detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/4944revolution in the u.s. information infrastructure88 pages | 5.5 x 8.5 | paperbackisbn 9780309052870 | doi 10.17226/4944national academy of engineeringrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolutionin theu.s. informationinfrastructurenational academy of engineeringnational academy presswashington, d.c.1995revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution ave., nw ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,and recognizes the superior achievement of engineers. dr. robert m. white is president of the national academy of engineering.this publication has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according toprocedures approved by a national academy of engineering report review process.the interpretations and conclusions expressed in this volume are those of the authorsand are not presented as the views of the council, officers, or staff of the nationalacademy of engineering.library of congress catalog card number 9569120international standard book number 0309052874copyright 1995 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americarevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiialthough terms like ònational information infrastructureó andòinformation superhighwayó have only recently become part of thevernacular, societies have always had information infrastructures.from mail carried by ship and pony express, to the telegraph, telephone and wireless, we have developed means and technologies thatpermit communication with others who are far from us. what is sodramatically different about todayõs information infrastructure, however, is its power and reach. digital technology, optical transmissionof information, and the continuing surge in the microchipõs dataprocessing capability have spawned a spreading communications network throughout the world. these technological developments offeruntold opportunities in fields as diverse as entertainment and industrial management. the public and private sectors are investing substantial sums to develop and implement the hard and soft infrastructure necessary to realize the promise of these advances.because of the complexity of the myriad undertakings nowunder way, and because the general public understands little of theirimplications, the national academy of engineering (nae) decidedto focus its 1994 annual meeting technical session on the revolution in the information infrastructure. the intent of the meeting, heldoctober 6, 1994, in washington, d.c., was to obtain the views of adiverse set of speakers whose current activities and future plans coverprefacerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a broad range of approaches to the subject. the symposium addressed three broad questions:¥what technical and economic factors will determine the standards of and marketplace demand for products and services?¥what roles are government and private investment, demonstration projects, and regulation and regulatory reform likely to playin the development of the infrastructure during the next decade?¥what are the problems and promises for peopleõs lives andorganizationsõ work as video and data communications approach andsurpass the interactivity of telephones?as is reflected in the papers in this volume, the technological andmarket forces that are driving changes in the information infrastructure are fairly easy to identify. as is also evident in the papers, giventhe rapid evolution and growth in the infrastructure, there is a greatdiversity of opinion about how this future will come about. there is,however, agreement that rich technological capabilities and abundantmarket potentials will enhance the national information infrastructure and will lead ultimately, in a process already begun, to the realization of a global information infrastructure.in addition to the authors, i would like to thank william r. wulffor his illuminating and insightful closing remarks at the symposium.other individuals who should be noted for their work, either in organizing the symposium or in getting this volume ready for publication,are gerald dinneen, bruce guile, janet hunziker, greg pearson,vivienne chin, maribeth keitz, and mary lee.robert m. whitepresidentnational academy of engineeringivprefacerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of information infrastructures:the competitive search for solutions1john s. mayothe role of government in the evolution of the internet13robert e. kahnthe promise of the national information infrastructure25robert w. stearnssatellite communications in the global information39infrastructuresteven d. dorfmancurrent trends and likely futures in wireless systems53john e. majorantitrust enforcement and the telecommunicationsrevolution: friends, not enemies63robert e. litancontentsvrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolutionin theu.s. informationinfrastructurerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1while reflecting on what might be said about the òsearch forsolutionsó noted in the title of this paper, i recalled the story of theyoung executive who was about to leave the office at 6:00 p.m., whenhe found the boss standing with a piece of paper in front of theshredder.òthis is very important, and my secretary has left,ó said the boss.òcan you make this thing work?óòcertainly, sir,ó said the young executive. he turned on themachine, inserted the paper, and pressed the start button.òexcellent, excellent!ó said the boss as his paper disappearedinside the machine, òi just need the one copy.óthe message of this story is that a solution that has worked wellin the past might be totally wrong for the problem at hand. thismessage also applies to the search for information infrastructure solutions.with this in mind, i plan first to examine the driving forces thatare propelling the emerging multimedia revolution and the evolutionof information infrastructures. then, i will discuss where these forcesare taking us: to the national information infrastructure (nii) and,ultimately, to the global information infrastructure (gii). finally, iwill briefly examine the consequences of this powerful and pervasivetechnological change on those involved in research and development.the evolution of informationinfrastructures: the competitivesearch for solutionsjohn s. mayorevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2john s. mayoforces driving changes in theinformation infrastructureit is no secret that information technology is the driving forceand the key enabler of the emerging multimedia revolution and theevolution of the nii, as well as a host of other advances that togetherare changing the way we live, work, play, travel, and communicate.we have seen technological capability double every year in certainfields, such as computing and photonics, and double every 18 monthsin microelectronics. even software, once a òbottleneckó technology,is beginning to advance rapidly in major areas like telecommunications, thanks to objectoriented programming and reuse of previouslydeveloped software modules.microelectronicsin microelectronics, we have witnessed the exponential growthof the familiar moore curve as the number of components per chipmoves steadily toward known physical limits. in the early part of thenext century, familiar òbulk effectó solidstate devices may maturewith transistors that measure about 400 atoms by 400 atoms eachñthe smallest such transistor likely to operate reliably at room temperature. the new frontier then will not involve making the devicessmaller, but in creatively and economically using the vast increase incomplexity and power made possible by this remarkable technology.the amazing progress of microelectronics represents a microcosm of the broad thrust of information technology and the other keydriving forces made possible by information technologyñall the mostvital forces that are leading to the multimedia revolution and theevolution of the nii. let me examine the progress and impact ofthese related forces.after the invention of the integrated circuit, every time the complexity of silicon chips increased by a factor of a thousand, something had to be reengineered. the first reengineering that was done,as we headed toward that first thousandfold increase, was to changeall of our design processes, which had been based on discrete components.when we reached 1,000 components per chip, we used the newdigital circuitry to reengineer our products from analog to digital, asrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of information infrastructures3did many other industries. let me stress that this early progresstoward digital products, enabled by microelectronics and software,has brought about the digitalization of most systems and servicesdomestically and, more and more, internationally. digitalization is apowerful force driving us toward multimedia communications andthe nii.about a decade ago, it became possible to make chips approaching 1 million components, and this brought us powerful microcomputers, along with all the peripherals related to microcomputers andthe necessary software systems. this led, in turn, to an explosion ofadvanced telecommunications services that forced at&t to reengineer itself from a company that provided largely voice and dataonvoice telecommunications services to one focused on universal information services, or the provision of voice, data, and images anywhere,anytime, with convenience and economy. providing advanced services on an increasingly intelligent global network was the beginningof multimedia communications, which has now become the revolution of the 1990s and beyond.we are currently experiencing another thousandfold increase incomponents per chip. reengineering has now extended beyond ourcompany and is leading to the merging of communications, computers, consumer electronics, and entertainment. the convergence of thesefour industries is being accomplished through joint projects, jointventures, mergers, acquisitions, and some startup companies. thisindustrial reengineering appears to be the nexttolast stage of theinformation revolution brought on by the invention of the transistor.the last stage, and one that may go on forever, is the reengineering of societyñof how we live, work, play, travel, and communicate. education will change with distance learning and homeschooling; virtual offices and working at home will transform ourwork lives; routine tasks such as visiting and shopping more andmore will be done from home. let me add, however, that many ofthese changes will be generational; social change, as well as technology, is needed to make them happen.speech processingthe trend toward increasingly powerful silicon chips is enablingexponential increases in the processing power of fixedpoint digitalrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4john s. mayosignal processors. this trend makes it possible to use much lessprocessing power to process a specific speechrecognition or speechsynthesis algorithm. today, for example, a single chip can recognizea 100word vocabulary, a function that would have required 20 to 30chips 5 years ago.based on these advances, we can project that speakerindependent automatic speech recognition and synthesis will become commonplace. these technologies will mature in a variety of servicecapabilities based on the ability of intelligent machines to talk andlisten much as people do. in addition, speech in one language will beautomatically translated into a second language, which might then besynthesized with the voice characteristics of the original speaker.virtually unrestricted recognition vocabulary will permit natural language interactionñwith humans, machines, and databases.automatic speech recognition is vital to the multimedia revolution not because it replaces human operators, but because it is apowerful technology for making multimedia systems easy to use.ease of use is an imperative for broad marketplace success.image processingthe emerging technology of image processing is related in manyrespects to speech processing and is another driving force towardmultimedia communications and the evolution of our informationinfrastructure. the same key information technologies that are enabling progress in speech processing are also fueling rapid progressin image processing, especially in the important areas of image andvideo compression.consider video compression. at the network capacity of twointegrated services digital network (isdn) basic rate interfacechannels, or 128 kilobits per second, we can have video that is compressed using the socalled p x 64 international standard for videotelephony, for persontoperson communications. this standard wasdesigned for sending videotelephony over phone lines in multiples of64 kilobits per second. at this capacity, we have the isdn videophone, which is likely to be a highly attractive product as long ascopper wires make up the local telephone plant. at the networkcapacity of 1.5 megabits per second, we can have highquality desktop video compressed with the maximum level of the px 64 stanrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of information infrastructures5dard. this network capacity can support national television systemcommittee (ntsc) color television with vhs quality, using themoving picture experts group (mpeg) standards, which are designed for capturing moving images on cdrom and for storing andtransmitting movies and broadcast television. however, with available compression technology, a capacity of 1.5 megabits per secondwould not deliver broadcast quality for scenes with rapid motion anddetail.the network capacity of 45 megabits per second will readilysupport highdefinition tv (hdtv) compressed to about 20 megabits per second, using variations of the mpeg2 coding algorithm.that is a considerable reduction (about 50:1 compression) from theroughly 1 billion bits per second required for uncompressed hdtv.that same network capacity will also support near studioqualityvideo (hdtv or ntsc) that has been compressed by using variations of the identical coding algorithm.common standardsanother force driving the progress of multimedia communications and the evolution of the information infrastructure is the worldwide push toward common standards that will encourage global networking. photonic transmission facilities, for example, will be basedon the evolving international standard called sdh, for synchronousdigital hierarchy. because sdh defines standard network interfaces, service providers and end users will be able to use equipmentfrom many different vendors without worrying about compatibility.sdh will provide efficient transport of broadband services and willsimplify networks. similar standards in domestic networks will allow digital communications into the workplace and home, and theywill make possible services dependent on high rates of data transmission.broadband integrated services digital network (bisdn) is anew digital format as well as an international standard that supportsmultiple services, such as voice, data, and new video services, usingfiberoptic transmission facilities. bisdn is currently defined atinterface rates of 155 megabits per second and 622 megabits persecond. based on the fastpacket technology of asynchronous transfer mode (atm), bisdn could herald an exciting new era in globalrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6john s. mayocommunications networking, as equipment vendors and service providers adopt compatible standards to provide sophisticated highbandwidth services.market demandthe demands of the marketplace, more than technology, set thepace for the multimedia and infrastructure revolution. for the greaterpart of this century, the customer willingly accepted whatever technological capabilities we were able to achieve. thus, the telecommunications industry was supplier driven, and the suppliers managed theevolution of the industry and the nii. however, the technologybecame so rich that it made possible many more products and services than the user could accept or was willing to pay for. thatmarked the transition from a supplierdriven industry to todayõs customerdriven industryñfrom supplier push to marketplace pull.competition the global transfer and assimilation of information technology,along with political and regulatory forces, such as the move to privatize telecommunications around the world, are leading to strong international competition in providing communications products andservices. such pervasive competition is another powerful force driving the evolution of both multimedia communications and information infrastructures. the public policy challenge is to provide a framework in which that evolution may occur.the multimedia revolutionlet us look a bit deeper into these subjects, starting with themultimedia revolution. after all, the pursuit of multimedia is creating social pressures on the nii and the information superhighways.so, what is òmultimediaó? a reasonable working definition is thatthe term multimedia refers to information that combines more thanone medium, including speech, music, text, data, graphics, fax, image, video, and animation. at at&t, we tend to focus on multimedia products and services that are networked, or connected over acommunications and information network. examples of this rangerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of information infrastructures7from videotelephony and videoconferencing; to realtime video ondemand, interactive video, and multimedia messaging; to remotecollaborative work, interactive information services such as electronic shopping, and multimedia education and training. eventually,we will have virtual reality, which will enable people to experience aplace or an event indirectly and remotelyñand do so in all dimensions.we are excited about multimedia because public switched networks, or information infrastructures, can currently accommodate awide array of networked multimedia communications. given the directions in which those networks are evolving, they will be able tohandle an increasingly vast range of such communications. moreover, a potentially enormous market is out there for multimedia hardware and supporting software. although estimates differ widely, themost commonly quoted projection for the total worldwide market formultimedia products and services is roughly $100 billion by the year2000.at&t is playing a major part in facilitating the emerging multimedia revolution: we provide services, network products to localservice providers, and products to end users. these are familiar rolesfor at&t, so let me briefly describe another perhaps less well knownaspect of the multimedia revolution that we are studying. that role isas the host for a wide variety of digital content and multimedia applications developed by others. hosting is a function that connects endusers to the content they seek. customers will gain easy and timelyaccess to personal communications, transactions, information services, and entertainment via wired and wireless connections to telephones, handheld devices, computers, and, eventually, television sets.sources for this digital content will range from publishers and largemovie studios to small software houses.global standards and open critical interfaces are vital to thiscomplex hosting function. the entertainment industry, for example,must have software systems that are compatible with those of thehosting industry. these software systems must, in turn, be compatible with those of the communications and informationnetworkingindustry, which must be compatible with customer premises equipment and systems. in the age of multimedia communications, consumers who aregeographically separated from each other will do more than just playrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8john s. mayogames together over networks. according to the at&t vision,people will increasingly seek new relationships based on òtelepresenceóña new type of community and social experience independent of geography. this potential for interactive networks is quiteunlike what will result from the 500 preprogrammed cable tv channels proposed for the united states. the beauty of interactive networks is that consumers will have the freedom to choose any subjector service from the intelligent terminals in their homes. and theywill be able to network clusters of friends or associates to enjoy suchservices as a group.although i have focused heavily on the impact that multimediawill have on the consumer, networked multimedia communicationswill dramatically change the nature of work and will therefore have abroad effect on business. videoconferencing, for example, can enhance productivity, save time, and reduce travel. moreover, currentdevelopments in multimedia telephony are making realistic the possibility of remote collaboration. in a few years, a person could beworking in real time with colleagues in new york, washington,hong kong, paris, and sydney. they could, for example, accomplish the task of producing printed materials, presentation slides, anda videotape introducing a new product line.evolution of the nii the quest for multimedia is driving social issues that relate tothe nii and the information superhighway. the nii might be viewedas the superhighway plus all the terminals and databases connectedto it.what is at&tõs vision of the nii? it is to bring people together,giving them easy access to each other and to the information andservices they want and need, any time, anywhere. in at&tõs view,the nii is a seamless web of communications and information networks, computers, databases, and consumer electronics, which willput huge quantities of information at the fingertips of a variety ofusers. quite simply, we see the communications component of thenii as a vast interoperable network of local, longdistance, and global networks; wireless; broadcast and cable; and satellites. in addition, the nii encompasses the internet as well as the test beds associated with the highperformance computing initiative, such as therevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of information infrastructures9blanca test bed with which at&t is affiliated. however, the nii isnot a uniform endtoend network developed and operated by government or any one company. it is the totality of networks in ournation, interconnected domestically and internationally.these networks consist of a wide variety of technologies thatprovide a complete range of features and transport speeds. in theunited states, competitive backbone information superhighways ofoptical fibers are already in place and expanding rapidly. however,access to the backbone is still largely via copper wire pairs, especially for homes, schools, and small businesses. many consumersand small firms will be able to get substantial value from the niiusing recent technological advances, such as isdn. genuine andeffective competition in the local exchange is a longterm possibilityand is the key to advancing the deployment of needed digital andhigherbandwidth access services. we also believe that the coaxialcables of the catv networks can become important elements of thenationõs broadband superhighways. one key to making this network of networks a true global information superhighway for multimedia and other communications is asystem of open, userfriendly interfaces and global standards. such asystem both promotes maximum interoperability and connectivityand supports a multivendor environment that allows maximum customer choice of equipment and services.to ensure that people can use whatever nii capabilities theyneed when they need them, a range of bandwidth offerings should bemade available.several policy issues are associated with the nii:(1)the government should help provide the vision for the waythe nii will evolve and operate. private industry should build, own,and operate the nii under competitive conditions.(2)the government should provide incentives and opportunities, such as tax credits for investment in equipment, r&d, or workertraining, to encourage the private sector to invest in and deploy newinformation technology. the government should continue to focusits direct support on precompetitive projects or applications that demonstrate and test new nii technologies.(3)in order to realize the broad benefits of the multimedia revolution and the nii, there must be full and fair competition in allrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10john s. mayosectors of our communications and information industry, both domestically and internationally.(4)private industry must continue to play the lead role in working to define the interoperability standards of the nii. the government must continue to work with and represent industry in someinternational treaty organizations that develop standards. jointly, weneed to speed up the standardssetting process.(5)perhaps the broadest policy challenge is that of facilitatingpublic acceptance of and comfort with the benefits of multimediacommunications and the nii. this will require setting ground rulesto protect electronically available intellectual property, creating aframework to ensure privacy and security of information, and establishing mechanisms to make these benefits available to the largestnumber of users. this last point is vital if we are to avoid having anation of information òhavesó and òhave nots.ó the challenge, simply put, is to develop a new definition of universal service.fortunately, most of the key issues and challenges surroundingmultimedia and the nii are already being addressed by cooperativegovernment and privatesector efforts. much more remains to bedone. the ultimate resolution of these issues will require the supportof all of us.impact on r&dat the beginning of this paper, i noted that a solution that hasworked well in the past might be totally wrong for the problem athand. this applies broadly to r&d and r&d environments. theforces behind the emerging multimedia revolution and the evolutionof information infrastructures, along with the benefits associated withthe information age, are also bringing about a new paradigm forr&d and a new r&d environment.the traditional r&d approach of past decades was to use prototyping and redesign: to do, then learn, and then redo as often asnecessary to produce a good product, and to do so through serialhandoffs from one function to another. today, that approach is notcompetitive because of the increasingly complex and rapid advancesof information technology, multimedia communications, and information infrastructures. the marketplace demands more and cheaperrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of information infrastructures11products and services with evershorter delivery intervals. in addition, an increasing demand exists for the customization of products toeversmaller buying units.thus, in contrast to the traditional r&d approach, we must pursue concurrent engineering, together with the important integrationfunction of deciding and planning precisely what to do before webuild anything. instead of talking to the customer after we completea project, we do so before starting, because the customer is really incontrol. the vital integration function, which helps ensure that theproduct or service works the first time, is becoming an everlargerpiece of the r&d effort.functionally structured r&d has yielded to customerfocused,multifunctional teams. this shift has helped generate a new r&dparadigm and a new r&d environment with very different processesand demands on people. let me illustrate with the typical challengeof trying to pursue a number of r&d projects at once. within todayõslean, costeffective r&d organizations, there are usually many moreprojects than there are expert staff. therefore, dedicating these experts to specific projects would result in poor overall project performance. instead, support systems must facilitate the training and sharing of expertise, most often through wellorchestrated multifunctionalteams and new techniques for learning, including a strong focus onintergroup learning.another key element of the new r&d paradigm and its associated environment is a focus on reusable assets, such as previouslydesigned and tested software modules and hardware platforms. reusable assets facilitate the creation of products and services fromhigherlevel elements. they enable organizations to share key skillsacross projects and create worldclass experts, while also developingrapid and costeffective solutions, customizations, and competitiveadvantage. reusable assets are the most powerful mechanism wehave today for improving r&d productivity. proper use of suchassets can make possible perhaps as much as a tenfold improvementin design productivity. the reusableasset concept also extends tofamilies of reusable processes, which unify architectures and facilitate efficient realization of products and services.structuring r&d around reusable assets produces an environment in which research is more important than ever. a major part ofdoing good research is finding good problems on which to work.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12john s. mayobell labs has never had to look far; every day we face many realproblems for which we do not have good solutions. moreover, research results are themselves reusable assets; they help reduce thedevelopment effort and shorten the development interval. the newr&d approach also yields lower costs and higher quality.the new r&d paradigm and r&d environment cannot by themselves fulfill the demands of the new marketplace paradigm of growththrough new corporate structures, new customers, and new competitors. r&d, however, must play the important role of identifying thenew opportunities and parameters that a corporation must pursuewith its total resources.summaryrich information technology, the worldwide push toward globalstandards, everincreasing customer demands, and growing international competition are key forces behind the emerging multimediarevolution and the evolution of national information infrastructures.the growth of multimedia communications and the further competitive evolution of our national information infrastructure, as well asthe global information infrastructure, raise some difficult issues andchallenges, but these advances promise a broad range of informationage benefits to virtually every citizen of our nation.already, we find that yesterdayõs r&d solutions are no longeradequate for the revolution at hand. a new r&d paradigm for a newr&d environment is developing rapidly. and each and every one ofus, especially those in r&d, must understand and assimilate this newparadigm. we must ensure that it both serves society well and creates an environment in which the best minds of the world seek careers in science and engineering. longterm progress depends on it,and it can be done.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13this paper discusses the role of government in the continuingevolution of the internet. from its origins as a u.s. governmentresearch project, the internet has grown to become a major component of network infrastructure, linking millions of machines and tensof millions of users around the world. although many nations arenow involved with the internet in one way or another, this paperfocuses on the primary role the u.s. government has played in theinternetõs evolution and discusses the role that governments aroundthe world may have to play as it continues to develop.very little of the current internet is owned, operated, or evencontrolled by governmental bodies. the internet indirectly receivesgovernment support through federally funded academic facilities thatprovide some networkrelated services. increasingly, however, theprovision of internet communication services, regardless of use, isbeing handled by commercial firms on a profitmaking basis.this situation raises the question of the proper longterm role forgovernment in the continued evolution of the internet. is the internetnow in a form where government involvement should cease entirely,leaving privatesector interests to determine its future? or, doesthe role of government in theevolution of the internetrobert e. kahna version of this paper appeared in the august 1994 issue of communications ofthe acm.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14robert e. kahngovernment still have an important role to play? this paper concludes that government can still make a series of important contributions. indeed, there are a few areas in which government involvement will be vital to the longterm wellbeing of the internet.origins of the internetthe internet originated in the early 1970s as part of an advancedresearch projects agency (arpa) research project on òinternetworking.ó at that time, arpa demonstrated the viability of packetswitching for computertocomputer communication in its flagshipnetwork, the arpanet, which linked several dozen sites and perhaps twice that number of computers into a national network forcomputer science research. extensions of the packetswitching concept to satellite networks and to groundbased mobile radio networkswere also under development by arpa, and segments of industry(notably not the traditional telecommunications sector) were showing great interest in providing commercial packet network services.it seemed likely that at least three or four distinct computer networkswould exist by the mid1970s and that the ability to communicateamong these networks would be highly desirable if not essential.in a wellknown joint effort that took place around 1973, robertkahn, then at arpa, and vinton cerf, then at stanford, collaboratedon the design of an internetwork architecture that would allow packetnetworks of different kinds to interconnect and machines to communicate across the set of interconnected networks. the internetworkarchitecture was based on a protocol that came to be known as tcp/ip. the period from 1974 to 1978 saw four successively refinedversions of the protocol implemented and tested by arpa researchcontractors in academia and industry, with version number four eventually becoming standardized. the tcp/ip protocol was used initially to connect the arpanet, based on 50 kilobits per second(kbps) terrestrial lines; the packet radio net (prnet), based on dualrate 400/100 kbps spread spectrum radios; and the packet satellitenet (satnet), based on a 64 kbps shared channel on intelsat iv.the initial satellite earth stations were in the united states and theunited kingdom, but subsequently additional earth stations wereactivated in norway, germany, and italy. several experimentalprnets were connected, including one in the san francisco bayrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of the internet15area. at the time, no personal computers, workstations, or local areanetworks were available commercially, and the machines involvedwere mainly largescale scientific timesharing systems. remoteaccess to timesharing systems was made available by terminal access servers.the technical tasks involved in constructing this initial arpainternet revolved mainly around the configuration of ògateways,ónow known as routers, to connect different networks, as well as thedevelopment of tcp/ip software in the computers. these were bothengineeringintensive tasks that took considerable expertise to accomplish. by the mid1980s, industry began offering commercialgateways and routers and started to make available tcp/ip softwarefor some workstations, minicomputers, and mainframes. before this,these capabilities were unavailable; they had to be handcrafted by theengineers at each site.in 1979, arpa established a small internet configuration control board (iccb), most of whose members belonged to the researchcommunity, to help with this process and to work with arpa inevolving the internet design. the establishment of the iccb wasimportant because it brought a wider segment of the research community into the internet decisionmaking process, which until thenhad been the almostexclusive bailiwick of arpa. initially, theiccb was chaired by a representative of arpa and met severaltimes a year. as interest in the arpa internet grew, so did interest inthe work of the iccb.during this early period, the u.s. government, mainly arpa,funded research and development work on networks and supportedthe various networks in the arpa internet by leasing and buyingcomponents and contracting out the systemõs daytoday operationalmanagement. the government also maintained responsibility foroverall policy. in the mid to late 1970s, experimental local areanetworks and experimental workstations, which had been developedin the research community, were connected to the internet accordingto the level of engineering expertise at each site. in the early 1980s,internetcompatible commercial workstations and local area networksbecame available, significantly easing the task of getting connectedto the internet.the u.s. government also awarded contracts for the support ofvarious aspects of internet infrastructure, including the maintenancerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16robert e. kahnof lists of hosts and their addresses on the network. other governmentfunded groups monitored and maintained the key gateways between the internet networks in addition to supporting the networksthemselves. in 1980, the u.s. department of defense (dod) adoptedthe tcp/ip protocol as a standard and began to use it. by the early1980s, it was clear that the internetwork architecture that arpa hadcreated was a viable technology for wider use in defense.emergence of the operational internetthe dod had become convinced that if its use of networking were to grow, it needed to split the arpa internet (calledarpanet) in two. one of the resulting networks, to be known asmilnet, would be used for military purposes and mainly link military sites in the united states. the remaining portion of the networkwould continue to bear the name arpanet and still be used forresearch purposes. since both would use the tcp/ip protocol, computers on the milnet would still be able to talk to computers on thenew arpanet, but the milnet network nodes would be locatedat protected sites. if problems developed on the arpanet, themilnet could be disconnected quickly from it by unplugging thesmall number of gateways that connected them. in fact, these gateways were designed to limit the interactions between the two networks to the exchange of electronic mail, a further safety feature.by the early 1980s, the arpa internet was known simply as theinternet, and the number of connections to it continued to grow.recognizing the importance of networking to the larger computerscience community, the national science foundation (nsf) begansupporting csnet, which connected a select group of computerscience researchers to the emerging internet. this allowed new research sites to be placed on the arpanet at nsfõs expense, and itallowed other new research sites to be connected via a commercialnetwork, telenet, which would be gatewayed to the arpanet.csnet also provided the capacity to support dialup email connections. in addition, access to the arpanet was informally extendedto researchers at numerous sites, thus helping to further spread thenetworking technology within the scientific community. also duringthis period, other federal agencies with computeroriented researchprograms, notably the department of energy (doe) and the nationalrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of the internet17aeronautics and space administration (nasa), created their ownòcommunity networks.óthe tcp/ip protocol adopted by dod a few years earlier wasonly one of many such standards. although it was the only one thatdealt explicitly with internetworking of packet networks, its use wasnot yet mandated on the arpanet. however, on january 1, 1983,tcp/ip became the standard for the arpanet, replacing the olderhost protocol known as ncp. this step was in preparation for thearpanetmilnet split, which was to occur about a year later.mandating the use of tcp/ip on the arpanet encouraged the addition of local area networks and also accelerated the growth in numbers of users and networks. at the same time, it led to a rethinking ofthe process that arpa was using to manage the evolution of thenetwork.in 1983, arpa replaced the iccb with the internet activitiesboard (iab). the iab was constituted similarly to the old iccb, butthe many issues of network evolution were delegated to 10 task forceschartered by and reporting to the iab. the iab was charged withassisting arpa to meet its internetrelated r&d objectives; the chairof the iab was selected from the research community supported byarpa. arpa also began to delegate to the iab the responsibilityfor conducting the standardssetting process.following the csnet effort, nsf and arpa worked togetherto expand the number of users on the arpanet, but they wereconstrained by the limitations that dod placed on the use of thenetwork. by the mid1980s, however, network connectivity had become sufficiently central to the workings of the computer sciencecommunity that nsf became interested in broadening the use ofnetworking to other scientific disciplines. the nsf supercomputercenters program represented a major stimulus to broader use of networks by providing limited access to the centers via the arpanet.at about the same time, arpa decided to phase out its networkresearch program, only to reconsider this decision about a year laterwhen the seeds for the subsequent highperformance computer initiative were planted by the reagan administration and thensen. albertgore (dtenn.). in this period, nsf formulated a strategy to assumeresponsibility for the areas of leadership that arpa had formerlyheld and planned to field an advanced network called nsfnet.nsfnet was to join the nsf supercomputer centers with very highrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18robert e. kahnspeed links, then 1.5 megabits per second (mbps), and to providemembers of the u.s. academic community access to the nsf supercomputer centers and to one another.1under a cooperative agreement between nsf and merit, inc., thensfnet backbone was put into operation in 1988 and, because of itshigher speed, soon replaced the arpanet as the backbone of choice.in 1990, arpa decommissioned the last node of the arpanet. itwas replaced by the nsfnet backbone and a series of regionalnetworks most of which were funded by or at least started with fundsfrom the u.s. government and were expected to become selfsupporting soon thereafter. the nsf effort greatly expanded the involvement of many other groups in providing as well as using network services. this expansion followed as a direct result of theplanning for the high performance computing initiative (hpci),which was being formed at the highest levels of government. dodstill retained the responsibility for control of the internet name andaddress space, although it continued to contract out the operationalaspects of the system.the doe and nasa both rely heavily on networking capabilityto support their missions. in the early 1980s, they built high energyphysics net (hepnet) and space physics analysis net (span),both based on digital equipment corporationõs decnet protocols.later, doe and nasa developed the energy sciences net (esnet)and the nasa science internet (nsi), respectively; these networkssupported both tcp/ip and decnet services. these initiativeswere early influences on the development of the multiprotocol networking technology that was subsequently adopted in the internet.international networking activity was also expanding in the earlyand mid1980s. starting with a number of networks based on thex.25 standard as well as international links to arpanet, decnet,and span, the networks began to incorporate open internetworkingprotocols. initially, open systems interconnection (osi) protocolswere used most frequently. later, the same forces that drove theunited states to use tcp/ipñavailability in commercial workstations and local area networksñcaused the use of tcp/ip to growinternationally.1for a brief period in the mid1980s, there was a small initial nsfnet that linkedthe supercomputer centers with 64 kbps lines.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of the internet19the number of task forces under the iab continued to grow, andin 1989, the iab consolidated them into two groups: the internetengineering task force (ietf) and the internet research task force(irtf). the ietf, which had been formed as one of the original 10iab task forces, was given responsibility for nearterm internetdevelopments and for generating options for the iab to consider asinternet standards. the irtf remained much smaller than the ietfand focused more on longerrange research issues. the iab structure, with its taskforce mechanism, opened up the possibility ofgetting broader involvement from the private sector without the needfor government to pay directly for their participation. the federalrole continued to be limited to oversight control of the internet nameand address space, the support of ietf meetings, and sponsorship ofmany of the research participants. by the end of the 1980s, ietfbegan charging a nominal attendance fee to cover the costs of itsmeetings.the opening of the internet to commercial usage was a significant development in the late 1980s. as a first step, commercial email providers were allowed to use the nsfnet backbone to communicate with authorized users of the nsfnet and other federalresearch networks. regional networks, initially established to servethe academic community, had in their efforts to become selfsufficient taken on nonacademic customers as an additional revenuesource. nsfõs acceptable use policy, which restricted backboneusage to traffic within and for the support of the academic community, together with the growing number of nonacademic internet users, led to the formation of two privately funded and competinginternet carriers, both spinoffs of u.s. government programs. theywere uunet technologies, a product of a dodfunded seismicresearch facility, and performance systems international (psi), whichwas formed by a subset of the officers and directors of nysernet,the nsfsponsored regional network in new york and the lowernew england states.beginning in 1990, internet use was growing by more than 10percent a month. this expansion was fueled significantly by theenormous growth on the nsfnet and included a major commercialand international component. nsf helped to stimulate this growth byfunding both incremental and fundamental improvements in internetrouting technology as well as by encouraging the widespread distrirevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20robert e. kahnbution of network software from its supercomputer centers. interconnections between commercial and other networks are arranged ina variety of ways, including through the use of the commercialinternet exchange (cix), which was established, in part, to facilitatepacket exchanges among commercial service providers.recently, the nsf decided that additional funding for thensfnet backbone no longer was required. the agency embarkedon a plan to make the nsf regional networks self supporting over aperiod of several years. to assure the scientific research communityof continued network access, nsf made competitively chosen awardsto several parties to provide network access points (naps) in fourcities. nsf also selected mci to provide a very high speed backboneservice, initially at 155 mbps, linking the naps and several othersites, and a routing arbiter to oversee certain aspects of traffic allocation in this new architecture.the internet society was formed in 1992 by the private sector tohelp promote the evolution of the internet, including maintenance ofthe internet standards process. in 1992, the iab was reconstituted asthe internet architecture board, which became part of the internetsociety. it delegated its decisionmaking responsibility on internetstandards to the leadership of the ietf, known as the internet engineering steering group (iesg). while not a part of the internetsociety, the ietf produces technical specifications as possible candidates for future protocols. the internet society now maintains theinternet standards process, and the work of the ietf is carried outunder its auspices.issues for considerationas the internet continues to grow, the role of the research community in developing and evolving standards needs to be addressed.when the financial implications of decisions about internet standardswere relatively small, the current standards process proved entirelysatisfactory. as the financial impact of such decisions becomes increasingly significant, the nature of the standardssetting process willcontinue to change to allow more direct industrial involvement. howthis will ultimately play out is unclear. however, the vitality of thecurrent process derives from the broad involvement of the manycommunities that have a stake in the internet. unlike typical toprevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of the internet21down standardssetting operations that implement decisions formedby consensus, the internet process works essentially in reversethrough a kind of grassroots mechanism. candidates for internetstandards ordinarily result from actual implementation and widespread experimentation within the ietf. the most promising ofthese candidates are selected for placement on the internet standardstrack. no better process has yet emerged that is as dynamic andallows as much direct involvement by industry.further, with the widespread internationalization of the internet,scores of countries now have fundamental interests in its evolution.within the united states, the internet is seen in many quarters as thestarting point for the national information infrastructure (nii).around the world, there is growing recognition that the set of niis(assuming each country commits to developing one) should be compatible with each other along some stillunknown dimensions. whoshould take the lead in ensuring this compatibility? is this a role forthe private sector, for governments acting together, or for some combination of the two? there is clearly a role for government, at least toprovide oversight, support, and guidance, if not to participate actively.apart from these issues is concern about the viability of anyapproach that has no individual or organization with overall responsibility for its evolution. it seems fair to say that many of the traditional internet carriers would prefer that new capabilities be providedby them as a turnkey service. industry surely has the capacity toprovide many of the necessary capabilities, but history has shown theimportance of government involvement. what guarantees that thesame degree of vitality will be part of its future evolution if marketforces alone determine what new capabilities are added to the internet? furthermore, the internet offers the possibility of bypassingconventional service offerings by regulated carriers. this may bothmake it extremely difficult for the regulated carriers to compete effectively in certain areas and make it hard for government regulators to ignore the internet.finally, the carriers can only go so far in providing internetservices. ultimately, the communication pathways must enter theuserõs machine, pass through layers of software and end up in applications programs. the computer industry, along with the many vendors of computerrelated equipment, must play a role in determininghow this aspect of the internet will evolve. the nature of technologirevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22robert e. kahncal innovation almost guarantees that many new technological options will continue to be generated from many different sources andmake their appearance throughout the internet. thus, it appears thatno single entity can possibly be in charge of the internet. a key to thesuccess of the internet is to insure that the interested parties have afair and equitable way of participating in its evolution, includingparticipation in its alsoevolving standards process. a proper role forgovernments would be to oversee this process to make sure that itremains fair and meets the wide spectrum of public needs.an international infrastructure like the internet will ultimatelyrequire countries to set policy on many of the details that are nowtaken for granted. for example, internet names and addresses maytake on additional legal meanings in the various countries as they relyon the internet to a greater degree. trademark of internet names andaddresses is only one aspect of concern. contracts of all sorts mayhave internet names and addresses embedded within them. how canthe countries have confidence in the use of such names and addressesfor legal purposes without necessarily assuming responsibility for thedaytoday operation of this aspect of the system? computer virusesknow no national boundaries. if a major òinfectionó should strikemultiple countries, how will those countries work together to respondto such a situation? finally, the ability to conduct networkbasedbusiness between countries will require the resolution of many legalissues, including the formalization of legal contracts online and theability to deal with associated customs and traderelated matters. atits core, the issue of online legal contracts seems to require the use ofencryption technology, which has been perhaps the most closely heldof all the networkoriented technologies. how can this kind of capability be made available in the international arena in ways that areacceptable to national authorities? more generally, how can issueslike those described above, which are likely to arise in the future, beeffectively discussed and resolved?various subsets of these kinds of problems have arisen in thecontext of other international public networks, including for telephones, and are thus neither unique nor entirely new. as the internetcontinues to grow, many of the approaches developed for earliertechnologies may apply to the internet. some combination of publicand privatesector involvement will probably be required to deal withthese problems more generally.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evolution of the internet23governments have a fundamental role to play in the funding ofadvanced research and development that can push forward the frontiers of technology and knowledge. often, this will involve thedevelopment and use of pilot projects to test new ideas in the realworld. it also seems clear that governments must provide the necessary oversight to insure that the standardssetting process is equitable. governments must also take responsibility for helping toresolve problems that arise because of independent decisions madeby multiple countries, for example in legal, security, or regulatorymatters. in the case of u.s. infrastructure development, the government must provide leadership in many dimensions, including theremoval of barriers where they inhibit progress; the insertion oflegal, security, or regulatory mechanisms where the national interestso dictates; and the direct stimulation of publicinterest sectors, forexample in research, education, and certain network aspects of public health, safety, and universal access that require government assistance. other nations also may find similar incentives for government involvement.two final observations seem appropriate. first, it will be essential to separate the process by which standards are selected for theinternet from the process by which the variety of possible options aregenerated. the current situation is almost ideal, since standards areselected by a process akin to ratification only after independent implementation has produced the viable options. this separation needs tobe maintained.second, the most important use of the internet, and indeed thenii, will be to allow individuals to communicate with each other andto rapidly access information. in many cases, this information will bethe intellectual property of others. every internet user will also havethe opportunity to become a potential provider of information services, thereby vastly increasing the amount of information available.how much of this information may be deemed valuable in a literaryor business sense remains to be determined, but much of it may beimportant in other contexts. it is essential that we sensitize individuals to the value of intellectual property and the need to protect it.this will have the side benefit of encouraging others to develop andmake available intellectual property of their own. a combination ofethics, technology, and law are needed to ensure the effective development of this important aspect of the internet.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24robert e. kahnconclusionsover a span of some 20 years, the role of the u.s. government inthe evolution of the internet has changed. while the federal government took the lead in virtually every aspect of internet in the earlydays, it currently plays a more limited role. the government is nowa major funder of network r&d and provides significant oversight ofthe evolution of the internet. it provides direct support or even control for several key aspects of the internetõs operation, such as theassignment of unique names and addresses and the assurance of adequate backbone capability, although it may decide to relinquish someof these responsibilities in the future. it continues to stimulate thedevelopment of internet architecture in healthy new directions.although the role of the u.s. government in the internet hasbeen declining steadily for several years, particularly as privatesector interest in the internet has increased, there is a major continuingset of roles and responsibilities for government to undertake, both inthe united states and around the world. governments must be involved in decisions about how different countries cooperate on various aspects of the internet and its use, and they must continue tooversee the networkõs evolution, both nationally and internationally.other national governments may, but need not, assume the leadershiprole that the u.s. government has traditionally played in the unitedstates. without substantial u.s. involvement however, it is doubtfulwhether the nii will become a reality. and without governmentinvolvement on an international scale, it is unlikely that a globalinformation infrastructure will emerge or that the internet will continue to evolve in a vital and dynamic way.taking a long view, network and computer technologies are stillin their infancy, and many of their current uses reflect past practicescarried out more effectively in new environments. the real challengewill be for the public and private sectors to work together to harnessthe stilluntapped potential of new and increasingly powerful technologies in the networkbased setting of the nii, and to nourish andincubate the powerful, even revolutionary, new ideas that are certainto surface in the future.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.25there is a computer industry joke that is very relevant to a discussion of the national information infrastructure (nii). it explainswhy god was able to create the universe in 6 days: he did not havean installed base.creating the nii is certainly not as vast a task as creating theuniverse, although the concept does seem to have boundless potential. the joke came to mind because realizing this potential willrequire careful navigation through the baggage of old technologiesand partisan and entrenched points of view in industry, government,and academia.underlying the sometimes overblown talk about the informationsuperhighway is a widespread recognition that information technology has the potential to dramatically change many aspects of ourlives. we also are recognizing that information systems have thepotential to play a central role in reinvigorating many of the institutions of our society.over the last decade, information technology has been an essential tool for corporations. it has enabled the cost cutting, reorganization, and reengineering that have helped reestablish the unitedstatesõ global competitiveness and rejuvenated many u.s. companies. we are now discovering that this technology could have asimilar effect on our noncorporate lives: it could change the ways wethe promise of the nationalinformation infrastructurerobert w. stearnsrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26robert w. stearnseducate our children and ourselves, interact with government, manage our health, and entertain and socialize. at compaq, we believewe play a central role in the development of the nii, particularly asthe computer evolves from a device used principally for computationto one that is dominantly used for communication.there are, of course, many different definitions of the nii, depending on oneõs business and/or political perspective. nii has beendescribed variously as: a 500channel interactive multimedia video/cable network; numerous òedutainmentó multimedia products andservices; the natural evolution of todayõs telephone system from onethat is voiceoriented to one that supports voice, data, image, andvideo; an electronic marketplace for commercial and/or consumerproducts and services; a commercial version of the internet; a publicnetwork for government information and services, medical information, and education; not a single network at all but a loose aggregateof many different networks and services with common or relatedaccess; a publicpolicy debate about social rights and access to information; a political battle in which the telecommunication and cableindustries may attempt to reassert their monopolies in the name ofuniversal service; and a governmentfunded initiative, created by theclinton administration and modeled after the national highwayproject of the late 1950s and 1960s, which could easily turn into anew species of hightechnology pork.whatever the technical description, five key issues dominatepolicy discussions:universal service.all americans should have easy access tothe nii, at least for some basic level of services yet to be defined.interoperability.legacy and future platform devices such ascomputers and phones, software applications, and databases shouldbe able to òtalkó to each other easily via the highway.security, privacy, and protection of intellectual property.thecontent and nature of communications on the nii should be carefullyprotected from eavesdropping, misappropriation, or unauthorized use.privatesector versus publicsector model.should the niievolve in a basically unregulated environment that responds to freemarket forces, or should the federal government fund and guide itsdevelopment?niiõs link to the gii.is the global information infrastructurerevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure27truly a worldwide, unified system or the aggregate of individual service networks?with these issues as context, i would like to review the recenthistory of the information industry and attempt to characterize theprobable nature of the industry in the future. i will also explain whythe pc may well play a central role and give some examples of technology use that exemplify the fundamental promise of the nii. finally,i will outline the key challenges to realizing the full potential of the niiand identify some principles that should guide us as we move forward.the information industryunderlying the information revolution has been the dramaticpace of innovation in semiconductor technologies, fiber optics, voiceand data communications, and software. these innovations haveenabled a shift from incompatible analog technologies to interoperable digital technologies and have brought about the convergence of computers, telecommunications, and media. the information user has received an unprecedented improvement in features anda sharp reduction in cost.the industry structure that is emerging, although confusing, canbe divided into three basic categories: platform providers, conduitproviders, and content providers. platform providers include vendorsof the hardware and software building blocks of personal and corporate computing. conduit providers establish the electronic highwaysthrough which the information flows. content providers develop andcommercialize the software applications, information, and entertainment that flow through the highways to and from the platforms.these three categories of providers are inextricably linked. thecomputer will increasingly be an access, processing, and storage pointon the network. the network will increasingly be designed and builtwith a higher and higher percentage of the intelligence lying outsidethe conduit in the devices connected to the network. the contentproviders will increasingly develop their products in multiple versions to be compatible with the multiple technologies that will beused to distribute these products.it is no longer possible for any one provider, by itself, to movethe development of the information infrastructure. innovations to theplatform, without a supporting network and content that people want,revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28robert w. stearnswill not succeed. equally useless are network developments withoutthe corresponding platform and content innovations. in short,progress in the information industry now requires close partnerships.companies in the computer industry have functioned in this typeof partnership model for the last decade. during this time, we havemade the transition from an industry that was dominated by verticallyintegrated players offering solutions that were often proprietary to ahorizontally stratified one in which the players specialize in one or afew aspects of the total solution. in todayõs computer industry, theprocessor vendors, operating systems vendors, applications developers, and platform vendors all are highly interdependent. this modelis being extended rapidly outside the computer industry to include allelements of the information industry. the real winners in this changehave been the customers. they now enjoy a multiplicity of services andproducts, based on open standards, and offered at everlower prices.staged transitionthe popular vision of the 500channel, highbandwidth highwayinto the home has received an inordinate amount of attention in thepress. i believe this vision is incorrect because it embraces a òcouchpotato modeló of the consumer and therefore misses the fundamentalpromise and essential appeal of what is possible.recent studies suggest that the cost of installing highbandwidthservice are prohibitiveñas much as $2,000 per home. to date, experimental offerings of videoondemand and homeshoppingtypeapplications show that consumers are unwilling to spend what isneeded to justify the investment. the most educated consumers, whocan afford to pay, are the least interested in a steady diet of passivemovie entertainment.at the same time, 28% of american households have pcs, peopleare subscribing to online services and using the internet at an astonishing pace, and sales of multimedia pcs have exploded. the number of new users of internet is increasing at the rate of 10 percent permonth. remarkable applications are being developed and utilized inthe areas of health care, education, government, and business, allbased on todayõs infrastructure. customers are using the widelyavailable narrowband technology and a pc with a modem and cdrom drive for communication, information access and disseminarevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure29tion, transactionoriented tasks, and various òedutainmentó activities.the compelling aspect of these applications is their interactivity.this is the element that is grossly underestimated in the couchpotatoview, which promotes an array of oneway downloads of linear entertainment and advertisements to a passive consumer whose optionsare limited to ordering a pizza and a video.connectivity will allow users to participate actively in communities of interest. online services and the internet provide links forchatting and information sharing that are easily accessed and can beprecisely focused to the userõs particular interests. children whohave been brought up with interactive games are especially drawn tothis type of application. they use the technology to connect to othersaround the world. parents report that children will spend hours chatting online, playing interactive games, and accessing various networkresources. these same children are bored by passive television. arecent study cited in the wall street journal reported that the amountof tv viewing declines in homes that subscribe to an online servicesuch as america online, compuserve, or prodigy. these youngcustomers of tomorrow view the computer as a portal to a connectedlife in which a computerchat pal in japan is as normal as a friendacross the street. it appears that many of the adults developing passive systems do not understand the key perceptual and behavioraldifferences that are now shaping our children.these factors suggest that the development of the informationinfrastructure will proceed in measured stages. we will develop anduse information technology applications in layers, starting with basicnetworked services. the evolution will be driven by applications thatprovide new levels of interactivity and connectivity rather than applications that are simple extrapolations of the passive models of thepast. instead of one or two individual òkiller applicationsó attractingusers to the information highway, a large number of diverse applications that touch many different parts of our lives will drive the demand for incrementally higher and higher levels of bandwidth andservice from the infrastructure.the pc will lead the waymany people believe that the tv will be the focus for all servicesin the home. i doubt that will be the case. todayõs tv is an oldrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30robert w. stearnsanalog design that receives broadcast signals and displays them usinginterlace scan. this is hardly a device designed to accommodate thedigital world. i believe the pc will play the central role in the niibecause it is a multifunctional platform that is wellsuited to themosaic of uses that people are demanding. a pc in the home can beused as a node on the office network, an educational tool for children,a tool for managing personal finances, the place to play entertainingcdroms, as well as a connection to the internet. the platform isopen to all kinds of hardware and software additions and upgrades.these factors make the pc, as it is currently configured, the platformof choice for the near term. one might say the pc is the òultimatedriving machineó on the information highway.as the infrastructure develops, the pc will evolve with it. it willtake new forms that will be adapted for even broader uses. pcs willbe made to fit distinct lifestyle needs and to fit more gracefully intospecific environments. for example, one could envision pcs for theliving room with a large screen and a woodgrained enclosure or akitchen pc that has integrated telephony, a sophisticated messagingsystem, a touch sensitive screen, and links for electronic commerce.we might one day see pcs loaded with cdrom reference òjukeboxesó and linked to office computers and databases used for homebased study or a playroom pc with multimedia and òedutainmentóperipherals such as joy sticks and virtual reality helmets. or imaginea home mobile pc with embedded wireless communications andvoice recognition used in the yard for howto applications such asplanting flowers or building a deck.these various devices could be linked to each other via a homelocal area network (lan) that would allow individual devices toshare components such as software, hard drives, and modems. thishome lan would provide access to the information infrastructurewith its array of services. computers would be linked to other smartproducts in the home such as security and energymanagement systems. the sharing of components across all of these elements wouldmake the cost of the total system competitive with what people arespending today on the various separate devices that provide thesefunctions. increasingly, what we today call a tv and a pc willmerge into the same powerful programmable digital device, and atthat point, the tvversuspc argument will become moot.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure31applications of nii technologieswhat are some of the nearterm, practical applications of òhighwayó technology? each of the following applications of informationand communications technologies could have impressive economicand social benefits.health carewe have had a long debate on health care in this country. onepoint of agreement is the great potential for streamlining the administrative and service aspects of medical care. information technologyholds great promise for this type of cost reduction and has the potential to improve fundamentally the patientclinician relationship andallow the patient to be a much more informed and active consumer ofhealth services. systems are being designed that allow patients toaccess their own medical records, including information on treatmentoptions. some health care providers are offering online questionresponse services and publishing online journals that summarize thelatest medical research to make it useful for the average patient.these systems supplement and expand patientsõ knowledge, allowing them to participate more directly in their care.telemedicine is another exciting application. this technology isgiving rural communities access to specialists in leading medicalcenters. using videoconferencing systems with highspeed, highresolution imaging, the specialists consult with the doctor in remotelocations, review xrays, interview the patient, and offer their expertadvice on treatment options. in places where these systems havebeen tested, users find that the technology not only brings bettermedicine to the remote areas, but it also enriches rural doctorsõ livesby giving them access to the knowledge and counsel of worldclassspecialists.businessthe continuing importance of information technology to businesses cannot be overstated. the knowledge and expertise of acompanyõs workforce and the ability to access and mobilize thisinformation are two of the basic elements of competitive advantagein todayõs marketplace and will probably be the most important derevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32robert w. stearnsterminants of success in the future. realizing the power of the technology lies in shifting our view of information from something that isstored or resides in specific experts to something that has its greatestvalue when it is fluid and shared for the purposes of problem solving.companies are learning how to get the right products to marketfaster by using information technology. they are using communication technologies to shorten the distance between groups inside thecompany and to bring the right teams of experts to bear on a givenproject. team members are linked for the duration of the project andare easily redeployed upon completion of their work.these technologies have revolutionary implications for the structure of organizations. they flatten hierarchies, eliminating levels ofmiddle managers whose role was to gather information and move itup or down the organizational pyramid. the new organizationalstructures use teams of implementers connected via information networks to those who set policy, thus reducing the need for internalintermediaries. the need for external intermediaries is also reduced.customers and producers and producers and suppliers are linked moredirectly, significantly reducing cost and greatly increasing the utilityand currency of the information passed back and forth.information technology also has the potential to allow a betterbalance between our home and work lives. telecommuting allowsemployees to spend more time at home with their families, and it willbenefit the environment as auto exhaust emissions fall with reductions in commuting.as the infrastructure develops, it will spawn a more efficientoperating environment that rewards innovation and highquality, lowcost products. it will also alter fundamentally many of the currentbusiness models. for example, as home shopping on a pc supersedes shopping at the mall or through a catalog, this new channel willearn òrentó for its virtual òshelf space.ó while it is not clear at thispoint how the conduit and platform vendors will share this income,we can be certain that providing access to the home shopper will earna return.governmentwe all believe that many aspects of government are unwieldy,uncoordinated, and expensive. we try repeatedly to reorganize govrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure33ernment but fail to get the results we want. information technology,if applied properly, could be an essential part of the solution. it mayeven help us return to a more democratic society by bringing peopletogether electronically.the most notable effort in this arena is the reinventing government initiative, championed by vice president albert gore. the initiative, which uses information technology to reduce paperwork andstreamline administrative processes, already is starting to show resultsin terms of greater government efficiency, faster processing, increasedaccuracy, improved service levels, and reduced administration costs.the new information technologies are also allowing the government to provide new potentially valuable services. for example, thedepartment of commerce collects and makes available online reamsof market data that companies can use to operate in a more informedmanner. also exciting is the potential for involving more people inthe political process. information technology can closely link theelectorate and the elected at the local, state, and national levels.educationthe decay of the american educational system is a great socialtragedy. it may be the single biggest threat to the future social andeconomic health of the nation. while the information superhighwaywill be only part of the solution to this problem, it has a major role toplay.information technology frees us from the traditional but tiredmodel of learning: an òexpertó teacher in the front of a classroomintent on dispensing knowledge to a captive group of students. information technology encourages other modes of classroom teachingñteachers and students do not have to be in the same place at the sametime, and learning does not have to stop when the student joins theworkforce but can occur throughout oneõs life.for example, the national technological university (ntu), acollaborative effort by a number of leading schools of engineering, isusing a satellite tv system to bring the best teachers into corporations around the country. this is extremely affordable for corporations, and it minimizes or eliminates travel time for professors.equally exciting benefits are becoming available to young learners.in tennessee, educators are using a network link that allows highrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34robert w. stearnsschool science students to ask questions and get answers from 70college science professors. this capability complements learning inthe classroom.teachers themselves are benefiting. incorporating informationtechnology in the pursuit of learning frees teachers from having toknow it all. instead, they can be facilitators, helping students in theirquest for learning. taking this approach, many teachers find theclassroom a less intimidating place.technology is helping teachers in other ways as well. in texas,teachers in remote locations are linked via the texas educationalnetwork. they use the network to share lesson plans and ideas onnew ways to teach old subjects. in the process, they enrich both theirwork experience and their studentsõ learning. the same networkoffers similar advantages in the administrative area.with increasing cost pressures in academia and the demand forongoing education in an informationbased society, information technology provides an innovative, lesscostly way to meet the nationõseducational needs.entertainmentthe implications of new information technologies for entertainment can be profound, but the vision of what might be has beenclouded by a focus on a passive rather than interactive model. theinteractivity offered by new technologies will allow networked games,fullmotion feeds of customized videos, and virtual reality experiences, all available in the home. either these services will be available using narrowband technology with processing and compressionto allow a nearwideband experience, or they will wait until the investment in higher bandwidth communication is economically justified.in the near term, communities of interest will meet in cyberspaceto interact and enhance each otherõs knowledge. this new form ofentertainment and social activity is the likely forerunner of the entertainment world to come. no couches here.guiding principles for going forwardmoving forward will require us to overcome various technicalchallenges. however, the products and services that are on handrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure35today, combined with the technical innovations that will be availableshortly, will provide most of the core technology needed to realizethe next stage. the more pressing challenges are to identify theembodiments of technology that the consumer will find truly compelling and to ensure the creation and protection of a commercial andacademic environment conducive to real innovation.meeting these challenges requires the development of responsible public policy. as vice president gore stated in a september1994 speech:ògovernment has an indisputable and appropriate role in developing the gii. by reducing the regulatory barriers and promotingprivate sector involvement, by identifying the public interests thatmust be served, and by aggressively using the gii to provide education, health care and other public services, governments can playa key role in developing the gii in cooperation with industry andothers in the private sector.óhis emphasis on reducing regulatory barriers and on the strongrole of the private sector is correct. untangling the regulatory legacyof the telecommunications and cable industries is critical. theseefforts should be directed at opening up access to the networks and tothe devices that interface to the networks. we cannot permit telecommunication companies to reassert a de facto monopoly powerover access to the home or the equipment used in the home. nor canwe allow the cable companies to act as rigid gatekeepers controllingthe content of services they provide. if the conduit providers areallowed to assert monopoly control over access to the home, or ifthey are directed to do so in the name of universal service, this willseriously stifle progress in the development of the infrastructure.the government will also need to work to assure interoperability.here we should encourage straightforward, open standards whoseeffect is to encourage competition among compatible solutions. theopportunity for missteps is significant. for example, the idea ofrequiring interoperability not only with new technologies but alsowith all antecedent systems is potentially paralyzing. there are already many industry, national, and international organizations thathave a long history of debating, creating, and promulgating standardsfor information technology. we do not need to impose another orhigherlevel standardssetting process. finally, forcing standards thatrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36robert w. stearnsare too rigid or pervasive risks locking in inferior, unworkable, anduneconomical approaches.we must also avoid pressures to turn this into a governmententitlement program. because the clinton administration has shownsuch a strong interest in this issue, some parties are recommendingpoorly conceived technical visions in hopes of winning governmentfunding for illconsidered research activities that tend to complicatefairly simple facts and practices. they suggest problems that existonly in the minds of overreaching central planners and overzealousacademics. letõs not overstudy this, particularly in an academicvacuum.many individuals advocate universal service to ensure that wedo not stratify our society into òinformation haves and have nots.óthey promote special support for needy individuals to allow themaccess to the information infrastructure. careful thought should beapplied to the priority we place on information access relative toother needs in our society. in our zeal to provide access to advancedinformation services for individuals, we must be careful not to placehigher value on the highway than we place on food, shelter, and basicmedical care.adherents of universal access look to the health care, education,and government sectors to support widespread involvement in theinformation infrastructure. this is a worthy objective, but i recommend we examine closely the rationale and methods for such funding. john browning, in a superb article in the september 1994 wiredmagazine, writes:òuniversal service crosssubsidies are a taxñalbeit a tax buried inthe price of services and beneath layers of obscure allocation andpricing regulation. they are a particularly inefficient and wastefultax. and worst of all, they are a deceptive and distorting tax, a taxthat makes it hard to see the real costs of the building blocks oftomorrowõs networks and thus the real opportunities in buildingthe networks that will change the world.ósince health, education, and government represent a sizable proportion of our economy, this tax would be substantial, could obscurethe true costs of providing a specific service, and as a result couldhinder and distort the development of this enterprise. in general, theless subsidy, the better. we should subsidize the consumer, not theprovider.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national information infrastructure37conclusiona freemarket approach to the development of the infrastructureis critical to the appropriate development of products and services.this point of view was strongly supported in a 1994 report issued byeuropean union commissioner martin bangemann that led to thecommissionõs recent òaction plan.ó allowing market forces to guidethe computer industry, and more recently the telephone industry, hasworked well for industry, government, and the consumer. theinternet is an excellent demonstration of what can be achievedthrough unconstrained, unregulated innovation. with a minimum ofgovernment funding and a lot of collaboration between governmentand academiañand most of all by letting a balance develop betweenwhat people want and what they are free to supplyñthe internet hasgrown and will continue to develop at an astonishing pace. theinternet points to a future in which the information infrastructure isnot a highway but a web of interrelated public and private networks,platforms, and services. a market approach will allow the infrastructure to continue to grow while addressing real needs today, will create an atmosphere that encourages experimentation and rapid learning, and will permit good ideas to flourish and bad ideas to die.a word of caution: we must not underestimate the population offuture users. by this i mean we should not develop the nii and all therelated products with an inactive user in mind. what is exciting is notthe ability to deliver more passive entertainment products. instead,the focus should be on new forms of entertainment, new connections,and new ways of learning.the nii is based on technologies in which american industryleads the world. if we creatively pursue this opportunity with theright goals in mind, there will be significant benefits to both thepublic and private sectors. moreover, we will lead the world into anew and truly exciting era.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39this paper presents my views on satellite communications andthe global information infrastructure (gii). i believe the gii is moreimportant to the future of this country in terms of world leadership,job creation, and export revenues than the national information infrastructure (nii), which is often called the information superhighway.the gii is also of paramount importance to the worldõs newly emerging global economy. todayõs global marketplace requires a reliable,timely, and unrestricted flow of people, information, capital, andproducts. by creating a seamless, ubiquitous, and costefficient global information infrastructure, we provide the communications architecture for the global marketplace. satellites, in particular, will playa critical role in executing this mission.the national information infrastructureever since vice president albert gore first lit the fuse with hisfocus on the nii, the media have responded with a barrage of stories.media megamergers, alliances, and acquisitions are frequent news.stock prices soar at the mention of the magic phrase òinteractivemultimedia.ó conferences are being held, and committees are beingformed. hundreds of billions of dollars have been pledged to buildthe nii.satellite communications in theglobal information infrastructuresteven d. dorfmanrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40steven d. dorfmanmuch of this interest is justified, because we are indeed on thebrink of turning some fascinating concepts into reality. these include viewing whatever we want, whenever we wantñvideo on demand; strolling through video shopping malls from our living roomand ordering with a push of a button on the remote control; havingtwoway fiber optic video transmission into and out of the home;playing video games with someone in another state; telemedicine;and telecommuting.but so far, most of what we hear and read about the nii suggeststhat fiber will be the delivery system. satellites are seldom mentioned. even the term òinformation superhighwayó connotes something that is landbased, which is why i believe this term is a misnomer. it is true we already have 15 million miles of fiber optic cablecrisscrossing the country. this is more than 300 times the mileage ofour federal interstate highway system. however, i believe that satellites will play a major role in the nii, because they fulfill both of vicepresident goreõs clearly stated nii policy objectives of competitionand universal access.competition and universalaccess in the niithe real story behind the hype about the nii is competitionñhow we are breaking away from the monopoly concept of telephoneand cable service. the original thought that government would invest huge sums to help create the information superhighway is gone.instead, telecommunication bills are being promoted to encouragecompetition for local phone, cable, and longdistance service. now,the cable company will be able to compete with the local phonecompany and vice versa, while longdistance and local phone companies will also be able to compete with one another. in this competitive environment, prices will drop, services will improve, and newapplications will flourish.regarding universal access, the second nii policy goal, the realissue here is the lastmile link to the home or office. this final mile,bridged either by wire or by satellite dish, is where the majority ofcosts are.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications41the economics of satellite transmissionsatellite communications will flourish in this new competitiveenvironment and will help make universal access a reality. hughesõnewly launched directv service is a good example. we offer 150channels of tv service to homes that have no cable. that is universalaccess. we also provide a competitive alternative to consumers whodo have access to cable. while bridging the last mile to the home bycable costs $2000, providing this link by satellite costs $700. theeconomics favor satellites, if the playing field is kept level by preventing cross subsidies.similarly, satellite communication will provide twoway, highdatarate services using very small aperture terminals (vsats) whereintegrated services digital network (isdn) is not readily available,and it will be a competitive alternative where isdn is available.moreover, satellites can provide mobile communication when terrestrial cellular communication is unavailable.thus, with 20 gigahertz (ghz) of satellite transmission capacityavailable from geostationary orbit, a new realism is now replacingthe hype. many are now questioning whether the cost of a fiber toeach home is justified if phone users or taxpayers do not pay for it.after all, how much are people willing to pay to save a trip to thelocal video store, especially when a service like directv can provide video on near demand?as a result, alliances and mergers, such as the one between bellatlantic and tci, are being reconsidered. pilot interactive multimedia systems are being carefully reviewed, and investments are beingrethought. one bell atlantic executive recently described the firmõsplanned advanced video networks as òa little more difficult to develop than people thought.ó the company intends to invest $11billion to develop these networks.like other companies, hughes is working vigorously to injectthe already sophisticated nii with new capabilities and services thatfocus on satellite communications. i am particularly proud of ourgalaxy classroom project, where we have demonstrated the power ofsatellitebased distance learning by accelerating the learning rate ofkð4 students by one grade in 40 schools around the country. we willexpand this program to 20,000 schools. we support the efforts ofcongress, the justice department, and the federal communicationsrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42steven d. dorfmancommission (fcc) as they strive to implement the architecture thatwill serve this country best in the 21st century.increasingly, however, hughes is also focusing its attention outside the united states. as both industrialized and developing nationsincrease their demand for access to information, entertainment, andmobile communications, the gii is where the action will be. in amarch 21, 1994 speech in buenos aires, vice president gore talkedabout the importance of the gii and did an excellent job of positioning america for a leadership role. the ubiquitous reach of satellitesñtheir ability to provide that crucial lastmile linkñmeans thatsatellite technology will play a major role in the gii.the gii: meeting the worldõsneed for telecommunicationsin recent years, the world has exchanged a bipolar, cold warmentality for an environment that recognizes the benefits of multilateral trade and cultural exchange. a global economy has emerged.but developing nations are finding that in order to participate in thisglobal economy, they must build significant infrastructureñeverything from modern roads and air transportation systems to reliableelectronic banking and telecommunications networks.a global information infrastructure will require massive development around the world. many countries have only minimal accessto communications technologies and very primitive or poorly developed internal and external connectivity. china, for example, willspend $600 billion on infrastructure in the next 6 years. withouthuge spending on such infrastructure, developing nations will experience bottlenecks that will impede their economic growth and socialprogress. ironically, because they have made limited investments incommunications infrastructure in the past, developing countries willbe heavy users of wireless, digital, and satellite technologies.privatization, competition, andadvances in satellite technologyas we move toward a seamless, ubiquitous, and costefficientglobal information network, three significant trends are shaping thefuture of satellite communications.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications43the first is privatization. many governments cannot readilyafford the major investments required to develop communicationsinfrastructure and so are increasingly turning to sources of privatecapital. in latin america, privatization is revolutionizing telecommunications in places like mexico, argentina, chile, colombia, andvenezuela. in 1994, india ended its state monopoly on telecommunications after determining it would have had to spend over $7 billionto modernize its phone system.as privatization takes hold, hughesõ international satellite construction business is becoming increasingly commercial. for instance, most of the satellites we now build for other countries arecontracted by private firms. hughesbuilt satellites serving japan,malaysia, china, indonesia, luxembourg, and thailand were all contracted by private, nongovernment entities.competition is the second key trend shaping the future of satellite communications. competition from both domestic and foreignsatellite service providers is driving down costs, spurring technological innovation, improving service, and expanding offerings to users.in august 1994, for example, singapore announced it would letprivately owned companies compete to provide satellite communications links that previously could be supplied only by two governmentcontrolled enterprises. by 1998, the european union will deregulate all basic telecommunication services, opening a $100billionayear market to competition.privatization and competition are also creating new regional satellite operators, like panamsat and ses. with the launch of pas3 indecember 1994 and pas4 in 1995ñboth highpower hughes 601satellitesñpanamsat will operate the worldõs first privately ownedglobal satellite system. ses, based in luxembourg, covers europewith highpower tv signals using hs601 satellites. private companies like ses and panamsat are building and expanding their systemsto compete against the oldline public satellite consortia. along withadded capacity, these new operators are infusing the internationalsatellite transmission market with greater flexibility, improved performance, and competitive pricing.the third factor shaping the future of satellite communicationand, along the way, helping to create a more universal and lowercostglobal information infrastructure, is the quantum leap that has beenachieved in satellite technology. improvements in efficiency in space,revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44steven d. dorfmanon the ground, and within the radio spectrum are lowering the cost ofsatellites and satellite services for everyone. for example, 30 yearsago one needed a 100foot antenna to receive one tv channel from asatellite, but todayõs directv can transmit 150 tv channels intoan 18inch dish.advances in satellites, earth terminals,and digital technologylet us take a closer look at some of these technological advances. todayõs satellites are more powerful and efficient. reconfigurable spotbeam antennas shape the beams more accuratelyand weigh less. miniaturization and component improvements havemade receivers more sensitive and lighter. travelingwave tubes andsolidstate power amplifiers have increased efficiency and, hence,require less prime power. batteries and solar panels are more efficient and lighter. microprocessors simplify tracking, telemetry, andcontrol of the satellite. modern composite techniques contribute tolighterweight satellite structures, and onboard propulsion has become more costeffective. in 1995, hughes will launch the firstcommercial ionpropulsion system, for the galaxy iiir spacecraft.this will save 800 pounds of satellite mass and more than $10 million per launch. as a result of these technological improvements andimproved production efficiency, the hughes 601 satellite is up to fivetimes more costeffective than its predecessor of the 1980s.advances in technology are also yielding more efficient, lowercost groundbased satellite terminals. at the 1977 world administrative radio conference, scientists predicted that 60 decibel watts(dbw) of power would be required to transmit tv signals to a onemeter dish. since then, there has been great improvement in receiversensitivity, antenna efficiency, and signal processing. today, only50 dbw are required to transmit tv to a halfmeter dish, and receivers can be purchased for less than $700.finally, digital communication combined with digital data compression is enabling new satellite applications. for example, compression of digital audio signals has made satellite mobile communications economically feasible by increasing the capacity of satellitestenfold. compression of digital video signals will result in at least afivefold increase in the capacity of a transponder to transmit televirevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications45sion channels. this, combined with the decreased cost of decompression chip sets in ground receivers, permits new applications of satellite digital tv, such as hughesõ directv. in general, compressionof digital signals will significantly reduce the cost of transmittingthrough satellites. i believe that the satellite communication marketis elastic and that the reduced cost will increase demand.an explosion ofsatellite communicationswe already see evidence that the increased costefficiency ofsatellite communications is stimulating demand. there is an abundance of new satellite capacity. already, 145 commercial communications satellites orbit the globe. another two dozen were scheduledfor launch during the last three months of 1994, and more than 100new commercial communications satellites are on order. nine hundred filings have been submitted to the international telecommunication union (itu) for future satellite systems, and that numberexcludes hundreds more low earthorbiting (leo) satellites thatcompanies such as iridium and teledesic plan to launch. at hughes,we have our largestever backlog; in 1994 and 1995, we will belaunching an average of one satellite per month for customers inthailand, mexico, brazil, and other countries. the technological advances i describedñmore powerful satellites, more sensitive lowercost receivers, and digital communicationsñare bringing more than just cost efficiencies. they are alsostimulating new satellite applications. i would like to discuss three ofthese: highspeed interactive voice, data, and video transmission;satellite mobile services, which will eventually evolve into handheld terminals; and directtohome television broadcasting throughsatellites.before discussing highspeed interactive communications, however, we must consider that much of the world is still in need of basictelephony. in china, which has fewer than two phone lines for every100 citizens, a private residential phone line from the beijing telephone company requires a 6 month wait and costs $575, the averagegovernment workerõs salary for an entire year. in mexico, the phonesystem is so unreliable that when a call finally does go through, thecommon greeting is not òhelloó but òwho have i reached?órevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46steven d. dorfmansatellites, in the form of vsat networks, already play a tremendous role in providing basic telephony in such areas. while voice isnot a common vsat application in the developed world, it is perhaps the most critical application in both public and private networksin places such as china, india, southern asia, and eastern europe.vsats also transmit twoway data and video for business applications and offer the unique ability to overcome the challenges posedby distance and terrain.in africa, for example, 70 percent of the people live in ruralareas, and major business centers, like cairo and nairobi, are thousands of miles apart. the continentõs vast mountain and desert areaswould make it prohibitively expensive to provide telephony via fixedterrestrial links. vsats offer an immediate, lowcost solution andthe only real opportunity to rapidly advance the continentõs economicdevelopment. it will be a very long time before the developingcountries of the world have fiber optic networks approaching thesophisticated networks that exist in the united states.vsat networks are providing far more than basic public telephone and government communications services. theyõre also beingused for more sophisticated applications in banking, retail merchandising, oil exploration, and newspaper production and distribution.in europe, vsats handle holiday innõs international reservationssystem and visaõs global transaction network. the china peopleõsdaily is published via a vsat network.spaceway: high data rates andbandwidth on demandwith these vsat applications as a starting point, we now findourselves on the threshold of a new era of interactive high dataratetransmission. microsoftõs bill gates and cellular phone pioneer craigmccaw made headlines when they announced an ambitious plan tolaunch a high datarate global satellite business, teledesic. theproject would rely on a global network of 840 low earthorbitingsatellites.alternatively, hughes has announced its intention to establish aglobal network of geostationary (geo) satellites, called spaceway,that will provide an interactive bandwidthondemand service fortelephony, highspeed data exchange, and highresolution interactiverevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications47video. spaceway will consist of four interconnected regional satellitesystems operating in the ka band and providing worldwide coverage.by transmitting in this high frequency band and by using tightlyfocused spot beams, we can transmit to or from ultrasmall antennasmeasuring 26 inches in diameter. the price of these dishes will beless than $1,000.the spaceway system will play two key roles. first, it willprovide basic telephony to underserved areas of the world and offerthese regions access to global telecommunication. second, spacewaywill provide critical advanced communications support to the globalmarketplace, where huge quantities of information must be accessedand shared electronically.spaceway will offer business users a wide variety of applications, including desktop video telephony and conferencing, computernetworking, technical teleimaging, cad/cam transmission, andhighspeed, lowcost access to the next generation of online multimedia databases, at rates from 16 kilobits per second to 1.5 megabits persecond, and higher if necessary.spaceway will enable the entire world to have access to the kindof soupedup capacity that we are planning for the united states.and, it will deliver capacity on demand using asynchronous transfermode (atm) technology at a relatively low cost. spaceway willoffer twoway video for less than the current price of an internationalphone call and international phone calls for less than the current priceof a local phone call.the next generation:mobile satellite servicesmeanwhile, our second new applicationñsatellite mobile communicationsñis about to take off. the pioneering work has beendone by inmarsat, which provides service to tens of thousands ofmaritime and aeronautical customers. the first land mobile serviceswill be available soon via piggybacked payloads on the alreadylaunched optus and solidaridad satellites of australia and mexico,respectively.in spring 1995, the first highpower land mobile satellite, amsc1,will be launched, followed shortly by its twin, tmi1. these satellites, which hughes is building for the u.s. american mobile satelrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48steven d. dorfmanlite corporation and the canadian telesat mobile incorporated, willfor the first time give cellular car phone users ubiquitous roamingservice across north america. dualmode handsets will route callsover cellular networks when they are available and by satellite whenthey are not.amsc1 and tmi1 will interconnect with all existing cellularsystems and with the entire public switched telephone network, creating the first seamless network for nationwide mobile voice, data, andfax communications in the united states and canada. the satelliteswill be capable of serving hundreds of thousands of customers.a followon amsc2 satellite with eight times the capacity ofamsc1 will lower costs; more important, its tightly focused spotbeams and onboard digital processing will reduce the needed uplinkpower to less than onehalf watt. this will permit handheld service,using lightweight pocket phones, for the first time.hughes is one of several companies examining handheld mobile telephone service in other regions of the worldñpacific asia, forexample, where demand is great. while hughes and others are currently working on geostationary systems, several different entitieshave proposed projects that would provide worldwide handheld service via a constellation of either low or medium earthorbiting (meo)satellites.two leo systems are being built: motorolaõs 66satellite iridium project and the 48satellite globalstar system from loral/qualcomm. a meo system based on 12 satellites is planned byinmarsat. construction of this system is scheduled to start in 1995.each type of system proposedñgeo, leo, and meoñhas certain advantages. a geo system is most suitable as a regional systemand has the lowest cost. ultimately, a series of regional geo systems could form a global system. a leo system will be the mostexpensive service because of the large number of satellites required,but it will not have the transmissiontime delay of geo satellites. ameo system will be more expensive than a geo but less than a leoand will have minimal time delay.i believe worldwide demand will be such that all three types ofsystems could coexist. ubiquitous handheld telephony, using a combination of satellite and terrestrial communications infrastructure, isa virtual certainty for the 21st century.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications49directtohome digital tvhighpower directtohome tv is already a reality. with thelaunch of hughesõ dbs1 and dbs2 satellites, every u.s. household with a tv can now access a cornucopia of digitally pure videoprogramming, accompanied by cdquality audio, via an 18inchdish. using digital compression, hughesõ directv company andhubbardõs ussb are able to beam more than 150 channels of premium programming directly into every american home. competitors such as echostar and primestar have announced similar services.demand for tv entertainment and information is also explodinginternationally. currently, more than 25 million privately ownedsatellite dishes in backyards and on rooftops across the world aredelivering vast menus of programming directly into the home. ses,for example, is broadcasting programs in five languages to over 17million privately owned receivers. after germany and the unitedkingdom, poland is the european country that has the largest numberof privately owned dishes, even though no polish language channelsare broadcasting and satellite dishes were banned there until 1990.satellites with names like asiasat, apstar, palapa, jcsat, superbird,and astra are sources of such familiar channels as cnn, hbo, espn,and mtv.because most of the world has access to only a handful of localchannels, there is enormous pentup demand for more variety and forforeign programs. this demand can be filled most costeffectivelyby satellite tv, especially when there is little or no cable. as alreadyindicated, it costs less to provide access by satellite than to build anew cable or fiber link to the home.because of these fundamental economics and builtin demand,hughes is exporting its highpower direct broadcast satellite (dbs)technology to the rest of the world. we are building highpowersatellites capable of directtohome broadcasts for china, malaysia,mexico, australia, and japan, among others. australia, which has nocable and only a handful of broadcast stations in the major cities, gotits first directtohome tv service in 1992 via an optus satellite. asecond optus satellite went into service in 1994.also, hughes recently teamed up with three of latin americaõsleading media companies in a joint venture called galaxy latinamerica (gla). beginning in early 1996, gla will bring multirevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50steven d. dorfmanchannel satellitetohome digital tv to millions of households incentral and south america and the caribbean. panamsat has announced a similar system.the spectacular success of startv in the asianpacific region isa good window into the future of satellitetohome tv worldwide.startv uses 10 channels on asiasat, which hughes built in 1990, tobeam entertainment programming to 60 million homes in 53 countries. apparently, the bold and the beautiful and santa barbara areespecially popular in india.because of all these satellites, global viewership is rising exponentially. cnn international currently has 80 million subscribers, upfrom just 11.6 million in october, 1991. soon, satellites will servethe entire world with directtohome digital tv, providing multipleprogramming choices from every corner of the globe.a vision for the futurein 1962, president john f. kennedy envisioned the united statesusing its technology to connect the world through satellite communications. from this vision came the communications satellite actand two of the most successful international organizations in history,intelsat and inmarsat.now, more than 30 years later, we have the opportunity to transport president kennedyõs vision into the next millennium. by expanding on that vision, we can create a global telecommunicationsinfrastructure that will make this a better world. this satellitebasednetwork will allow schoolchildren in a remote african village toreceive a superior academic or technical education from instructorsin nairobi, cairo, or virtually anywhere in the world. it will enable adoctor in afghanistan to transmit a patientõs xrays and medicalrecords instantly to a consulting specialist in the united states. localcontractors in sarajevo or beirut will be able to rebuild their citieswith the benefit of online engineering and architectural expertisefrom other countries. and, using workgroup computing, employeesin the budding economic zones of eastern europe can contribute theirtalents to leading multinational corporations.an integral part of this global telecommunications infrastructurewill be the satellite global phone, which we will automatically slipinto our purse or pocket each morning. it will be a smart phone,revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellite communications51always in communication with our personal computer, even as wetravel to the most remote corners of the world. it will know where weare through a global positioning system (gps) chip set, automaticallyswitching to satellite mode when we move out of range of terrestrialcells.satellitetohome television will keep us well informed and entertained and will help us learn and understand the values and cultures of other societies. hundreds of millions of us will own personalsatellite dishes, and we will be able to receive programs from everycontinent. everybody will be watching news events as they happen,wherever they happen. there will no longer be any remote corners ofthe world.there will be challenges. we must modify the comsat, intelsat,and inmarsat organizations so they can keep pace with todayõs technology and the worldwide drive toward competition and privatization.we must formulate an international approach to the orderly allocation of frequency spectrum for geostationary and low earthorbitingsatellites in a highly competitive marketplace. sufficient spectrumexists for all of the satellite applications discussed here, but it must beallocated efficiently. another challenge we face is to create a globalenvironment that permits the free flow of information across bordersand, at the same time, protects copyrights.as in 1962, we have an enormous opportunity to shape the futureof satellite communications around the world. by exporting ournationõs rich store of satellite technology and knowhow, we not onlycreate new jobs in the united states and boost our own economy, wealso further the economic and social progress of developing nationsthrough improved access to education and health care. by exportingamericaõs defining values of democracy and human rights, we willmake this a better world.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.53no matter how you look at it, the 1990s has been an incredibleperiod for communications in general and wireless communicationsin particular. for example, the paging industry, once predicted to beeclipsed by the cellular industry, is now growing faster than ever. bythe end of 1993, there were some 50 million pagers in use worldwide;150 million units may be in service by the turn of the century. that is150 million units for a service that was expected just several yearsago to pass out of use. meanwhile, cellular communication and nowpersonal communications services (pcs) have exploded onto theworld scene. although there were just 600,000 units in service at theend of 1985, some 33 million units were in service worldwide at theend of 1993, and the prediction is for well over 100 million cellularand pcs units by the year 2000.moving beyond sales figures, governments worldwide have embraced the issue of communications, and wireless communications inparticular, as a national priority. the u.s. government stimulatedthis trend when it began using two new acronyms, nii (nationalinformation infrastructure) and gii (global information infrastructure). neither the nii nor the gii is fully developed yet, but opendebate about them at the national and international level has focusedattention on important issues and helped accelerate the process ofchange.current trends and likelyfutures in wireless systemsjohn e. majorrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54john e. majoralthough this is a global story, one can gain an understanding ofit by focusing on events in the united states. in 1994, the federalcommunications commission (fcc) allocated 3 megahertz (mhz)of spectrum for a new class of service called narrowband pcsñpaging, if you will. that move doubled the available spectrum andopened up the potential for whole new classes of services. for example, one will be able to know that a page was received, and because the network will be able to locate the cell the pager is in, it willbe economical to send much longer pages, such as the dayõs agenda.finally, the person being paged will be able to respond with shortmessages such as, òiõll reach you this evening.ófollowing narrowband pcs is pcs itself, which is essentiallyupbanded cellular communication.1 for this service, 120 mhz ofspectrum has been set aside, which is more than twice what waspreviously available. this not only makes possible truly competitivecellular service, with the attendant benefits of decreasing costs andincreasing features, but it also offers the prospect of enhanced voicequality for a wireless lastmile alternative that would provide competition in the local loop. the fcc has allocated another 20 mhz ofspectrum for unlicensed pcs to be used for building networks andwireless local area networks (lans). finally, some 33 mhz hasbeen designated for use by big leos, or low earthorbiting satellitenetworks, to provide global wireless service.all of thisñthe 3, 120, 20, and 33mhz allocationsñhas occurred in just 2 yearsõ time. similar activities are under way aroundthe world. the pace is startling, and if we proceed with courage,energy, and vision, we can expect much more to happen as the decade proceeds.the outcome of these trends depends greatly on what we chooseto do, for there are still many unresolved issues in the nii/gii debate.these include concerns about security and privacy, interoperability,information access, ease of use, portability, ubiquity, network availability and manageability, applications development, and networkcomponents. this paper will focus on just two of these: portabilityand ubiquity. unless the nii/gii initiative satisfies these two re1 upbanded cellular communication is cellular service at the 1.8gigahertz (ghz)band. todayõs service is at the 800mhz band.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wireless systems55quirements, it cannot deliver the promised convenience, services, andapplications.individual voice and public imagesafter some 100 years of technological progress in telecommunications, we live in a world that can be characterized as having òindividual voiceó and òpublic images.ó individual voice means that almost anyone can have a voice conversation with almost anyone else,anywhere, at any time. with cellular and cordless technologies, thephones are locally or regionally wireless, and the wireless networkthat supports them is implemented by a highly complementary parallel wired network. there are some limitations in terms of access,costs, and competition, but recent pcs decisions will greatly improvethese areas.ours is a world of public images because those broadband, orvideobased, services are still comparatively expensive or controlledtightly. whereas anyone can make a phone call, only those withspecialized equipment and an fcc license can broadcast a televisionshow or movie. further, in this world of individual voice and publicimages, information and computing have largely been left out of thetechnological picture. newspapers, books, and learning services areobtained pretty much as they were at the turn of the centuryñinnewsstands, libraries, and schools.the nii/gii initiative holds the potential to change dramaticallyall of this and in so doing to empower all citizens through the opportunities that result from making communication services personallyaccessible. in the nii/gii vision, the separate worlds of individualvoice and public images will be unified. that is, individuals willhave full access not to just voice services, as they do today, but alsoto imagebased and information services that can now only be imagined. this is telecommunications with full mobility and connectivity, and it will be made possible by completing the second and thirdgeneration systems that must be part of the global telecommunicationsagenda.a vision at riskthe promise of nii/gii lies in three synergistic forces: the availability of bandwidth resulting from developments in fiber optics andrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56john e. majorsignaling; the availability of computing brought on by the development of the microprocessor and advances in semiconductor technology; and the emergence of competition and choice spawned by newtelecommunications policies worldwide.what is missing from this picture is wireless communications,the next generation of telecommunication technology represented bypaging, cellular, and pcs services. until recently, everything youcould receive on a wallattached television in your home, you couldreceive on a portable television, whether you chose to use it in another room, on a campout, or at a sporting event. that started tochange with cable, when the delivered wired bandwidth for televisionservices was effectively increased by two orders of magnitude. today, one buys a portable tv but ends up tying it permanently to thewall with a coaxial line. that has got to change.a similar shift has occurred in computing. early on, what couldbe done with a portable computer, or what we then called a portablecomputer, was pretty much what could be done with an office orhome computer. that changed when lans and computer networkscame into being. with that transition, the unnetworked portable computer became less useful than its lanbased equivalent. thesechanges initially went unnoticed; after all, at least the new portablecomputer was portable when you carried it home. this too willchange. in the near future, for a portable computer to be truly portable, the network will need to be portable as well.let us keep this perspective and move forward to the time whenthe nii/gii begins to deliver on its promises. people far from oneanother will be able to talk face to face, so groups can interact anddecisions made more quickly; families will be united although theylive miles apart; and highspeed computing and information accesswill be available in the home and office. because of these developments, people will be more productive and better informed. today,the communications services that are available to a worker in his orher office are available when that person is on the move. in thefuture, that will no longer be true unless broadband wireless servicesare brought in line with broadband wired services.some people say this cannot be done. can you imagine whatwould have happened to television if, when it was first conceptualized, people had said that it would not work because it could not bemade to fit into the bandwidth of the existing am and fm radiorevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wireless systems57channels? it took great courage and vision to make the changesnecessary to support television. similar vision and courage are necessary to develop broadband wireless networks.this picture of broadband wireless communication of the futureprompts two questions: does having wireless matter? if it does, canthis future be realized with the technology now available and despiteother likely constraints? the answer to both questions is òyes.óalready, we have seen the high value people put on mobility. thatdemand for mobility is generating vast new highgrowth industriesthat produce products to make our citizens more accessible and ourcompanies more efficient. substantial new export markets are opening up for these products.applications of mobile communicationswhat i have just outlined is the broad picture, but what happensin specific circumstances and industries is perhaps more important.the availability and dependability of private landmobile communications is one of the primary factors that has allowed the unitedstates to establish and maintain its position as the worldõs leadingproducer of goods and services. private landmobile radio is used byall segments of the industrial, business, publicsafety, publicservice,and landtransportation workforces. the continued growth of thisnationõs commercial and publicservice activities demands additionalcommunication capabilities. it is imperative that the industrial andpublicsafety sectors have access to new imaging and decisionprocessing/remotefile access technologies. even though personal communications services will be available to the general public throughcommon and private carriers, publicsafety, publicservice, and industrial users will continue to satisfy their specialized communications requirements through private systems.a community of private landmobile radio users is necessary tomaintain global competitiveness. motivated by the constant need toimprove productivity and service, private users will invariably migrate to the specific communications solutions that provide the greatest advantage to their operations. an additional allocation of radiospectrum is essential if these users and their industries are to continueto flourish in increasingly competitive global markets.wireless systems will serve the critical daytoday operationalrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58john e. majorneeds of a variety of industrial, publicsafety, and publicservice sectors. these include:law enforcement¥mobile transmission of fingerprints, mug shots, warrants, andother images to and from law enforcement field personnel¥mobile transmission of maps, floor layouts, and architecturaldrawings for crimeinprogress operations¥tactical use of live mobile video for hostage, arrest, and surveillance operations¥highresolution graphics and electronic transfer of maps andother graphic information to police vehicles¥vehicle and personneltracking systems¥wireless òdog tagó locator services to help assure personnelsecurity¥onboard information and security systems for mass transitvehiclesenergy conservation and management¥advanced distribution automation, such as remote monitoring, coordination, and operation of distribution and transmission components from centralized locations, for load management, advancedmetering, and systemcontrol functions¥demandside management (dsm) systems; for example,managing the consumption of electric power and natural gas¥transmissions to monitor and record pipeline flow and pipeline pressure indicators¥realtime monitoring, alerting, and control in situations involving handling of hazardous materialshealth care and fire/emergency medical systems¥remote monitoring of patientsõ vital signs in healthcare facilities to allow immediate response in the event of a patient medicalcrisis¥mobile transmission of maps, floor layouts, and architecturaldrawings to assist fire fighters and other response personnel in therescue of individuals in emergenciesrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wireless systems59¥transmission of visual signals and physician instructions insupport of rescue operations¥highspeed transmission of highresolution medical imageryand data from paramedics to hospitals¥automated inventory controlpollution control¥highresolution graphics and electronic transfer of maps andother graphics information to mobile users¥management and remediation operations following spills orother crises¥realtime monitoring, alerting, and control in situations involving handling of hazardous materials¥visual inspection of pipes and cables exposed during excavation projectsindustrial productivity¥automatic transmission of messages advising of impendingshortages of parts in a manufacturing environment¥vehicle and personnel tracking systems¥locator service based on wireless transmitters to address personnel security¥remote safety and security inspection of inaccessible locations¥automation of process and qualitycontrol functions¥transmission of scheduling and cost updates, job site inspection results, and performance assessments relating to constructionprojects¥wireless òfacetofaceó conferences between inhouse production and sales personnelintelligent vehicle highway systems (ivhs)¥traffic management systems that adjust to actual traffic conditions rather than rely on historical patterns¥systems that can electronically weigh and inspect commercial vehicles in motion, issue and monitor permits, or track a container throughout a multimodal shipmentrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60john e. major¥systems that permit electronic collection of tolls and transitfares¥devices that alert authorities to the need for emergency vehicles at the site of a collision or other roadside situationthe recent spectrum allocation for pcs will not satisfy the personaluse needs for emerging wireless technologies. the regulatoryscheme adopted for pcs makes it impractical, if not impossible, forprivate users to obtain and use their own pcs licenses for the newtelecommunications technologies they need. private users, includingthose in publicsafety fields, need to use continuously the spectrumallocated to them so that they can design systems to meet specificneeds. consider two examples. first, for the typical pcs user, radiocoverage while in a building or even in a basement might be desirable, but it is not critical. if a portable phone does not work in theselocations, it is an inconvenience but no more. however, for a firefighter trapped in the basement of a burning building, that same lackof coverage could be a life and death matter. systems only deliverthis type of coverage throughout a service area if they are specificallydesigned to do so. second, if a system does not work during veryadverse conditionsña flood, an ice storm, or a power blackoutñit isagain just an inconvenience for the typical pcs user. this is not truefor the radio systems used by certain crucial components of our infrastructure. phone and utility companies, for instance, design suchsystems to work regardless of emergency conditions. in fact, thefunctioning of these systems is critical during such emergencies.phased approach one aspect of the nii/gii vision calls for fully mobile communications. implementation of this goal should take place in twophases; the first requires immediate attention, and the second requiresspecific actions toward deployment by the turn of the century.phase ispectrum allocations for secondgeneration leo satellite systems for handheld, twoway subscriber units and pagers. althoughthe first generation of leo technology is only now being brought torevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wireless systems61market, it is not too early to plan additional spectrum allocations inanticipation of leoõs success. an additional 60 mhz will be required to allow for the expansion of existing systems and the emergence of anticipated competitive systems.spectrum allocations for industrial and publicsafety digital systems with broadband capability. it has always been a priority of thefcc to ensure that all necessary spectra critical to public safety andindustry support are made available. as such, the long tradition ofsupport and forwardlooking solutions for public safety and privateindustry has been marked by the continued leadership of the unitedstates. to prepare for the next series of changes, it is estimated that75 mhz of spectrum will be needed to deliver digital systems withbroadband capability. these systems will not support continuousfullmotion video, but they will allow selected slowscan video, image transmissions, file searches, and the transmission of buildinglayouts, maps identifying the locations of hazardous chemicals, andfingerprints.ivhs. one function of the information highway is to supportand make more efficient existing physical roadways through ivhsprograms. these programs need additional spectra to support thetransfer of information between vehicles and ivhs infrastructure.twenty mhz is needed to meet this requirement.phase iianalog cellular, paging, and private systems provided the firstgeneration of wireless communications. the second generation consists of digital systems, such as u.s. digital cellular (usdc), that remined existing systems, pcs, and the first phase of the nii mobilityinitiatives. thirdgeneration systems for private or public use allowpaging, or image data, or voice transmission with similar functionality but with flexible broadband capability, increased capacity, satellite system interconnectivity, and global roaming. these systems notonly support data, but they support it at lan rates. they deliver thefull capacity of the nii/gii vision to the mobile person. clearly, asubstantial amount of spectrum will need to be set aside to supportcompeting public systems, wireless cable access, and private systemswith this capacity. efforts are just beginning to assess spectrum useand availability around the world.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62john e. majorthe role for the governmenthow can government help? first and foremost, the governmentneeds to accept what history has shownñthat mobility is essential.wireless solutions need to be an explicit part of the nii/gii agenda.the initial 155 mhz should be for industrial and publicsafety services, ivhs, and satellite services. substantial additional spectrumwill be required to support thirdgeneration systems. governmentassistance needs to be focused on making spectrum available. remining of portions of the spectrum used by broadcast televisionshould be considered in light of the capability of phase ii systems todeliver both broadband data and video. clearing the spectrum is notjust a regulatory challenge. solutions need to be developed to transfer existing services to either wireline or to new spectrum areas.conclusionfor the next 5 years or so, thanks to the vision and efforts ofgovernments around the world, we can expect current trends in wireless communications to continue. cellular and cellularlike serviceswill become more global and more ubiquitous. wireless localloopservices will provide increased competition and basic service in ruralareas worldwide. paging services will become more sophisticated,and they, too, will become even more global. satellite services thatdeliver global, portable service will emerge, allowing true globalroaming. beyond these initial trends, greater allocation of spectrumwill allow services for satellite system expansion, ivhs, and industrial and public safety use. after that, we will see the emergence ofbroadband wireless services.that is the potential of these new telecommunications technologies. the united states has led the world with its communicationsand computing visions in the past, and, with mobility as part of thenii/gii agenda, it will do so again well into the next century.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.63i will start with a confession: i am a telecommunications neophyte, having only recently learned how to use the internet. but iknow from my job and from casual reading that the united statesñand indeed the worldñis in the midst of a telecommunications revolution that will have profound consequences for every aspect of ourlives.at the global level, telecommunications helped end the coldwar. the former communist countries could not control the flow ofinformation that personal computers and television delivered aboutlife in the west. ultimately, political freedom itself spilled over fromwest to east.within the united states, telecommunications products and services are powering economic growth. according to the council ofeconomic advisers, firms engaged in the informationservices sectorof our economyñincluding computers, software, telecommunications services, and equipmentñaccounted for 9 percent of thenationõs gross domestic product in 1993. assuming the administrationõs telecommunications reform proposals are enacted by thenext congress, this share could double over the following decade.meanwhile, advances in telecommunications have been transforming our daily lives. it is difficult to remember life without faxmachines or email, both of which have dramatically speeded upantitrust enforcement and thetelecommunications revolution:friends, not enemiesrobert e. litanrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64robert e. litancommunications on the job. some people may already feel the sameabout videoconferencing, which may be standard practice in relatively few companies now but surely will be common throughout thecountry in just a few short years.in our homes, the telecommunications revolution has alreadydramatically lowered longdistance telephone rates, while bringingdozens of video channels to our television sets. millions of americans are now also using online information services and the internetto communicate with each other, with a growing number of librariesand other databases, and with people around the world.the future promises even more video interactivity. once theyare fully built, fiber optic highways and satellites will do for videowhat copper wire did for voice: allow individuals to interact with oneanother rather than passively receive information or entertainment.these are not simply pieinthesky predictions. by the time thefederal communications commission (fcc) completes its auction,investors are likely to have plunked down billions of dollars for spectrum rights that will enable providers to deliver these services to thepublic.the question this paper addresses is: what publicpolicy issuesare raised by the spread of computer and videobased interactivity?there are many, and i certainly do not feel competent to address themall. instead, i would like to concentrate on two very simple butpowerfully important objectives that government policy makersshould focus on as the telecommunications revolution proceeds.first, policies should be in place to assure that firms in all partsof the telecommunications industryñthose building the infrastructure and those developing the content that will travel over itñhavethe maximum incentive to innovate and to develop and deliver products and services of the highest quality at the lowest cost.second, the telecommunications services that are generatedshould be made available broadly, not just to the fortunate few. information networks have positive externalities: the more peoplehooked up to the networks, the more valuable the hookups are foreach participant.moreover, information is what economists call a public good.we educate our children, at public expense, by giving them the information and skills they will need to lead productive lives, because it isin everyoneõs interest for all kids to grow up to be responsible adults.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement65similarly, we provide libraries, also at public expense, so that knowledge is made freely available to all segments of society.now that technology is revolutionizing the way information isdeliveredñover wires, over the air, and through computersñit isvitally important that all citizens continue to have at least some access to the information services of the modern age. this does notmean that everyone should be entitled to order movies on demand intheir homes at subsidized rates. however, it does mean that greatattention will have to be paid to ensuring that all of us have some basiclevel of access to the services and information that will be deliveredover the information highways of tomorrow. by making sure thatcompetition governs the telecommunications marketplace, the federal government can both provide incentives for innovation and encourage widespread availability of new telecommunications services.this is an objective shared by all government agencies responsible for telecommunications policy: the fcc, the department ofcommerce, and the antitrust division of the department of justice.the rest of this paper will explain why competition is so importantand how, in concrete terms, the antitrust division in particular haspromoted and will continue to promote innovation in the telecommunications industry by protecting the competitive process.the importance of competitionthe notion that competition is critical to the development oftelecommunications services has not been, and may still not be, accepted by everyone. for decades following the invention of thetelephone, for example, it was widely assumed that telephone servicewas a natural monopoly. public policy makers embraced this assumption by allowing at&t to run the nationõs telephone networkfree from competitive challenge.more recently, some parties have suggested that the need forstandards in computerbased systems is incompatible with competition. for example, bill gates has asserted that microsoftõs operatingsystems for personal computers have become industry standards andthus have characteristics of a natural monopoly. while each of thesearguments in support of natural monopoly may be appealing superficially, neither, on closer examination, justifies the rejection of thecentral role of competition that they both imply.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66robert e. litanconsider first the claim of natural monopoly in the telephonebusiness. this notion was roundly rejected when the department ofjustice and judge harold greene forced the breakup of at&t in theearly 1980s. the breakup was not a universally popular move, eveninside the reagan administration. in fact, according to publishedaccounts, president reagan, secretary of commerce malcolmbaldrige, and secretary of defense casper weinberger believed thatthe at&t monopoly was a national treasure that should not be broken up. but william baxter, then the assistant attorney general forantitrust at the justice department and now professor emeritus atstanford law school, insisted that only by divesting the regionaltelephone monopolies from at&tõs longdistance monopoly wouldlongdistance competitors to at&t have a fair chance to hook up tolocal telephone networks.professor baxter and judge greene were right. look what hashappened since the breakup:¥over 100 companies have entered the longdistance telephonemarket, knocking at&tõs share of that business down from 100percent to 60 percent. real residential longdistance rates have fallenby about half, in part due to the increased competition. while thelongdistance market could use even more competitionñat&t,mci, and sprint today account for about 90 percent of the businessñthe entry of so many firms rebuts the view that longdistance telephone service is a natural monopoly;¥a less wellrecognized but potentially even more importantproduct of the at&t breakup is that it helped unleash the fiber opticsrevolution, making possible an exciting range of telecommunicationscapabilities. corning glass invented fiber optic cable and attemptedto sell it to at&t in the early 1970s, but at&t was a monopolistand probably had little interest in ripping up its existing copperwirenetwork in order to replace it with fiber. it was not until at&t wasbroken up that the use of fiber optics really took off. in part, this wasbecause at&t, corning, and others working on fiber optics were bythen able to bring down costs. fiber became cheaper than the microwave technology that was once thought to be the main competitor tocopper wires. however, the breakup itself almost certainly pushedthings along. new entrants into the longdistance telephone business, like sprint, mci, and their smaller competitors, turned to cornrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement67ing for fiber optic cables. eventually, at&t too was forced to installfiber in order to match the quality and low cost of its competitorsõservices.now that longdistance telephone markets have successfullywithstood the dissolution of the naturalmonopoly model, the nextcandidate for competition is the local telephone business. today, thismarket is virtually monopolized by the regional bell operating companies (rbocs), which carry more than 99 percent of the local traffic in their regions. the local market may look very different in thenear future, however.it is possible, if not likely, that within a few years the coaxialcable owned by cable television operators will be delivering localtelephone traffic, just as it is doing today for nearly 400,000 customers in the united kingdom. in addition, a variety of wireless technologiesñincluding cellular, specialized mobile radio, and the newpersonal communications services portions of the spectrumñcouldcreate powerful competition to landline telephone services.of course, cable and other alternatives to the rbocsõ local telephone monopolies will arrive only if state and local regulators permitthem to compete. so far, only a few states have taken steps to removerestrictions to entry into the telephone business. later, this paper willaddress the need for other states to eliminate these artificial and unnecessary barriers to entry.what about the claim that the need for standards leaves littleroom for competition? this argument is flat wrong. it may well betrue that once a standard has been accepted in the marketplace, suchas the qwerty layout on a typewriter, competition is no longerpossible. but, with the one qualification i will discuss shortly, competition should actually govern the development of the standardsthemselves.microsoft proves this point. microsoft gained a monopoly inoperating systems for personal computers in the 1980s by successfully marketing dos and windows, which became industry standards. there was nothing unlawful about this. but then the companyadopted certain licensing practicesñóper processoró licenses thattaxed competing operating systems and set lengthy terms and largeminimum commitments. this effectively froze competing operatingsystems out of the original equipment market, the largest channel forrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68robert e. litandistributing this type of software. the justice department suedmicrosoft because these practices, coupled with restrictive nondisclosure agreements imposed on developers of applications software,unlawfully entrenched the companyõs monopoly and thereby deprivedcompetitors of a fair shot at becoming the next standard. microsofthas signed a consent decree, which the district court for the districtof columbia disapproved in february 1995 but which i fully expectthe court of appeals to approve on appeal. when it does, this decreewill help level the playing field in the pc operating systems market.the microsoft case teaches an important lesson. it is perfectlylegitimate to own a technology or product that becomes a standard,but it is against the law to erect barricades to competing, wouldbestandards. this proposition is especially important in hightechnology industries, where rapid innovation may create frequent opportunities for new standards to replace old ones. if the owners of the oldstandards are allowed to use any means to block entry of the new,then innovation itself will be discouraged and consumers will loseout.the one qualification to the proposition that competition shouldgovern the development of standards is that in some cases, it may bein societyõs interest for competitors to agree on standards, or, ineffect, to work jointly to create standards. for example, manufacturers may lawfully cooperate to set quality standards, saving regulatorsthe time and expense of certification. a number of bodies in thetelecommunications and computer fields perform similar functions.but even in these cases, the jointventure partners in the standards process must not abuse their legitimate collaboration to distortthe competitive process. thus, standardssetting bodies should beopen to all parties who meet reasonable criteria for membership. inaddition, the standardssetting process must be a fair one and notserve simply as a device for preventing new competitors or newstandards from entering the market.in sum, competition must remain the central governing principlefor the information age. competition encourages continued innovation and guarantees consumers the lowest prices for telecommunications and information services, and by so doing it promotes the widespread availability of these services.if there is any doubt about these propositions, one need only lookto europe and japan. both regions have continued to follow therevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement69statedirected, monopoly model in telecommunications, and they nowfind themselves playing catchup to the united states. for instance,it was recently reported that japanõs telephone monopoly, ntt, is farbehind the u.s. regional telephone companies in laying fiber opticcable (hamilton, 1994). in addition, european governments havebeen taken to task for sheltering their telecommunications giants fromboth domestic and foreign competition (the economist, 1994). thiscriticism is not hard to understand. one recent study projects that anend to telephone monopolies in europe would not only lower pricesbut improve quality by 40 percent (hudson, 1994).the benefits of competition are being recognized closer to home.in september, canadian regulators took a major step to promotecompetition by allowing telephone companies to transmit video images and by opening up local telephone markets to competition fromcable television operators and other sources. if the united stateswants to continue to lead the world in telecommunications innovation, it must act soon to move in a direction similar to canadaõs; thatis, it must clear away the remaining obstacles to fair and effectivecompetition throughout the telecommunications industry.preserving and promoting competitionthrough antitrust enforcementalong with the federal trade commission (ftc), the justicedepartmentõs antitrust division is charged by federal law with protecting and promoting competition. next, this paper will considerhow the division has been fulfilling this mandate in ways that affectthe future of telecommunications.merger enforcementone of the defining characteristics of the current revolution inthe telecommunications field is the dizzying pace of corporatemergers. it seems that not a week goes by without one or two majormergers or corporate alliances being announced, each advertised asan ideal way to accelerate the building of the information superhighway by combining the unique talents and expertise of the twopartners.in many cases, this may be true, and the division will not stand inrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70robert e. litanthe way of these arrangements. however, we draw the line, as thelaw requires us to, at mergers that threaten to concentrate economicpower in particular markets or to erect barriers to the entry of competitors.mergers involving telecommunications and computer firms canpose special problems for those who enforce antitrust laws, becausemany of the firms in these industries already have dominant, or evenmonopoly, positions. the seven rbocs, for example, each currentlyhas a monopoly in local telephone service. the same is true foralmost all cable television firms in the markets they serve. otherhightechnology firms also have substantial market power in variouslines of business.firms that are already dominant in their markets surely knowthat neither the division nor the ftc is likely to permit them toengage in horizontal acquisitions, that is, purchases of direct competitors. as a result, many of the hightechnology mergers we haveseen so far involve the marriages of firms dominant in one marketwith firms in related marketsñsuch as rbocs proposing mergerswith cable companies, telephone companies active in different geographic areas proposing mergers, and so on. the critical questionposed by these mergers is whether they will allow one or both of thefirms with dominance in one market to extend market power to asecond marketña special danger where the acquiring firm is a regulated monopoly. if so, antitrust enforcers try to persuade the partiesto revise their plans in ways that remove the anticompetitive effectsof the transaction. if this fails, we will sue to halt the merger.two recent examples demonstrate how it is possible to prune theanticompetitive effects from otherwise lawful telecommunicationsmergers. the first is the union between at&t and mccaw cellularcommunication, both dominant players in their respective markets.as noted earlier, at&t still has about 60 percent of the longdistance telephone market. overall, mccaw carries about 30 percent ofthe nationõs cellular traffic, but in some regions of the country thisfigure is closer to 50 percent. in seeking to acquire mccaw, at&tclearly wanted to provide seamless local and longdistance cellularservice to customers.without any conditions, however, this proposed merger posedrisks to competition in several markets. under the original proposal,the parties wanted to be able to market to their customers a comrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement71bined longdistance/localservice cellular package, without givingthem a choice of another longdistance carrier. given mccawõsmarket power in various localities and at&tõs market power inlongdistance, this proposal could have significantly distorted competition in the longdistance market by diverting customers awayfrom other longdistance companies based on factors other than quality or price, further entrenching at&tõs already dominant positionin long distance.to address this problem, the division conditioned its approval ofthe merger on mccawõs providing to competing longdistance carriers equal access to its subscribers. this is what the rbocs now arerequired to do for longdistance traffic on their land lines, and thedepartment of justice has proposed that they do the same if they areallowed to provide longdistance service to cellular customers. inaddition, the consent decree that the parties signed prohibits at&tfrom offering its local and longdistance cellular services as a bundle;the company must instead separately price each service.the at&t/mccaw merger also posed a threat to competition inlocal cellular markets. at&t currently is the dominant manufacturer of equipment for cellular carriers, including many of the rbocsthat compete with mccaw. given the nature of cellular systems,once a carrier begins purchasing a particular brand of equipment, itgets locked in to that brand for some period of time. the additionaldanger posed by the merger was that at&t could exploit its positionin the cellularequipment market by raising prices or denying or delaying the delivery of parts and other services to rbocs that compete with mccaw in local cellular service. knowing this, rival cellular carriers and at&t/mccaw could implicitly decide to keepcellular prices high. the consent decree prevents this result by prohibiting at&t from such conduct. in addition, it addresses the lockin problem by allowing, under certain circumstances, cellular equipment customers of at&t to sell back their equipment to at&t, ifthey want to, at cost minus a reasonable allowance for depreciation.the second telecommunications merger approved subject to important conditions is the purchase by british telecommunications(bt) of a 20 percent interest in mci, as well as the creation of aglobal joint venture between the two companies. this transactionraised important telecommunications issues in an international context. like at&t and mccaw, mci wanted its equity partnershiprevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72robert e. litanwith bt in order to enhance its ability to offer seamless telecommunications services, in this case on a worldwide basis. if bt did nothave market power in telecommunications services in the unitedkingdom, it is unlikely that either the proposed equity investment bybt in mci or the joint venture would pose any competitive risks.but bt was and remains the dominant telephone company in theunited kingdom. by virtue of this dominance, bt would gain fromthe proposed transaction both the incentives and the ability to favorits joint venture with mci in pricing, interconnection, and possiblyother waysñall to the detriment of u.s. users of other global telecommunications providers. if this occurred, then the prices on telephone traffic between our two countries would increase.accordingly, the division imposed several conditions on the bt/mci transaction. most important, the parties agreed to publish detailed information about the terms and conditions of services that btprovides to the joint venture and to mci. this information will giveammunition to any disfavored competitors that wish to lodge complaints with regulatory authorities in either the united states or theunited kingdom. such a òtransparencyó provision is less intrusiveand less costly, but no less effective, than direct regulation.in addition, the consent decree prohibits bt from providing toeither the joint venture or to mci confidential information aboutother international telecommunications providers. moreover, theparties agreed that if a significant act of discrimination in favor ofthe joint venture or mci occurs in the future, the department mayseek modification of the decree to strengthen its nondiscriminationprovisions.what about future mergers in the telecommunications industry?it is difficult to be specific, because some are pending now before thedivision. it is possible, however, to offer several broad comments onthe relation between competition policy and mergers in the industry.there has been much talk about òtheó information superhighway. in fact, several highways appear to be in the worksñlandlinetelephone, landline cable, and various wireless technologiesñallcompeting to deliver voice and video content to businesses and homesaround the country. no one really knows which of these highwayswill be successful. that is what markets are forñto let the firms thatare now spending billions of dollars to build these highways fight itout.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement73for those charged with enforcing the antitrust laws, three concerns are paramount.first, we do not want any highway owner that now has a regulated monopoly in its market to crosssubsidize. that is, cable operators who want to enter telephone markets, or local telephone companies that may eventually gain entry into longdistance markets, shouldfund their expansion only from the capital markets and not from theircustomers. the same is true for regulated telephone companies hoping to offer video and other services. to allow any other result is topermit the marketplace to favor monopolists, to the detriment ofconsumers.second, at least for the next several years, we should not allowthe owner of any one highway in a given geographic area to mergewith or buy out a competing highway. if, for example, local telephone companies were permitted to merge with their cable television competitors in the same service territory, neither firm wouldretain the incentive to develop and supply the new interactive services that consumers have been promised. this situation may changeonce technology affords consumers more ways to receive information in the home. in the meantime, however, it is prudent to prohibitfor a reasonable period marriages of cable and telephone firms operating in the same service areas; the administration has suggested 5years.third, we will be especially watchful of mergers or joint ventures between owners of highways and owners of content. suchtransactions may create strong incentives for the integrated entity todeny competing programmers access to the highways. in such cases,we will be prepared either to block the merger or to condition it onòequal accessó requirements that prevent such discrimination, as wedid with tciõs acquisition of liberty media.removing barriers to entryit is one thing to prevent mergers that threaten to choke offcompetition. it is another to ensure that such competition is allowedto take place. current law, however, largely presumes that certaintelecommunications markets should be monopolies and thereforeinsulated from competition. therefore, unless the supreme courtholds that federal law is unconstitutional (as have three federalrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74robert e. litancourts), local telephone companies will remain barred from offeringvideo services in their service territories. as noted earlier, localtelephone companies are legally insulated from competition in allbut a few states. in addition, the consent decree governing theat&t breakup prohibits the rbocs from competing in longdistance telephone services.in 1994, congress came very close to enacting comprehensivelegislation that would have paved the way for erasing each of thesebarriers to competition. the clinton administration worked closelywith congress to achieve passage of this legislation and intends tocontinue that partnership in 1995. in the meantime, the administration urges the states to remove barriers preventing new entrants in thelocal telephone business. new york, wisconsin, illinois, and a number of other states have already taken such steps or will soon do so.competition is vital if america is to maintain its leadership intelecommunications technologies and services. competition also willbest advance the goal of universal service, since competition willencourage providers to lower their own costs, and thus their prices toconsumers.still, even a vibrantly competitive telecommunications marketplace will not deliver its services to all consumers. some will lackthe income to buy. others services may be too costly for privatesuppliers profitably to provide. the most efficient and least distorting way to fill these gaps is to provide subsidies to those who wouldotherwise not be able to purchase competitively priced telecommunications services. the legislation considered by congress last yearwould have directed the appropriate federal and state regulatory bodies to move in this direction.conclusionthe message here has been a simple one. monopolies in telecommunications are dead or dying. this is good news, for onlythrough vigorous competition will the telecommunications revolution we are now witnessing bring its full benefits to american consumers. the justice departmentõs antitrust division is working hardto make this happen. we hope that congress will assist us in this taskby enacting soon the comprehensive telecommunications legislationthat is so sorely needed.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.antitrust enforcement75referenceshamilton, d.p. wall street journal. august 15, 1994. getting wired: big fiberopticproject is private sectorõs job, japan reformers say. a1.hudson, r.l. wall street journal. september 30, 1994. world business (a specialreport): an industrial revolution. r20.the economist. august 13, 1994. europeõs dash for the future. 13.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.revolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77steven d. dorfman is a senior vice president and member ofthe office of the chairman of gm hughes electronics corp. and itssubsidiary, hughes aircraft company, and president of the hughestelecommunications and space company. he joined hughes in1957 and, in subsequent years, held positions of increasing responsibility in management, systems engineering, and electrooptics. mr.dorfman was named to his present position in october 1993 afterserving more than 2 years as president of hughes space and communications company. prior to mr. dorfmanõs space and communications company assignment, he was president and chief executiveofficer of hughes communications inc. (hci), the hughes subsidiary that owns and operates communications satellites. mr. dorfmanwas elected to the national academy of engineering in 1992. hereceived his bachelorõs degree in electrical engineering from the university of florida and his masterõs degree in the same field from theuniversity of southern california.robert e. kahn has been president of the corporation for national research initiatives (cnri) in reston, virginia since 1986.cnri was created as a notforprofit organization to provide leadership and funding for research and development of the national information infrastructure. from 1972 to 1985, he was a program mancontributorsrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78contributorsager, deputy director, and ultimately director of the information processing techniques office at the defense advanced researchprojects agency. he is a member of the national academy of engineering, a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronic engineers, and twice recipient of the secretary of defense meritoriouscivilian service award. dr. kahn received his b.e.e. from citycollege of new york and his m.a. and ph.d. degrees in electricalengineering from princeton university.robert e. litan is an associate director of the office of management and budget. at the time this paper was written, dr. litanwas deputy assistant attorney general in the antitrust division of theu.s. justice department, where he supervised the divisionõs civilnonmerger enforcement program and the development of the divisionõs policies affecting regulated industries. he came to this position in september 1993, following 9 years as a senior fellow at thebrookings institution, where he also was director of two researchcenters in the institutionõs economics studies program. dr. litanformerly was a partner and then counsel to powell, goldstein, frazer& murphy, an associate at arnold & porter, and the regulatory andenergy specialist for president carterõs council of economic advisers. he has a b.s. in economics from the wharton school of finance,a j.d. from yale law school, and a ph.d. in economics from yaleuniversity.john e. major is the senior vice president and assistant chiefcorporate staff officer for motorola. in those roles, he overseesmotorolaõs product, software, and manufacturing research, as well asmanages motorolaõs global telecommunications network. one of hiskey initiatives is leading motorolaõs effort to be a global leader insoftware technology. previously, he managed the worldwide systems group that developed and manufactured private voice and dataradio systems for publicsafety and business users. mr. major serveson the boards of directors of the telecommunications industry association and the electronics industry association. he is a member ofthe national academy of sciences, where he serves on the computerscience and telecommunications board. his degrees include a b.s.in mechanical and aerospace engineering from the university ofrochester, an m.s. in mechanical engineering from the university ofrevolution in the u.s. information infrastructurecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contributors79illinois, an m.b.a. from northwestern university, and a j.d. fromloyola university.john s. mayo is president emeritus of at&t bell laboratories.he served as president from july 1991 until march 1995. throughout his career at bell laboratories, dr. mayo has played an importantrole in the development of digital technologies that have brought theworld to the threshold of the information age. dr. mayo is a fellow ofthe institute of electrical and electronic engineers (ieee). amonghis awards is the 1990 national medal of technology, given for hiscontributions to the technological foundations for information agecommunications. dr. mayo was elected to the national academy ofengineering in 1979. he received his b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degreesin electrical engineering from north carolina state university in1952, 1953, and 1955, respectively.robert w. stearns is vice president of corporate developmentfor the compaq computer corp. he directs the companyõs strategicplanning and business development activities, including acquisitions,joint ventures and alliances, advanced market research, and technology assessment. he is also responsible for coordinating legislativepolicy issues and compaqõs involvement in various technical standardssetting organizations and trade associations. mr. stearns joinedcompaq in july 1993 from mckinsey & co., where he served as aconsultant to hightechnology clients. he previously held seniormanagement positions at a number of technology companies, including motorola/codex, banyan systems, motorolaõs information systems group, and management technologies inc., a decisionsupportsoftware company that he founded. mr. stearns speaks and writesfrequently on matters related to the computer and telecommunications industries and innovation in technological organizations. hegraduated with a b.s. degree in chemistry from brown university in1971 and an m.s. degree from the massachusetts institute of technology in 1973.