detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5130the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructurethrough 2000304 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309054324 | doi 10.17226/5130nii 2000 steering committee, national research councilthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the unpredictablecertaintyinformation infrastructure through 2000nii 2000 steering committeecomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1996iabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe steering committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences andwith regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation, the advancedprojects research agency, and the national institute of standards and technology under grant number iri9421465. that support does not constitute an endorsement of the views expressed in thereport.library of congress catalog card number 9667383international standard book number 030905432xadditional copies of this report are available from: national academy press 2101 constitutionavenue, nw box 285 washington, dc 20055 8006246242 2023343313 (in the washingtonmetropolitan area)b728an electronic version and information about the publication can be found at the nrc world wideweb site http://www.nas.edu.copyright 1996 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nii 2000 steering committeelewis m. branscomb, harvard university, chair cynthia h. braddon, the mcgraw hill companiesjames a. chiddix, time warner cabledavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologyjoseph a. flaherty, cbs incorporatedpaul e. green, jr., ibm t.j. watson research centerirene greif, lotus development corporationrichard t. liebhaber, mci communications (retired)robert w. lucky, bell communications researchlloyd n. morrisett, john and mary markle foundationdonald w. simborg, knowmed systemsleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorlouise a. arnheim, senior staff officer (through august 1995)john m. godfrey, research associateleslie m. wade, research assistantgloria p. bemah, administrative assistantiiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boardwilliam a. wulf, university of virginia, chair frances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerdavid clark, massachusetts institute of technologyjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbarahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems incorporatedjames gray, microsoft corporationbarbara grosz, harvard universityjuris hartmanis, cornell universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinrichard m. karp, university of california at berkeleybutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationbarbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorolarobert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom incorporatededward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasmir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerpaul semenza, staff officerjerry r. sheehan, staff officerjean e. smith, program associatejohn m. godfrey, research associateleslie m. wade, research assistantgloria p. bemah, administrative assistantgail e. pritchard, project assistantivabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, chair stephen l. adler, institute for advanced studypeter m. banks, ibm corporation (retired)sylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyl. louis hegedus, w.r. grace and companyjohn e. hopcroft, cornell universityrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, u.s. nuclear regulatory commissionkenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatoryken kennedy, rice universitythomas a. prince, california institute of technologyjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesl.e. scriven, university of coloradoleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratoryshmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorvabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating societyof distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicatedto the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.upon the authority of the charter granted to it by congress in 1863, the academyhas a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific andtechnical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of the national academy ofsciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. haroldliebowitz is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering inproviding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. harold liebowitz are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein october 1994, the computer science and telecommunications boardconvened, at the request of the technology policy working group (tpwg) ofthe information infrastructure task force, a steering committee to assessmediumterm deployment of facilities and services to advance the nation'sinformation infrastructure. the project was designated nii 2000 by the steeringcommittee, and its tasks were the following:ł to reach out to a broad range of industries with a stake in the future ofu.s. information infrastructurešthose industries expected to be majormarket drivers as well as those expected to be major service providersšto explore their expectations and motivations for technologydeployment in the next 5 to 7 years; to infer from this exploration the extent to which there is a sharedvision of the importance of common features of system architecture,such as interoperability or open system interfaces, and the alternativelikelihood that major parts of the system will develop alongproprietary, incompatible lines; and to conclude with suggestions to the u.s. government on public policychoices that might serve both the rapid, orderly, and successfuldevelopment of information infrastructure and its satisfaction ofimportant public interests.to achieve these goals, the steering committee was asked by the tpwg toundertake a specific series of activities: convene a workshop ofprefaceviiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professionals and scholars to discuss and identify key issues related totechnology deployment, call for white papers to gain further information onthese issues, organize a forum to discuss the white papers and other key ideas,and write a synthesis report of its findings. as a preliminary step, the steeringcommittee solicited inputs and suggestions via liaisons (listed in appendix e)from trade, professional, and advocacy organizations, as well as governmentagencies, beginning in late 1994.the workshop, which was held in washington, d.c., on january 1718,1995, brought together invited members from business, industry, and interestgroups as well as federal government representatives. panels during the 2dayproceedings focused on technology deployment, enduser hardware and softwareissues, domainspecific applications, the internet as a national informationinfrastructure (nii) model, and what different industries meant when they usedcertain terms and concepts. for example, "architecture," "programming,"''service," and "network" are among the many fundamental terms (see box 1.2in chapter 1 for a longer list) that are defined differently by different industries.see appendix a for the workshop agenda and a list of participants.following the workshop, the steering committee released a call for whitepapers (appendix c) on issues related to architecture and facilities, enablingtechnologies, recovery of costs, middleware technologies and capabilities,applications, equitable access and public service obligations, and research anddevelopment. the call was distributed through various media (the internet,press advisories, direct mail, and so on) to producers of communications,computer, and software systems goods and services; internet access and othernetworkbased service providers; scholars specializing in relevant technical,economic, and public policy research and analysis; and project liaisons andother representatives of industries and sectors believed likely to become majorusers of advanced information infrastructure (such as the arts, banking andfinance, education, health care, government agencies, libraries, manufacturing,and transportation). the white papers (see appendix d for a list of papersreceived and their authors) were distributed to participants at the spring forumand to interested federal agencies. their content, representing a broad spectrumof views from knowledgeable participants in the evolution of informationinfrastructure, was a major component in the development of the steeringcommittee's report, which quotes from and refers specifically to several ofthem. the white papers will be made available in a forthcoming companionvolume.shortly after the call for papers was issued, the steering committeereceived a letter (appendix f) from vice president albert gore underscoringthe highlevel interest in the project's potential to generate "anprefaceviiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.objective assessment of the capabilities of different residential broadbandarchitectures (e.g., hybrid fiber coaxial cable, fiber to the curb, and wirelessalternatives) being deployed by the private sector." explained the vicepresident, "we would like to see an nii that allows individuals to be producersas well as consumers of information, that enables 'many to many'communication, and that provides a 'general purpose' infrastructure capable ofsupporting a wide range of services."the vice president's letter contributed to the steering committee'spreparations for the spring 1995 forum, which was structured to assess thedifficulties inherent in developing a nationwide information infrastructure builtlargely with private resources, but having the capacity to further social andeconomic goals as well. (see appendix b for the forum agenda and a list ofparticipants). like the evolving nii itself, the forum embraced a range ofmodels that provided different perspectives on the possible roles ofinfrastructure: onetomany distribution of large quantities of preselected video,combinations of television and telephony to support interactive programming,onetoone voice telephony augmented by a variety of conveniences, manytomany explorations over computer networks, most notably the internet, andmanytoone interactions between consumers and information sources over theworld wide web, in particular.this synthesis report represents the collective view of 12 experts whomonitored and participated in a unique public policy undertaking. the nii 2000project was an experiment of sorts, an attempt to hold other issues constant byfocusing attention on technological and business models. although each of thefollowing elements is part of the overall nii "story," this report is not adescription of an optimistic vision of future possibilities and benefits for variousbusiness and nonprofit entities, for the purpose of motivating interest in the nii;an analysis of legal and regulatory barriers to competition; or an attempt toresolve broad policy concerns such as universal access or the democratizationof cyberspace. nevertheless, comments from many contributors to the projectconvey the message that a complete assessment of nii deployment, and the roleof government as well as industry in its evolution, must take these issues intoconsideration to at least some degree.finally, it is also important to state that the nii 2000 steering committee'ssynthesis report is a technology deployment "road map" only in the mostmetaphorical sense. participants described many roads, or in some casesterritory through which roads might be constructed, but most of these roadshave unknown, indeed unknowable, destinations. as the tpwg's howardfrank observed at the january 1995 workshop:prefaceixabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the government is not doing a road map that says how do we get from here tothere.– if you look at the united states, and look at the interstate highwayroad map, or look at the road map of all of the roads in the united states, youcan see that no path is dictated; there are a variety of ways of moving, asopposed to a specific formula. what we are trying to do is identify thosecapabilities and metrics of an nii, and the barriers associated with thosevarious roads, [so that] we could speed the creation of the nii and eliminatesome of the barriers.the nii 2000 steering committee shares this view. like howard frank,we do not know where "there" is, and we observe many forks in the roads wecan see. we do believe, however, that the future offers many very attractiveoptions for u.s. society and its many business communities, if government andprivate interests collaborate in understanding how to enable that future toemerge in a way that best satisfies each other's needs, concerns, and expectations.this report is an effort to explore the limits of consensus on a broad arrayof fastchanging issues. as a result, it benefits from the work of manyindividuals, among them the participants in the january 1995 workshop and themay 1995 forum, and the authors of the white papers. we are grateful to themfor the level and range of expertise they brought to the project. the steeringcommittee gratefully acknowledges the assistance of several individuals andorganizations, including rupert stow, who provided numerous suggestions forenhancing the discussion of broadcasting; stewart personick, who providedinsights into technical and business perspectives from telephony; duane adamsand howard frank, whose vision motivated and guided the establishment of theproject; y.t. chien, john hestenes, and michael papillo, whose ongoingquestioning and suggestions on behalf of the tpwg provided regularencouragement and feedback; the liaisons, particularly michael roberts ofeducom, suzanne tichenor of the council on competitiveness, and charlesbrownstein of the corporation for national research initiatives' crossindustryworking team; and of course the anonymous reviewers, whose criticisms,reflections, and suggestions were essential to the strengthening of this finalreport.the members of the steering committee devoted much of their time forabout a year to formulating the project and guiding its conduct. but moreimportantly, each member brought a level of professional knowledge andcompetence from many areas of technology, allowing the project to beauthoritative in its coverage. i am particularly grateful to one member of thesteering committee, david clark of mit, who gave much more than his shareof devotion to this project, frequently filling in for the chairman. but the mostespecial thanks from all the steering committee members is due to marjoryblumenthal, leader of a fine team from theprefacexabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cstb and now a recognized authority on public policy issues related toinformation technology. among all of us, she should be considered theprincipal author of this work. other members of the cstb team to whom ourappreciation is owed are john godfrey, who amassed and analyzed considerableamounts of technology and industry data; gloria bemah, who tracked the largenumber of participants and documents associated with the project; pamelarodgers, who orchestrated the logistics for the spring forum; leslie wade, whotransformed the draft into a fully documented and appropriately formatted finalreport; and susan maurizi, whose editorial assistance helped make this reportmore readable.lewis branscomb, chairnii 2000 steering committeeprefacexiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents1 introduction and summary 3 defining the national information infrastructure 3 driving deployment: business transitions, business models 7 the significance of the internet 11 as a barometer of potential 12 as a laboratory for development of workable standards 13 as a basis for critical flexibility 13 as a vehicle for new market structures 14 whither the internet? 15 realizing the nii's potentialšthe user perspective 16 deployment of infrastructure technology 18 access 18 flexibility and interoperability 19 additional technology concerns 20 user interaction with networked infrastructure 21 public versus private objectives 22 organization of this report 24 notes 252 making technology work: individual andorganized end users 27 who is the end user? 27 why the nii must reach the home 30 evolving demand for nii capabilities 32 the end user as consumer 37contentsxiiiabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. access devices 40 the personal computer 41 the television 43 advanced television 44 the telephone and other access devices 45 toward a fully integrated home system 45 what increasing use of generalaccess devices implies fornetworking technology deployment 48 high data rates to the end point 51 adequate bandwidth in both directions 52 multiplesession capability 52 continuous availability of service 52 realtime, multimedia communication 53 nomadicity 53 security 53 concluding observations 54 notes 573 where is the business case? 63 factors shaping investment in information infrastructure 63 investment in facilities 66 the problem of how much bandwidth to invest in 66 federal licenses as an influence on deployment of newwireless systems 70 investing to achieve infrastructure generality 71 from facilities to services and applications 77 balancing investmentšsoftware "capital" 78 the separation of services from facilitiesšbroadeningthe potential content 78 the internet and its use for business 81 effects on provision of goods and services 81 the internetšlayering, incrementalism, and diversification 83 incremental increases 89 arrangements for interconnection 94 economic models 96 usagebased fees for communications and informationservices 99 embedded or domainspecific services 100 the broadcast model 101 enduser devices paid for by consumers 103 the access subscription model 104 payment models and the internet phenomenon 105 notes 106contentsxivabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 technology options and capabilities: whatdoes what, how 115 the changing nature of technology and communications 115 how trends in technology are changing communicationsinfrastructure and services 117 separation of infrastructure facilities and service offerings 118 building services on each other 119 the tension between supporting mature and emergingservices 120 resolving the tension: the internet as an example 121 the importance of the internet 122 the coexistence of new and mature services 124 current technologyševaluating the options 127 hybrid fiber coaxial cable 127 fiber to the curb 130 digital services and the telephone infrastructure 131 data over the telephone system 132 asynchronous transfer mode 135 local area networks 136 wireless 137 broadcasting 141 satellite 144 power industry as infrastructure provider 145 the internet 145 change and growth 146 transport infrastructure to information infrastructure 148 open interfaces and open standards 150 standards and innovation in the marketplace 151 management and control of the infrastructure 155 notes 1575 technology choices: what are the providersdeploying? 161 introduction 161 wireline telephony 163 summary and forecasts 163 local access and the larger system 166 integrated services digital network 167 telephone industry fiber deployment 170 demand for telephone services 172 data communications 173 summary and forecasts 173 data services provided by telephone carriers 175 business networking 177contentsxvabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. cable television and telephony: advanced services to thehome 181 summary and forecasts 181 advanced cable and telephone services to the home 182 online services and internet access for consumers 186 summary and forecasts 186 online services and internet access 186 wireless and broadcast infrastructure 188 summary and forecasts 188 wireless telephony 189 wireless data networking 192 terrestrial and satellite broadcast television 194 wireless cable 194 direct broadcast satellite 195 notes 1956 public policy and private action 197 introduction 197 publicprivate engagement 199 nii systems issues 201 defining roles for government 206 regulation, rules, and norms 206 protecting the nii: ethics and mechanisms 209 security, reliability, and architecture 210 government as user and service provider 212 technology development through r&d 214 architecture and networking 215 information management and ease of use 218 standards 222 international issues 224 systems data and analysis for nii assessment 225 government as convenor 226 conclusions 227 notes 230 bibliography 235 appendixes a workshop participants and agenda 251b forum participants and agenda 256c call for white papers (abridged) 265d white papers received 269e nii 2000 liaisons 274f letter from vice president albert gore, march 6, 1995 276g acronyms and abbreviations used 278contentsxviabout this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the unpredictable  certainty  information infrastructurethrough 20001about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wanderer, your footsteps arethe road, and nothing more;wanderer, there is no road,the road is made by walking.selected poems by antonio machado,translated by betty jean craigelouisiana state university press, baton rouge, 19782about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introduction and summarydefining the national informationinfrastructureare there any dominant trends in the evolution of a global or nationalinformation infrastructure (nii) for which there is no specification, no overallplan, and no institutional mechanism for reaching consensus about what it is orwhat it should be? that question motivated the nii 2000 project, which soughtto characterize the technology deployment, market expectations, and proposedactivities of communications and information facilities and service providersover the next 5 to 7 years. perspectives provided directly by these suppliersšdrawn from multiple industriesšwere complemented by inputs from a crosssection of users in industry, private nonprofit organizations, and the publicsector. the diverse inputs on deployment plans and prospects revealed thatthere are as many visions of the information future as there are sectors of theeconomy helping to create them.today, the range of players, starting positions, and strategies underscoresthe fact that the information infrastructure is not static; it is evolving in waysthat reflect its initial components as well as ambitions for its growth. it is nearlyimpossible to overstate the implications of the combination of powerful lowcost microprocessors, highcapacity multistream digital servers, lowcostmemory and digital storage media, and broadband connections to and fromhomes and businesses. each of these capabilities is advancing quite rapidly, andthe combination of them makesintroduction and summary3about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.possible an enormous number of applications, some clearly seen and some asyet unimagined. there will be missteps and failures, along with full and partialsuccesses, but the technology and its uses will advance steadily.history tells us that systems as complex as a nation's informationinfrastructure evolve incrementally, driven by private investment in the pursuitof unrealized opportunities, consensusbased public needs, and countlessentrepreneurs testing the system for natural niches, for unique sources ofcustomer value. given that future plans are marked by diversity of vision andaction, is the nii itself a paradigm that is losing its luster? perhaps, if it isinterpreted to refer to conformance with a grand plan, which appearsincreasingly unrealistic.given a future only partly seen, how shall we characterize the nii? thesteering committee for the nii 2000 project sees no choice but to define the niibroadly and inclusively:the national information infrastructure (nii) is the collection of all public andprivate information servicesšboth facilities and contentbasedšoperating asa complex, dynamic system. it exists today but is and always will be in a stateof flux.since more and more devices, systems, and processes will containcomputing elements and be interconnected in some way, it is important that thenii be defined early on as being inclusive. of course, the global informationinfrastructure of which it is a part extends the notion of inclusivenessgeographically, technologically, and economically.rather than a single coherent technical framework, the nii is a concept tofocus thinking about a very important set of resources whose value to societydepends on their connectivity, accessibility, and functionality for manyimportant purposes.1 this view of the nii admits to different perspectives, asexpressed by various readers of an early draft of this report. box 1.1 gives twoexamples. in particular, perspectives differ significantly across industries.approaches to testing new markets are as different as conducting market trialsfor integrated multiservice packages and making new applications available onthe internet. but the difference between the personal computer (pc) vision andthe settop box vision is not about the detailed technical choices to be made; itconcerns instead a choice about the role of infrastructurešshould infrastructuredeliver a particular service (e.g., telephony or television), or should it enable thecreation of entirely new services via generalpurpose (e.g., internet) services?šand differences in the funding model (identify a specific ''killer app," or assumethat the aggregate of the demand will come from millions of customer uses,none of which is important by itself). symptomatic of the many differencesamong industries are semantic disagreementsintroduction and summary4about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that confound public debate and private sector interactions. box 1.2 lists termsthat are fundamental to information infrastructure but subject to differingdefinitions and usage among industries.box 1.1 the nii: what is in a name? a range ofreactions"nii," in my thinking, is a rallying phrase, not to be confused with or perceivedas a tangible definable entity. it is not a predetermined universal architecture oreven an orchestrated collection of interworking architectures to be furthered bysome form of consensus, even at the highest level. nii – is the sum of countlessu.s. and global initiatives, driven by continuous intellectual discovery, and byconceptualization, development, and implementation of a wide variety ofapplications and services. "nii" is founded in scientific curiosity, social need,historic experience, national character and goals, standardofliving expectations,the needs of individual users and of corporations and organizations, securityrequirements, profit motives, current and future national economy considerations,global policies, and so on. the list is very lengthy. –šthomas plevyak, bell atlantic[beware falling] victim to the tendency in washington to add coats to everyavailable coat hook. the nii cannot possibly be the sum of all of our expectationsfor a better society based on improved communications and electronic information.even if someone were capable of articulating a vision of that scope, none of therest of us would grant him or her the power to execute it. what we can have, whatis doable, what we can build reasonable consensus around, is a "system ofelectronic communications and information resources based on computingtechnology.'' despite efforts by many to promote ideological visions of what thesystem can do for society, the system is fundamentally amoral. much of itsdevelopment has been, and will continue to be, based on technological darwinism.– i have two suggestions. don't refer to the nii as an "it." at best, the nii is acomplex system of systems spanning a variety of new and older technologies andconsequently never embodying the holy grail of developersša "single systemimage." secondly, be cautious in using terms that have been captured by socialand political visionaries and already have emotional baggage attached.šmichael roberts, educomdoes a broadly encompassing definition of the nii preclude anyexpectation of effective interoperation of the parts of the nii? to what extentwill a more or less integrated nationwide system of computer network servicesbe able to attract users and capital investment? had these questions been posed,say, 5 years ago, the answers would have been more divergent. today, theanswers reflect the extraordinary impact of the internet, which has becomeincreasingly attractive for commercial activities over the past 2 years.2 theinternet is a critical component of many of the business plans of industrialcontributors to this project. adintroduction and summary5about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ditionally, the steering committee notes an increasing recognition in all sectorsof industry that interconnection and interoperation are a powerful stimulus tocontent creation, ubiquitous communication, and the opening of new markets.thus, despite multiple visions and definitions, the steering committeeconcluded that there is a good chance of attaining a "seamless web" withinteroperable facilities and services that compose a subset of the larger nii,3 asbroadly defined above. the internet protocols will help to achieve this outcome.other components will probably remain disconnected, proprietary, verticallyintegrated business "towers."box 1.2 vocabulary test: key terms on whichmany differabstractinteractive/interactivityaccessinterfaceaccess circuit/subscriberinteroperabilityloop/droplocal/residential/personalarchitecturemarket forcesatmmodalitiesbackchannel/upstream/multicastreturn path/upchannelmultimediabroadbandnetworkbundling/unbundlingopencompetition/competitiveprogrammingconsumerscalablecostseamlessdomainserviceflexiblesoftwarefullservice networktechnologygatewayuniversal (access, service)generaluserthis chapter provides an overview of the key issues and findings coveredin the nii 2000 project. like the rest of the report, it draws on inputs gatheredvia a workshop, forum, white papers, and a variety of consultations andsecondary source materials. it relates technological capabilities to evolvingplans for business strategy, competition, and structure, characterizing privatesector views and stated plans to illuminate opportunities for the public sector. itexplains why the internet and also federally supported research anddevelopment came to play a greater role in the project and in the steeringcommittee's assessment than originally anticipated.introduction and summary6about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.driving deployment: business transitions,business modelsthe opportunities presented by the evolving information infrastructure areas speculative as they are rich: enormous technical, business, and public policyuncertainties about the future face investors, the public, and policy makers. thecommunications and information marketplaces are changing as technologiesconverge and the production processes of different industries overlapincreasingly.today, the most widely used information systemsštelephones, television(cable and broadcast), and, to a lesser extent, hardcopy publication (e.g., print,videocassettes, compact disks)šare mature services resting on many billions ofdollars of installed equipment. their viability depends on the continuingprovision of services to established consumers and business users at profitmaking prices; they attract investment because growth in profit is anticipated.as a result, the business plans of many established communications andinformation service suppliers appear to center on extending existing highrevenue business offerings such as telephony and video delivery, upgrading theunderlying facilities, and hoping to be properly positioned if and when newapplications mature. (de)regulation permitting, cable tv will be able to deliverinteractive services and voice telephony. telephone companies will offer videodelivery. cellular services will become digital, as they already are in manyother countries around the world, and will evolve to personal communicationservices. digital broadcast satellites will eventually acquire practical uplinksand offer interactivity.it is not surprising, considering the magnitude of the capital investmentsanticipated for new infrastructure, that telephone and cable tv companies areeach viewing the other's business as attractive, since these are mature businessesgenerating billions of dollars in revenues, representing major sources of capitalfor expanding the nii (although there is no evidence that the revenue pool willgrow in proportion to the number of providers). nor is it surprising that bothsectors are planning on initial growth in applications that constitute modest andincremental extensions of current lines of business (tv on demand, games,home shopping, passive access to information).new information infrastructure markets are characterized by a largenumber of small players, who divide the total (initially limited) revenues. willthe information infrastructure market follow the pattern seen in pc software, inwhich a large pool of providers shrinks to a few dominant players after only 3to 4 years? the prospects for competitive losses, combined with economies ofscale and scope, immature applications, and a skeptical public, suggest that, asis often the case with maturing marintroduction and summary7about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kets, a shakeout among information infrastructure providers will eventuallyresult.many sectors of the information industry (notably print publishing andbroadcast television) will find the new environment highly disruptiveševenthreateningšas well as filled with potential for new activities. others whosebusinesses bring together consumers with goods and services produced byothers may also be challenged. when customers themselves have direct access(of the type envisioned via the nii), the previous intermediary either iseliminated or becomes a facilitator rather than a dispenser of knowledge.in agreement with most of the industry experts contributing to this project,the steering committee believes that the future information infrastructure willprovide more than just basic telephony and entertainment: a wide range ofapplications will combine to form the economic base of the nii (see box 1.3).this broader vision implies that existing facilities will be used in fundamentallytransformed ways. in particular, termination of the network in affordable butpowerful computing devices will create an inherently more generalpurposecommunication environment. at the same time, new physical facilities willhave to be built to provide expanded interactive bandwidth to more users.virtually all industries and public institutions will use the nii to do theirwork better, often in quite industryspecific ways that will implicitly increasedemand for information infrastructure. examples from contemporaryexperience include pharmaceutical companies incorporating communicationsfacilities and services into delivery of drug information to physicians andhospitals, and banks incorporating communications into online retail banking,bill paying, and investing. the business models associated with such embeddedservice delivery ultimately may bring far greater resources to the nii than willthe direct user fees that support the current infrastructure. but that suppositionis difficult to quantify, given the difficulties various industry sectors experiencein characterizing their future infrastructure service requirements.facilities providers contemplating major investments to create the nextgeneration of networks want to ensure that there will be reasonable ways torecover their costs. some are creating and testing new applications that theyhope will be broad enough to adapt to new markets. still others are holdingback until the crystal ball becomes considerably less cloudy. market trials haveattempted to probe the attractiveness (as well as the performance and costeffectiveness of delivery technologies) of new forms of networkbasedentertainment and shopping as well as educational and other "public interest"services. but results reported are not encouragingšthe trials are bounded by thelack of genuine novelty in the former and a lack of substance in the latter.4introduction and summary8about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1.3 tenets of the information societyif nii technology deployment will be driven by multiple applications, whatmight we expect to see? the steering committee collected many inputs thatecho or amplify frequently cited tenets of the "information society":customers for goods, services, and information in every sphere ofeveryday life will want to be able to influence the form and makeup ofsome of the information they consume, while continuing to be passiverecipients of other, prepackaged information products. they will alsouse more avenues to send out more kinds of information to others.for example, it will become routine to generate and transmit video forpersonal (business and pleasure) as well as job or educationrelatedpurposes.personalization of information and communication services will be akey consequence of the availability of computer intelligence to almostevery individual through a variety of devices. an important impetus willbe significant changes in available wireless systems, from twowaypaging to wireless links for text or video communications.the distinctions among the workplace, home, and schools willcontinue to erode as part of a broader blurring of the associationbetween activities and locations and the broader penetration ofcomputing and communications in all manner of jobs and activities.public data networks will provide a key mechanism to (1) integratewidely separated work locations into collaborative institutions, (2)allow the office or business transaction to extend to the home and tomany other offsite locations (nomadic computing), and (3) allow thehome to become the base for a wide variety of entrepreneurial work(and public service) activities. when coupled with rapidly expandingwireless capabilities, the end result will be a truly anywhere, anytimeworkplace.professional activities and services will increasingly be supportedšand perhaps transformedšby information networks, mergingeducation and professional service delivery, improving efficiency andenhancing the quality of work undertaken by a wide range ofparaprofessionals, and increasing the consumer's ability to obtaindesired information directly. similar phenomena will transform citizenparticipation in the political process in ways that are hard to foresee.facilities providers are stymied by the prospect of financing aninfrastructure that will be characterized increasingly by low marginal costs foruse but large fixed costs for facilities deployment, a problem that regulatoryreform will not solve.5 ,6 the difficulties with justifying investment are mostserious for providers of access circuits to individual residences and smallbusinesses. given that almost all the wireline options for access technology costthe same to within 20 or 30 percent, it is possible to form a rough guess as tothe monthly fee needed to recover these costs. allintroduction and summary9about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current forms of wireline residential access technology, if installed new, costabout $1,000 per home passed, which seems to imply a monthly fee near $30.the only alternative that might give a lower price under some circumstances iswireless, which has the advantage that it involves less major investment upfront and thus could support emerging markets with lower initial penetration.it was further noted in the project's workshop, forum, and white papers thatan important role for research and development in this context is to explorenetwork and information access technologies that would alter costs andcapabilities over the long term. reducing perhome access costs by a factor oftwo, a cost reduction that (for constant function) occurs in the computerindustry at intervals of less than 2 years, would change completely the prospectsfor rapid deployment of advanced broadband services to the home. however,the cost structure of the access circuit appears to be driven by factors other thanthose that help to reduce computer costs, and has indeed remained stubbornlyconstant for some time.the consequence of uncertainty about future network and informationrequirements and the potential for profitability is hesitation in planning forfuture infrastructure investments. in this respect, there has been a markedchange over the last 5 years, at least in public posture. what was, a few yearsago, the vision of a rewired america, to be accomplished as a single plannedreengineering over a fairly small number of years, has become a much moreincremental plan for experimentation and upgrades. this more incrementalapproach to investment, which is discussed in chapter 3, is probably morerealistic than the earlier visions (and indeed those earlier plans may never havebeen as concrete as some of the media discussions suggested).7 it has theadvantage that instead of a single massive upgrade to some chosen newtechnology, which then becomes obsolete over time, it involves smaller stagedinvestments that bring in a series of new technologies. this incremental processcould establish a pattern of continuous technology upgrade as justified byproven market demand. however, it will almost certainly lead to a slower andmore measured pace of investment and deployment. one of the steeringcommittee's conclusions is that timing, as much as direction, is the majoruncertainty in the current planning for the nii.the divergence of opinion concerning the relative need for onewaycommunication, primarily for entertainment, and twoway communication, forvarious sorts of interactive uses, was a major theme of the workshop and theforum. a basic uncertainty is the rate at which upstream capacity (from the userinto the network) will be required to support emerging twoway applicationssuch as provision of information by individuals and interactive "telework"support. the concern is whether sufintroduction and summary10about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ficient twoway bandwidth can be made available at affordable rates andwhether lack of bandwidth will stifle the emergence of important newapplications, especially those involving sharing of images and video.perceptions of the true market demand will influence deployment decisions andwill thus shape the ways in which end users in homes and independent officescan participate in a society that will depend increasingly on interactiveelectronic communications.reflecting the prominence of such concerns, one area whereexperimentation is notable and where multiple approaches may coexist for theforeseeable future is cost recovery. at least five different but overlappingeconomic models, representing different ways to allocate cost, are evident in theinformation infrastructure at large and in the internet in particular: (1) usagebased fees (e.g., metered telephone service; consumer pays by the minute); (2)access subscription (e.g., cable or flatrate telephone subscription; consumerpays by the month); (3) broadcast (e.g., tv and radio; advertiser pays by theminute, consumer does not pay for service per se); (4) enduser devicecentered(e.g., pcowning consumer pays for unlimited use of a device, including usethat is independent of networkbased services); and (5) embedded (cost ishidden in some other, possibly domainspecific, service; consumer leases settop box in conjunction with purchased tv). the fates of these models may helpto determine which businesses and industries endure or advance in theinformation infrastructure marketplace and, given their different capacities forgenerating returns on investment, how quickly underlying facilities are enhanced.the significance of the internetmuch of the current excitement about information infrastructure and theconvergence of many communications and information technologies to a digitalbasis has been catalyzed by the internet. thus, understanding the internet maybe key to understanding many of the opportunities in the nii.is the internet a model for a commercially dominated interoperableinfrastructure, or is it a remarkable but transitory development from the worldof research and education? the steering committee concluded that the internetis indeed a prototype for much of the emerging information infrastructure,despite its roots in experimentation and its current (but not necessarilyenduring) limitations. its future is evolution, not replacement.what is the internet? it is a network of many kinds of networks. but tounderstand its importance it is better to think of it as a capability forinternetworking, allowing any user to find, touch, and if desired connectintroduction and summary11about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to a large variety of networks and the sources of information, users, andcomputational resources that each makes available.as a barometer of potentialthe number of internet access service firms has been growing veryrapidly, as has internet access activity (e.g., acquisition of internet addresses),although no one knows for sure how much of this growth is driven by faddismas opposed to enduring demand for access and associated goods and services.the most frequently cited illustration of the economic (and deployment) impactof the internet is its role as the underpinning for the world wide web (web),which has made the internet easier to use and more broadly meaningful. theweb appears to provide what pc owners have always wanted: the capability topoint, click, and get what they want no matter where it is. whereas earliermanifestations of the information revolution bypassed many people who wereuncomfortable with computing technology, it appears that the web is nowattracting a large cross section of people, making the universality of informationinfrastructure a more realistic prospect. if the web is a first wave (or a second,if the internet alone is a first), it is likely that further advances in utility andapplication will follow. once people are comfortable finding information on theinternet, they will discover that they want much more: they will want help inlocating reliable, useful information; they will want to discuss it with others,build communities around it, generate it, and so on. these activities will createdemand for more applications and for different kinds of interactivity, formats,media, and so on. box 1.3 suggests how technology and changing approaches towork, education, and recreation in the "information society" can continue to coevolve.a powerful appeal of the internet as a prototype for the new informationenvironment is that innovators can take relatively small risks while stillaccessing a huge potential market. the economics of telecommunicationsfacilities deployment contrasts markedly with that of the internet, whose currentstate reflects a unique set of economic conditions: tremendous market accesshas been achievable with a very small initial investment, an advantage that hasled to a wide range of experimentation and innovation. combining low barriersto entry with unusually high potential for growth in usage volume, the internethas been an extraordinary platform for innovation, one that is perhaps unique inhuman history.however, a central conundrum at the present is that the internet, with itsvery low cost of entry, must operate on top of expensive physicalcommunications infrastructure. as discussed above, very large investments arerequired up front to achieve any substantial upgrade in u.s.introduction and summary12about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications facilities, and without this investment the internet itself, andthe other possibilities for exploitation of the infrastructure, cannot flourish.as a laboratory for development of workable standardsthe internet also demonstrates the remarkable potential (although perhapsthe outer limits) for evolutionary standards development and implementation inconcert with rapid technological change. in particular, many of the importantinternet standards were not adopted until they worked in a reallife environmentand passed the test of performance and scaling. those standards processes andthe associated architectural principles embodied in the internet derive from thelongterm involvement of a relatively small community of computer scientists,funded largely by the federal government, who saw the internet as acollaborative enterprise in which they served as designers, developers, andusers. they understood that the large number of alternative paths fortechnological evolution meant that standards must be open to technologicalchange, anticipate future innovations, and either accommodate them orminimize the cost of accommodating them later.8the current internet standards development process is subject to a numberof stresses that are a source of concern. although there is no clear case forintervention, the process should be monitored. because computer scientists areno longer representative users of the internet, the technologists most active ininternet standards setting may be somewhat removed from the needs andpreferences of diverse users. conversely, the users who need standards are nolonger mostly computer or other kinds of scientists, and their increasinginvolvement in the internet engineering task force standards process has led toa much balkier and more balkanized process. at the same time, increasingcommercial interest in the internet is creating pressures for alternatives tostandards that are proprietary or that are defined by dominant industry players.as a basis for critical flexibilityalthough to many people the internet is synonymous with its applications,such as public or open electronic messaging or the world wide web, the powerand utility of the internet actually derive from its internal organization, the waythe protocols and functions are designed and organized. the basis of itsflexibility is that it defines a simple service interface that any application canuse to request network service from whatever network technology is in use.since this interface is independent of underlying technology details, and alsoindependent of specific applicaintroduction and summary13about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tions, it allows new applications to be devised and deployed, thus stimulatinginnovation in network technology. the 1994 computer science andtelecommunications board report realizing the information future  (rtif;cstb, 1994b) advocated an open interface with these characteristics to supportinnovation of new network applications. the report called this interface thetechnologyindependent bearer service and called the network that would resultfrom providing this interface the open data network, or odn. the internetfeatures an odn architecture, with a form of the bearer service in its internetprotocol.in the course of the nii 2000 project, the steering committee heardrepeatedly that the internet standards are the basis on which new applicationsare being crafted. the current volume of deployed devices using the internetstandards, together with the observed level of investment in internetrelatedproducts and services, constitutes a unique foundation, one for which there is noalternative now or in the next decade. the steering committee has concluded,based on its assessment of industry trends, that the call for an open, technologyindependent bearer service as a basis for emerging applications, as voiced inrtif, was correct. now, moreover, a more concrete conclusion is justified: theinternet standards are in fact being widely used for this purpose and areregarded by a great majority of commercial players as the only viable option foran open, applicationindependent set of service interfaces at this time. thus theinternet and the protocols on which it is based are critical components of theevolving nii.as a vehicle for new market structuresthe internet is but one example of the transformation now occuring in themarketplace, a transition arising from the ability of new service providers aswell as existing infrastructure providers to make new services available bylayering them on top of existing communications infrastructure. innovation inservices layered over physical (and virtual) facilities and offered by the same ordifferent providers will flourish, reflecting the increasing dependence onsoftware as a servicecreating technology, as well as increasing ability to reapvalue from information.9it is unclear at this stage how the various playersšservice and facilityprovidersšwill align, integrate, or interoperate.10 marginal costs and prices forcommunications services can be expected to fall as the use of digital technologyand (assuming deregulation) competition increase. communications firms mayattempt to integrate vertically to take advantage of the higher profit marginspossible in providing proprietary content, or they may choose to purvey thecontent of others but seek to control their market through proprietary access totheir customers. suchintroduction and summary14about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.business structures may not be conducive to open, interoperable arrangementsand meaningful competition.while business pressures may motivate attempts at vertical integration,there are countervailing forces for open competitive service interfaces. for thefirst time in the history of the computer industry, virtually all computers speakaccording to the same set of protocols, and content providers can write theirapplications to get their information to their users using a set of standards thatare independent of the underlying media. the content provider (e.g., thepublisher and editor or broker or repackager) seeking to reach the maximumnumber of subscribers will pressure the telecommunications providers tointeroperate with their competitors if need be. the telecommunicationsproviders, if they want to play, have to support these protocolsšand they aredoing so. hence, interoperability may be a natural competitive outcome ofstratification of content and conduit providers.these pressures will play out as the various components of the nii evolveover the next decade. the internet is an example of open interfaces providing astructure for a set of business sectorsšfacilities, internet service, andapplications. the availability of standard interfaces permitting interoperabilitywill define the structure of the industries providing information infrastructure asmuch as any technologybased process can, but it is also the case that thestructure of the businesses will define the interfaces, and therefore the degree ofopenness for the infrastructure over time.whither the internet?if the internet is to continue to meet user requirements over the nextdecade, it must evolve in a number of ways. some of these involve aspects ofthe current structure that are inadequate and need to be fixed (for instance,current internet protocol addresses are too short); some involve the need to addnew features for which possible approaches are well understood (for instance,endtoend security); and some require major advances (for instance, acapability for intellectual property rights protection). the need for these varioussorts of advances suggests the importance both of continued r&d and of avigorous standardsdevelopment process.the widespread call for better security on the internet covers needsranging from protection against system penetration to trustworthy transfer ofinformation and protection of intellectual property. although security is aconcern for all information infrastructure, the open nature of the internet ingeneral as well as specific features of its evolving technology underscore thechallenges to security in the internet context. it is not yetintroduction and summary15about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clear how the necessary protections will be provided, especially given theimportance of transnational communications, but advances are being made.despite such concerns, lack of better security has not actually halted theexpansion of the internet; while efforts are being made to increase security,individuals and organizations are tailoring their use to the level and kind ofprotections available.the transition of the internet to a competitively provided commercialservice has raised many questions about models, options, and expectations.some, including longtime internet players monitoring changes in networkperformance, have expressed fears about the prospect of unstable service, due toissues such as incoherent routing and other technical or business concerns. ascommercial providers begin to keep operating statistics secret, it has becomemuch more difficult to gather overall information on usage, such as the growthrates and usage patterns of different applications, which would facilitate longterm planning by all parties.in terms of the broader operating environment, it appears to some that thecommunity of shared interests represented a very valuable, but rare, historicalopportunity, and we must now figure out how to develop shared, interoperableinfrastructures without that type of userdeveloper community. private andpublic actions should recognize how the internet development process hasfactored into u.s. competitiveness in key markets. for example, leadership increating and implementing key nii standards relates to leadership in thehardware and software that the united states exports.11 this value is implicit infederal support of internet standards setting.realizing the nii's potentialšthe userperspectiveenthusiasm about the nii is tempered by concerns about the difficulty ofrealizing its promised benefits in large application domains such as health careor education, let alone in the more diffuse context of individual citizens seekingaccess from their homes. after hearing several presentations by infrastructurefacilities providers, emergency response expert lois clark mccoy observed: ''ididn't hear the word 'user,' and i didn't hear, 'what does the user want?' i heard,'this is what we're going to give you,' as well as a great deal of discussion aboutthe tools, such as fiber optics and cellular, and about how the service was goingto be provided." these observations point out a tendency for public debates tofocus generally on the supply side, as well as the considerable and differingchallenges in adopting new infrastructure within individual applicationdomains. industry sectors that may become big users of the niišas representedby manufacturing, health care, education, and emergencyintroduction and summary16about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.response, for examplešsee barriers to progress that leave them with a sense offrustration.new applications may well come from specific user communities ordomains, but their development is snared in a "catch 22." largescaleimplementation and associated acceptance in the market await not onlystrategies for overcoming the constraints of traditional processes linked tolegacy systems, but also the development of standards for data (for elementsranging from terminology to presentation), codes of practice, sectorspecificinstitutional and market structures, and the removal of legal and/or institutionalbarriers within individual domains. thus information services can improvehealth care delivery and lower its trillion dollar cost, but only if they becomeintegral to the processes associated with delivering health care. a similarsituation exists for educational computing and communications, which alreadyshow the considerable influence of the emerging information infrastructure.providers of nii facilities do not appear to see as their concern the removalof domainspecific barriers to adoption of networkbased applications; suchmatters go far beyond supplying networking facilities and services. yet inputsfrom professionals from several specific communities eyeing the nii evolutionsuggested that the lack of apparent interest from infrastructure providers hascompounded already slow progress in resolving cultural, content presentation,legal, and other barriers to use.for example, sectorspecific and broadbased standards and approachesmust go hand in hand. there are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of nicheinformation markets specialized by subject matter, corresponding to everyindustry sector and to every professional and skill category. they havespecialized needs for data standards and sectorspecific approaches, but withrare exceptions, each requires access to general information and informationfrom neighboring niches or the larger sector or domain in which it fits, as wellas specialized material. consequently, even niche markets need communicationaccess to other parts of the economy, and niche market providers will probablyuse generalpurpose network capabilities and standards for achieving thataccess. thus, infrastructure providers may have a greater interest in domainspecific circumstances than may appear obvious.although the steering committee heard considerable frustration andconcern from key business domains about the current difficulties of utilizing thenii, this perspective should be viewed in the context of the current largebusiness market for telecommunications. for example, business customersaccount for about 60 percent of carrier revenues (see u.s. bureau of the census,1995). large companies in particular are already purchasing bit transportservices at wholesale, and they frequently investintroduction and summary17about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in their own facilities. large businesses thus clearly have access to the currentinformation infrastructure and are starting to take advantage of it.in contrast, one of the key concerns voiced at the forum and workshop waswhether (or when) the reach of highbandwidth networks and advanced serviceswould extend to the home and small business, which are important locations formany of the business domains that voiced frustration with access and utility,such as health care and education. as regards this reality, the spokespersons forthe various business domains, the infrastructure providers, and the visionarieson behalf of a new consumer were all equally frustrated.deployment of infrastructure technologyin 10 to 15 years cheaper and more powerful microprocessorbaseddevices, broadband connections to and from homes and businesses, and otherenhancements to the fundamental technology infrastructure of the economy willbe widely available for a great variety of uses. if anything has been oversold, itis timing. while emerging infrastructure is relatively simple to graspconceptually, in implementation it is quite complex and softwareintensive.notwithstanding appropriate public policy concerns about implications of thenii for society, attempts to constrain the fundamental technologies or to pushthe market for them in arbitrarily conceived directions will not succeed.several key technology issues are driven by the gap between requirementsarising as a result of what users increasingly seem to do and want and thecapabilities present or imminent from providers.accessa majority of the concerns and uncertainties uncovered in the nii 2000project centered on the issue of future connections to homes and smallbusinessesšthe access circuits that will permit the end user to connect to theinformation infrastructure and take advantage of its promise. the discussions ofaccess circuits revealed the great potential for technological advances, but alsogreat uncertainty about the extent to which business realities would constrainrapid exploitation of that potential. other technology areas discussed, such asbackbone capacity and access for large businesses, were much less the focus ofconcern.access to the information infrastructure today is provided by proven andrelatively mature technologiesšthe copper wire pairs of the telephonecompanies, the coaxial cable of the cable industry, and terrestrial broadcasttelevision and radio. newer technologies include cellular telephony and directsatellite broadcast of television. the future will bring anintroduction and summary18about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding range of technology options, including much higher bandwidths overboth copper pairs and coaxial cable alike, and several new forms of wirelesscommunication. increased transmission capacity to the home will be providedby the growing use of fiberoptic cables. even if these fibers initially reach onlypart of the way to the home, they can provide much increased capacity to thesystem as a whole. partial enhancement of current systems with fiber is thebasis for upgrading both the copper pairs and coaxial systems.different industry sectors appear to be responding to these circumstancesin different ways. the cable television industry, with its current base of coaxialcable, seems primarily to be planning a technology upgrade of thatinfrastructure to a configuration called hybrid fiber coaxial cable (hybrid fibercoax; hfc), which uses fiber optics to deliver signals part of the way to theresidence and uses the existing coaxial cable for the final part of the path. incontrast, the telephone industry is exploring a number of different technologypaths. some reuse the copper pairs to provide higher bandwidth (the variousdigital subscriber line approaches), others involve new systems similar toadvanced cable television infrastructure, and still others use wireless foradvanced services. these various technologies are explained and evaluated inchapter 4.flexibility and interoperabilitythe steering committee focused on the extent and nature of actualtechnology limits, given that major investment in infrastructure cannot easily berepeated. if the infrastructure has the flexibility to adapt if and when there isproven market demand, then it is less necessary to be able to predict nowexactly what the future will be. different technologies involve differentfundamental limits to twoway capacity. the further fiberoptic cable reachestoward the home, the more likely it seems that twoway bandwidth can beconfigured as needed. in this respect, the hfc technology received considerablediscussion because it is being deployed widely by essentially all of the cablecompanies and at least some of the telephone companies, and compared to someother options, it is somewhat more limited in its ability to support large upchannel capacity. while project participants did not agree totally on this point,the steering committee concluded that hfc technology has sufficient capacityto support exploration of the emerging market and allow new applications to belaunched. it may or may not have enough capacity to sustain a fully maturemarket with high penetration of advanced twoway services, depending ondetails of the application and the way the hfc system is installed. however, thesteering committee believes that if the potential of the market is once proven,investment for upgrades will beintroduction and summary19about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.made if necessary. it is the first steps that are the most tenuous, and hfc isadequate for that.ideally, hardware investments will incorporate the necessary flexibility andinteroperability required to support a highly functional, evolving set of nii uses.the need for flexibility is a consequence of two expectations: regulatory changeand the opening up of existing markets to competition, which implies the needto reuse existing infrastructure for other services (e.g., cable infrastructure fortelephony). the steering committee noted that increased flexibility in reuse ofinfrastructure for different services is an important trend in mostcommunications technology today, fueled by important factors such as theincreasingly digital, as opposed to analog, transmission of information. most ofthe presentations from industry acknowledged this need for flexibility, butexpressed also concerns about the costs of major infrastructure upgrades.interoperable systems allow content providers to achieve widedissemination without having to repackage their material for each differentdistribution system, and they enable end users to communicate using commonstandards and data representations. however, the need for interoperation doesnot imply that open and interoperable systems must be mandated as a part ofnew technology deployment. if the underlying physical infrastructure at thelevel of circuits and switches is engineered to support adaptability in a flexiblemanner, and if protocols and software can themselves evolve as marketsmature, then the degree of service interoperability achieved at any given timeneed not be a major concern, because it can be changed later as the marketrequires.12additional technology concernsbeyond the issues of accessšincluding adequacy of bandwidth, especiallyin the upchannelšand interoperability, the following were other significanttechnological concerns identified in the project: the ability to give users the sense that they are always connected, asopposed to their having to undertake a timeconsuming connectionprocess before using a remote application; the ability to enable users to connect to a number of remote points onthe network at the same time; the ability to support mobile users; the ability to provide for adequate security in the network; and the ability to mix different media types, in particular realtime trafficand traditional computer data.introduction and summary20about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.user interaction with networked infrastructureparalleling the importance of technology choices for network facilitiesšthe access wires and wireless links, the cables and fibers in the groundšare thetechnology choices affecting how users are connected to the network, the meansfor humans or for computers to interact and communicate in a useful fashion.today, the obvious devices that are connected to the network in volumeare the telephone, the television, and the personal computer. the importance ofthe television is its ubiquity and familiarity. its drawbacks are its limitedfunctionality, with low screen resolution, no useful input modes, and nocomputing power. the pc is more powerful and general but costs more ($2,000is a persistent price point for current fullfeatured products). however, as hasbeen pointed out numerous times, 30 percent of u.s. households have a pctoday, and substantial additional penetration into the consumer space ispredicted in a very few years. essentially all new pcs will have a modem, andso a broad base of consumers will have the ability to go "on line" in some form.the pc is thus an important and growing consumer interface to the informationinfrastructure. less change, in technology or use, appears to be anticipated fortelephones.how will the tv and the pc evolve over the next 5 to 7 years?contributors to the project from the industries that supply these devicesindicated that all would like to see their device evolve into a more general formcapable of supporting a broader range of applications. the steering committeesees as unrealistic the suggestion that they will converge to a singlemultipurpose device. the differences in cost, resolution, viewing distance, andso on suggest that each will continue to play a distinct role. but there is nodoubt that each will evolve so that it can to some extent play the role of theother.13to broaden the base of access to more consumers, including those less ableto bear the costs, several project participants raised the prospect of breaking the$2,000 price barrier for a home pc and producing a cheaper device (at $500 to$1,000) that can be used for limited pc applications and as an interface to online services and the internet. some of these attempts involve using the tv as adisplay, whereas others use a lowcost computer display or eliminate datastorage or other features. although in late 1995 this idea was translated into avariety of newproduct announcements, cheaper pcs have been tried before,without much success, and there is skepticism as well as hope about the currentundertakings. this area of innovation is an important one to watch during thenext few years, because its success or failure could influence the options forconsumer access to the network, and also because reducing the cost of accessmight be accomplished by an alternate approach, that is, pushing functions backintroduction and summary21about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.into the network, which would change the performance and cost expectationsfor that part of the infrastructure.another point discussed at the forum was how the various networksentering the home would interconnect to the various enduser devices. today,there is no single, common point of interconnection: telephone wires connectdirectly to a telephone or modem, and the cable feed connects directly to a tv,settop box, or (in the future) a data modem. numerous proposals for makingthis multiplicity of connections less complex and less costly involve providing asingle point of attachment for wires entering the home, and for the networksdistributing information within the home. interconnection could beaccomplished through some form of enhanced settop box or through a networkinterface at the side of the house. what is perhaps most important is not thename or location of the physical box, but rather which particular functions areperformed in which box, and who provides and controls these various functions.no one network provider should control the consumer's access to othernetworks, and so any single point of entry and crossconnection should notbelong to any one of the network providers. the alternative would be for theconsumer to purchase and control the device.14public versus private objectivesthe competitive drive of private industry will dominate the process bywhich the nii evolves. private firms will build it; their business plans mustjustify the investments; and competition and the desire for new markets, notpursuit of abstract visions or societal goals, will define and shape it. this realityprovides the impetus that will make it happen, and at the same time triggersmany fears and concerns. in this context, opinions differ considerably onwhether there is an appropriate government role in advancing the nii and, if so,what it is.most people can agree that an ideal information infrastructure should havesuch qualities as extended interoperability, broad accessibility, and support forbroad participation. it should allow multiple channels for manytomanycommunications and information sharing as well as onetoone (familiar todaythrough telephony), and also onetomany (familiar through broadcast and cabletelevision). progress toward that ideal is more likely if the government can setan example with its own services and help enable a consensus on a vision of thefuture by removing barriers to its realization. the steering committee believesthat rapid progress toward a harmonious national environment of interrelatedinformation services and capabilities would be valuable to the nation. it doesnot believe that a rational set of public and private services is likely to emergefrom the action of market forces alone. however, the government's role isintroduction and summary22about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as a partner and participant with the private sector, exercising its regulatoryauthority with restraint.if private industry is to build the nii, how can the government ensure thatthe evolving nii meets critical societal goals, such as equitable access? thisproblem was not a focus of the project, but it came up on many occasions.15 there was repeated concern about citizen access to those services that emergeas important to full participation in democratic processes and about equitableaccess to public services.16 from this perspective, it is important to note thatalthough consumers may in general be citizens, citizens are not all consumers,and public policy must consider the circumstances of the larger citizenry.governmental units will play a role in helping to define what appropriate accessreally means and in establishing the means to assure that it is achieved.project contributors provided much encouragement for government toserve as a model promoter and user of nii. success in these endeavors may notcome easily; the public sector is not known as a model of efficiency in usinginformation systems in its delivery of services. nevertheless, many of itsactivities relating to information infrastructure have been widely acknowledgedas constructive (cstb, 1994b). onethird of economic activity in the unitedstates is in the public sector, and for this and other reasons public services willrepresent a substantial fraction of the development, deployment, and operatingcosts of the nii. the federal government, in particular, also has a valuable toolin the form of support for fundamental and applied research and development,an area of activities that may range from university laboratory research totestbeds that can explore new technologies in the context of various userdomains. research and development (r&d) can enable more capabilities,greater ease of use, and lower cost for different components of the informationinfrastructure. the steering committee concluded that support of r&d is one ofthe most effective mechanisms available to the federal government.through the funding of network and applications research, its ownvisionary use of nii capabilities to better serve the public, encouragement ofpublicprivate partnerships in specific nii development and use situations, andthe convening of the involved parties to discuss the importance of keepingtechnological options open, the government can favorably influence thecoherence of physical information infrastructure and associated services. in theeyes of many from industry, practical government leadership will involve newways of doing business as well as pursuing such proven models as thoserepresented by the fostering of the internet and related technologies.although it drew comparatively little discussion at the 1995 forum, theinternational nature of communications implies that enhancements tointroduction and summary23about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the nii will be deployed and used in the context of an evolving globalinformation infrastructure. governments have special responsibilities in thearena of international negotiations, which can affect interconnectionarrangements, standards setting, markets for content, and other dimensions ofthe nii marketplace. public policy decisions in the united states will affectprimarily the growth of u.s. information infrastructure, but in a context wheremistakes can shift the opportunity to european and asian companies andmarkets.despite the many challenges confronting the private and public sectors inadvancing the information infrastructure, it is important to remember that theproblems discussed in this report are problems of success, not of failure.organization of this reportthis report is divided into chapters that present inputs collected from thenii 2000 project's many contributors. it serves partly to report what those inputswerešemphasizing, as requested, the views of contributors from a variety ofindustries. it also provides interpretation and commentary, includingobservations on what the steering committee did not hear and conclusionsdrawn by the steering committee from its deliberations.the chapters complement each other, but they also present some similarmaterial from different perspectives. chapter 2 focuses on user problems andneeds, addressing both organized users (e.g., users within different industries orapplication domains) and more independent users operating out of householdsor small businesses. chapter 3 considers determinants of infrastructure supply,examining influences on the nature and rate of investment and alternatives forcost recovery or revenue generation. chapters 4 and 5 examine keytechnologies being deployed: chapter 4 describes different kinds oftechnologies, while chapter 5 is a compilation of information generated throughthis project and published sources on actual deployment levels and forecasts.chapter 5 is the closest the steering committee could come to providing theelusive "road map." chapter 6 examines the role of government in shapingdeployment; it is not a comprehensive discussion of information infrastructurepolicy making, but rather a consideration of the interaction between public andprivate actions intended to foster and shape the information infrastructure.the chapters are complemented by seven appendixes with informationrelating to the information collection and synthesis processes that shaped thereport. a forthcoming second volume will contain the white papers that are thebasis of much of this report and that are quoted from and referred to throughout.introduction and summary24about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. in addition to the nii itself, the steering committee recognizes that there is a second tier ofinstitutions and resources without which the nii cannot be effective. while not a part of the niiitself, these institutions require policy and market environments and sources of new technology,which are to a large extent influenced by public policy. among such institutions and resourcesare the following: the industries that provide the machines and tools from which the niiis constructed; the schools and universities that train the human resources; the engineers and scientists who are exploring and developinginformation technologies and are learning about the cognitive andsocial dimensions of information; the state and federal agencies that make policy, provide resources, andset requirements for information services; and the business, trade, and professional associations whose stake in thenii is based on their dependence on the information provided through it.2. commercialization has in part reflected changes in government policy (e.g., with respect toacceptableness and users) associated with the national research and education network).3. the administration's agenda for action (iitf, 1993) describes a "seamless web" ofuniversally accessible information services and interactive capabilities as its vision of the nii.4. as constructed, they point to a limited willingness to pay more than current levels ofexpenditure for communications, entertainment, and other services offered through the trials. inother contextsšpurchases of consumer electronics, cellular telephonyšhowever, spending hasbeen rising.5. in addition, when there is radical technology change, it is rare for the new markets enabledby the technology to build up to volumes comparable with those of established markets in lessthan one to three decadesševen though the new markets eventually outstrip and displace the old.6. although at issue are business decisions, there is a notable unevenness in the underlyingeconomic conceptualization. in some cases the market model is relatively easy to understand,but we just do not know which technologies will win. the combination of high levels ofinfrastructure investment, low marginal costs for use, and competing suppliers is one for whicheconomic theory provides only limited and ambiguous insight, which is one reason thatpredicting the future is difficult. besides not being able to know in advance the technologicalwinners, we also do not know how the market will behave, whatever the winning technologies.these issues are examined in chapter 3.7. see cstb (1995c).8. although the collaborative aspects of internet standards setting may receive the mostattention, many associated standards, including those defining tools such as gopher and theweb, were developed by a few people and spread spontaneously because the community likedthem. this process is much moreintroduction and summary25about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.like the de facto standards development that prevails in most of the rest of the computerindustry; it can occur rapidly, and it fosters competition.9. these innovations will increase demand for bandwidth, possibly at a rate faster than it can bemade available, especially for local access. on the other hand, facilities owners are making andacting on plans to incrementally expand available bandwidth. reflecting their interdependencewith pure service providers, their investments are due at least partially to orders by smallerservice providers that are reselling the services, committing the sales and marketing resourcesin small niche markets, and/or adding content to the service (e.g., america online on top ofsprintnet).10. an interesting indicator is the relatively high incidence of carrier partnerships or initiativesto deliver information.11. today cisco systems exports almost all of the routers for the internet worldwide, and mostof the supporting software for tcp/ip comes from the united states.12. however, changes in software should not be viewed as trivial. an important goal isreducing users' costs associated with adopting new software, since the cost in time, money, anddiscomfort of user retraining to new software systems can be a major barrier to adoption ofalternatives, even if they are inherently superior. note, however, that there have been relativelyrapid changes in pc software user interfaces: windows has effectively replaced dos as a pcoperating system; in word processing, microsoft's word is leading wordperfect, both havingreplaced wordstar.13. new products coming on the market today allow one to connect a pc to a cable tv networkand to watch on the pc screen both tv pictures and information (in the form of web pages)about the material being seen. network interfaces for tvs are being developed that will enabletvs to be used for playing interactive games over the internet, and (to some extent, limited byscreen resolution) for searching and attaching to the web.14. if, however, custom network interfaces for the different networks that enter the home haveto be attached to such a device, then its final form, if it matures, will be in two parts, with thebasic unit belonging to the consumer, and featuring attachment sockets or slots into whichdifferent network interfaces can be inserted. such an architecture has not been developed oraccepted for a consumer network interface yet, although it has been discussed. however, itbears some resemblance to a pc, which has a bus or external interface into which network cardsare traditionally inserted. this raises the possibility that a pc could become a consumernetwork crossconnection device, a proposal that generates both interest and skepticism,depending on which industry sector is speaking. see chapter 2.15. see cstb (1994b and 1995b) and their references for fuller consideration. anderson et al.(1995) provide a thoughtful examination of electronic mail as an initial focus for universalaccess.16. there are areas of application, in health, education, transportation, and library services, forexample, where government has functional responsibilities that could be better served by fulluse of information and communications services.introduction and summary26about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2making technology work: individual andorganized end usersthis chapter focuses on end users and the technology foundations theyneed in order to gain the benefits of the national information infrastructure (nii)in their everyday lives. additionally, it describes how the absence of definitiveinformation regarding enduser preferences is a major source of uncertainty thatinfrastructure providers must factor into their deployment decisions. as astarting point for analysis, it addresses these questions: how is demand foraccess evolving? how does the end user access what he or she wants? whatequipment and systems compose the end user's means of access? how doesprivate industry translate what it knows about the above into decisionsregarding technology deployment generally?who is the end user?the end user of the nii is potentially every man, woman, and child. theend user may be the person at work using a networked computer environment;the person at home doing online shopping, sharing ideas with fellow hobbyists,or collaborating on a work project with remotely located colleagues; a childaccessing material in a library, sending homework to a teacher, or playing agame; a traveler changing an airline reservation; the household that has anenergy conservation system; or the realtor who relays facts, pictures, and bidand contract details for a house to prospective buyers. box 2.1 lists some of thecategories of usage. user applications range from the critical to the trivial. asthe january workmaking technology work: individual and organized end users27about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.1 what do information infrastructure endusers do?as a general observation and as documented increasingly in the newsmedia, individuals and organizations are using information technology in anumber of endeavors: work: in an increasing number of occupations, work involves sometype of networked computing. within the corporate environment,about 80 percent of computers are connected to networks (idc,1995f). electronic mail has become a popular way to communicate,and complex design collaborations can be carried out effectively innetworked environments. further, telecommuting and other forms ofdistributed work involve individuals working on line from home orwhile traveling. learning: networked access to information, be it reference material,training material, or ideas arising through discussion, is becoming animportant tool in the workplace and in schools, both of which involveimportant training opportunities for users. experience with usinginformation technology at work and in school carries over into moreinformal, unstructured learning opportunities enabled by broadaccess to networks for communications and information retrievalfrom the home, libraries, and other places not normally associatedwith training. financial and commercial transactions: many financial transactionsare conducted by the banking industry in a networked environment,and consumers spend billions of dollars buying goods throughshopping networks on cable television. online purchase transactions(plus online browsing, price comparison, and customerservicequeries) using a pc are becoming increasingly common. entertainment and socializing: the average u.s. household has atelevision set on for more than 40 hours a week (veronis, suhler,1995). television and radio provide entertainment, news, and otherinformation. in addition to such broadcast services, discretionary usercapabilities (e.g., pay per view, video on demand) are part of thefuture offerings that service providers expect to develop as moreadvanced network technologies are deployed. games and onlineservices also provide entertainment, as does socializing orcommunicating generally. from simple telephone calls to video anddata conferencing, messaging, and collaborative work, end userscommunicate more frequently and in more ways via networks. religion: devout people are sharing faith on line. they hold religiousservices, complete with sermons and at times including music. thereare online support groups for every creed. others: the above categorization is quite broad and does not dojustice to many critical areas in which technology deployment canand does have a major positive impact. for example, endeavors thatrely on rapid response, such as civilian or military crisismanagement, already depend heavily on the networkedenvironment, be it landline or wireless, voice or data communications.making technology work: individual and organized end users28about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shop and may forum made clear, there is no consensus on precisely how orto what extent end users will make use of evolving information technologycapabilitiesšno consensus on demand. nor, in the absence of expresseddemand, is there a consensus on how large a fraction of u.s. householdscurrently can access desired levels of services. ross glatzer, past president ofprodigy, noted that experience with online services emphasizes the role ofcommunications as the foundation for how services are used, with informationofferings and online transactions tightly integrated. he cautioned againstoveremphasizing any one type of activity or assuming that delivery ofinformation and content will dominate.while this view projects a continuum of uses for the nii, one particularissue shapes many of the specific considerations in this reportšthe distinctionbetween the worker in the corporate setting or large institution and the end userin the small business or in the home. this distinction seems to have polarizedthe planning of many business sectors, including that of some of the facilitiesproviders. in the near term, there will continue to be differences in theequipment and support available to different broad sets of users: large and smallbusiness users in the office or home will use computers and telephones, nottelevision sets; they may use laptops or other computer equipment purchased bytheir employer, as well as business software or specialized systems to supportremote work.1 as discussed below, they have very different needs for theircommunications infrastructure, requiring such features as more accessiblebandwidth to and especially from the home, continuous access with multipleongoing connections at once, and different sorts of communications security.over the long term, the distinction between home and small business users andusers in large businesses and institutions will disappear as people workincreasingly from the home. the trend toward selfemployment, typically homebased, is strong, and the very small business and the home are similar in termsof expertise, purchasing power, space, and other attributes.2in some instances, there are signs of overlapping uses of informationtechnology for business purposes across home and office. for example, stuartwecker of symmetrix incorporated observed that ''it is hard for me to tell whatis a business user," noting that people now install second lines in residences athigher than expected rates. moreover, the increasing exposure to computing andnetworking in work, study, and other institutional contexts will both broadenthe customer base and lead to the use of tools mastered at work or in school forother than businessrelated tasks.8 the explosive growth of experimentation,particularly in the context of the internet, underscores how the simple pattern ofan end user at home performing the same workrelated tasks as otherwise wouldbe done at amaking technology work: individual and organized end users29about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.place of employment does not capture the full range of transference ofinformation technologyenabled capabilities.why the nii must reach the homeparticularly in plans for technology deployment to and network access forthe end user in the home, the steering committee found areas of uncertainty andconfusion. in one view, advanced network services will penetrate into the homebecause some one application is so important and desirable that it alone candrive the economics of deployment. this "killer app" economic model has, forresidential networking, most commonly anticipated entertainment services asthe dominant driver. but the problem with the "killer app" metaphor is theexpectation that one activity will saturate the market.3 communications andcontent providers contributing to the nii 2000 project did not quantify theanalysis, but their comments suggested that an application need only capture asignificant percentage (even 10 percent) of the national market fortelecommunications to justify the necessary facilities investments.4entertainment has appeal as a "killer app" for residential use for severalreasons, including the obvious one that broadcast and cable are in theentertainment business already and understand it.5 as a result of their efforts,the principal application of communications technology for the nonworkinghome consumer has been television entertainment. even for sectors such astelephony that are only contemplating entering the entertainment business, thereis a proven market that can at least justify financial speculation. homeentertainment is an important segment of the u.s. communications industry (seefigure 2.1)6 and will continue to grow with the transition to digital technology.as a set of businesses, however, home entertainment represents only a smallpercentage of the u.s. economy. one reason is that strictly personal use ofinformation infrastructure for entertainment is a function of disposable personalincome (including competing demands on household resources) anddiscretionary time.7 by contrast, businessrelated use depends on the shift ofactivities to the home that traditionally or otherwise require a person to be at adifferent and specific locationšliterally, a place of business.the perceived inability of providers to construct a business case forinvesting in residential information infrastructure in the absence of a "killerapp" was a basis for frustration expressed by representatives of various businessdomains. as examined in chapter 3, comments from infrastructure builders(excluding cable and terrestrial broadcast television providers) indicate that theyare slowing their investments for fearmaking technology work: individual and organized end users30about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that home entertainment may not yield a sufficient return after all (mills,1995c). pessimistic about consumer market prospects, paul green of ibm's t.j.watson research center concluded that "the only way that i see that we areever going to be able to get fiber to the home, barring some discovery of the'killer app,' is via smaller and smaller businesses installing their own privatefiber or renting it from the telephone company. eventually it will just becomeslowly democratized." for user domain representatives, it was one matter tohear about infrastructure being built for what they felt was the wrong "killerapp"; it was quite another for them to hear that it might not be built for manydecades, given that the speculative "killer app" might be dead on arrival.figure 2.1 consumer spending on entertainment, 1980 to 1993. source:"the nii in the home: a consumer service," a white paper contributed to thenii 2000 project by vito brugliera, james a. chiddix, d. joseph donahue,joseph a. flaherty, richard r. green, james c. mckinney, richard e.ottinger, and rupert stow. data from p. kagan.evidence of growth in the amount of business that will be conducted toand from the home supports the conclusion that the vast majority of informationinfrastructure use will involve interaction with industries and government:finance and banking, health care, government services (benefits, information,taxation), manufacturing, and dozens of other domains, each of which has, tovarying degrees, been assimilating networked infrastructure into a variety ofbusiness processes. inputs from these sectors indicated that business uses in thehome, and not leisure uses, should be driving the plans for deployment ofbandwidth to the home. this insight is consistent with the slow rollout of fiberreflecting expectations for communications traffic based primarily onconventional use ofmaking technology work: individual and organized end users31about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making technology work: individual and organized end users32about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.˙˝ˇ˙ˆˆ˙˙ˆ˙!ˆ˙˝˚˙˙ˆ%"˘˙˙ˆ˙˚ˆ˛˚ˆ˛ˆˆ˙˙ˆ˙ˇ'˙˙˙ˆ)ˆ˛˛ˆˆ*˘ˇ˙˘˙˙ˆ˙+ˆ˚˙ˆ,˘˙ˆ˙ˆˆˆ˘(˙˙˙ˆ˘./˘ˆˆˆ˛˘<˙=ˆthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ityšand cultural. daniel schutzer (in a white paper) and others underscored thedifficulty of accommodating legacy systems in the near term to facilitatecommunication among different domains (box 2.2) as the informationinfrastructure evolves. white papers by thomas rochow et al. and by robertmason et al., for example, commented on difficulties with introducing use ofinformation technology in manufacturing that are also applicable across theboard to the several user domains examined during the course of the nii 2000project (see box 2.3).box 2.2 electronic commerce and legacy systemsthe electronic commerce domain has a large quantity of legacy systems whichit needs to interface to, and ultimately phaseout of as it evolves to more modernsystems, applications, and processes. these legacy systems and processes (e.g.,paper checks, mainframebased settlement and payment systems, and electronicdata interchange valueadded networks) will not go away overnight, and asuccessful electronic commerce infrastructure must allow the user to easily andtransparently transfer between and switch back and forth between the new allelectronic and the older, hybrid legacy systems and processes.šdaniel schutzer, "electronic commerce"a majority of user domain representatives at the workshop and forumindicated that the primary issues inhibiting greater nii use were notinfrastructurespecific. in fact, several of the speakers commented on theirsatisfaction with current communication services, and it is also the case thatnetworking in at least some form is being used increasingly in essentially allindustries and sectors (see box 2.4 and chapter 5 for observations on businessnetworking trends). enormous opportunities for savings have long been part ofthe appeal of business networking applications such as electronic datainterchange (edi) and also underlie, for example, powerutility investment inenergy demand management systems as discussed in the white paper by johncavallini et al. widespread implementation and use of information technology,however, are complicated by ongoing fundamental changes in nearly every userdomain that have as much to do with the information itself as with how it iscommunicated. in the 1980s, for example, edi attracted attention as an advancebeyond internal corporate networking to support interenterprise communicationusing standardized traderelated documents. in the 1990s, discussions ofelectronic commerce have reflected extensive changes in activity within andamong enterprises and individuals that now have greater flexibility inexchanging information. current accounts of indusmaking technology work: individual and organized end users33about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.try and sectorspecific problems concern how different industries conductbusiness and/or evolve, both in terms of overall structure and business processesand in terms of the assimilation of all kinds of information technology intothose processes.13 14box 2.3 adaptation to the use of informationtechnology in manufacturingnothing is harder to facilitate than the change of a work process. this iscultural change, often a change from what has been a successful process in thepast. human beings, perhaps as a result of a builtin predisposition to protect thespecies from the unknown, are strongly resistant to change.šthomas c. rochow, george e. scarborough, and frank david utterback,"electronic integrated product development as enabled by a globalinformation environment: a requirement for success in the twentyfirst century"– [t]here is concern that the learning cycle for small manufacturingenterprises (smes) – to implement information technology is too long and toocostly for them to effectively make the transition to the nii environment. thesolution to the problem is not simply one of assuring that every sme can purchaseand install a new information system. instead, the solution requires anunderstanding of how a complex combination of structural, technical, managerial,and economic factors affects the diffusion of information technology in smes andputs at risk a significant component of the nation's manufacturing base.šrobert m. mason, chester bowling, and robert j. niemi,"small manufacturing enterprises and the national information infrastructure"within each domain the barriers differ, but contributors to this projectdelineated some broad themes. data formatting standards and legacy systemsare pervasive concerns. difficulties have surfaced in the context of edi,collaborative databases, and other applications that involve document handlingand exchange, and the white paper by stephen zilles and richard cohn speaks,for example, of the need for standards to support all steps of document usešproduction, viewing, reading, reusing, annotatingšand links standards toarchitectures. another crosscutting concern is labeling and identifying people,places, and organizations, as ed hammond points out in a white paper. yetanother related concern is lack of cohesiveness within industries andorganizations themselves. richard sharpe of the hartford foundation explainedat the january workshop that health care "information is totally fragmented. thebusiness ismaking technology work: individual and organized end users34about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not a system. it is a cottage industry, with each cottage having a differentapproach to the netware."box 2.4 demand for networking in the businessdomainmany business and public sector domains have made significantinvestments in networking, as reflected in their purchase and use of privatenetworksšlocal area networks, wide area networks, virtual privatenetworks, and so on. a may 22, 1995, international data corporationanalysis (idc, 1995a, figure 13) arrayed several different industriesaccording to their responses in three categories regarding networking:1. the degree to which representatives indicated that they considerednetworking to be critical;2. the number indicating that most electronic information is transferred byusing computertocomputer communications (as opposed to fax) amonglarge business sites; and3. the proportion deeming electronic commerce critical.each sector's responses to each of the three were as follows:response (percent)sector(1)(2)(3)business services74.025.326.4banking71.022.113.7insurance71.012.110.3retail59.023.713.4transportation/communications/utilities55.011.910.9process manufacturing53.013.19.1discrete manufacturing51.010.54.8education49.020.89.4government48.018.93.2health care35.06.87.8notwithstanding perhaps predictable differences among infrastructure users by domainand by size of organization, there is evidence that the floor is rising. growth in activityand sophistication among domains that came later to electronic networking andinformation services suggests that large interdomain gaps in networking are unlikely topersist, although some specialized needs are likely to continue or emerge (cstb, 1993a,1995a).in addition, the cultural metamorphosis required in the transition to use ofinformation technology within each of the several user domains is a reality thattelecommunications providers must factor into their deployment decisions,according to project participants. several speakers at themaking technology work: individual and organized end users35about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.forum noted that infrastructure providers' involvement in helping end users toaccept advanced communications capabilities and use them in new ways mightaccelerate the demand for services. as thomas rochow of the mcdonnelldouglas corporation pointed out with regard to manufacturing, "we are talkingabout a sector of our economy that really has to learn how to crawl before wecan walk and then run. if you help us do that, you might be surprised that wecan help you coevolve with us for our mutual benefit." fostering the adoptionof information technology is arguably a task for both the user domains and thefacilities providers, given that infrastructure providers have a business interestin being responsive to customers' needs. from the providers' perspective, eachapplication domain has its own language, perspective on its problems, and needfor a somewhat tailored approachšall factors that can slow progress.whether or how well assimilation proceeds, it may also pace the rate ofmarket growth, inasmuch as it speaks to the problem of market penetration in agiven domain. in their white paper, mason et al. note that smallermanufacturing enterprises that may be only at the beginning of the socalled"learning curve" are responsible for up to nearly 40 percent of the nation'smanufacturing employment. richard sharpe remarked, "health care is asleeping giant. this is a major sector, a trilliondollar business opportunity foryou folks who are selling your wares."variations in requirements imply, in particular, that there is no coherentvoice through which users can express their needs up front. it also implies thatno one domain may have sufficient clout to sway investment choices one wayor another to meet its needs. thus, when infrastructure builders aim for aconstituency that represents a common denominator or compromise amongdifferent flavors of demand, it is easy for users in any domain to feel that"they're not talking to us."the lack of specific requirements or variation in perceived requirementscould be a problem for those who must decide what infrastructure to buildthrough processes involving upfront commitments to longlived facilitiescharacterized by economies of scale that are paid back through volume use. asdavid messerschmitt of the university of california at berkeley observed at theforum:do the needs of various user groups, such as doctors and hospitals and joe sixpack, differ radically? if so, we need to think of perhaps different networksolutions that are somehow "gatewayed" for these different communities. orare their needs actually very similar, and not different enough to justify thatsegmentation, so that we can benefit from the economies of scale of defining amore homogeneous nii network infrastructure?making technology work: individual and organized end users36about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the discussion here (see chapters 3 and 4) does not conclude that separatenetworks are required.the end user as consumerin the effort to stimulate consumer demand for information technology,affordability, ease of use, and interoperability of available devices stand out asbasic considerations. affordability is a concept that applies to a product's entirelife cycle; it includes both the initial purchase price and other costs incurredover a relatively long expected period of use (consumers generally cannotrecover the costs of their durable goods in the same way that businesses canrecover the capital of past investments and invest it for modernization15 ).joseph flaherty of cbs incorporated summed up the situation as follows: "sowhile the network questions might be bandwidth, bandwidth, bandwidth andaccess, access, access, the consumer questions are cost, cost, cost and life, life,life of the facility."project contributors associated with television manufacturing and servicesemphasized the consumer experience with electronics: relatively low pricepoints, longlived products (especially in the case of the more expensive items),and compatibility. in contrast, contributors associated with the computerindustry observed that consumers are investing in personal computer (pc)equipment even though it costs more than entertainment devices, althoughgiven the relatively high initial costs, customers are unlikely to upgraderegularly.costs for equipment are only part of the challenge in increasing consumerdemand. another is the price of service. while broadcast television involves noservice charge, brugliera et al. note in their white paper that basic cable serviceaverages about $300 per year and premium channels an additional $100 peryear each, levels that consumers are aware of and can factor into theirexpectations. average monthly rates for basic telephone service, according tofederal communications commission (fcc) statistics, are about $11 forresidential customers and about $43 for singleline business customers (fcc,1994, pp. 304305).16 in contrast, online service pricing has been volatile,currently averaging around $10 per month for about 10 hours of "basic" service.price levels affect willingness to move from one pattern of consumption toanother (e.g., from videocassette rental to use of video on demand) and to usenew kinds of products.in addition to the issue of overall cost are the issues of predictable cost andeasy payment for services, as emphasized by leonard kleinrock of theuniversity of california at los angeles in the context of nomadic computingneeds, which combine portable and alternative computing and communicationsarrangements (see box 2.5). the features sought bymaking technology work: individual and organized end users37about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kleinrock imply corresponding accounting mechanismsšwell established fortelephony and various subscription television services but currently in flux forcomputerbased services.box 2.5 predictable and easy paymenti do not want to make a query out over the network and have a 15megabytevideoclip downloaded to me on my 14kilobit modem. i want to be warned about thecost in time, delay, dollars, and storage and maybe get some approximate picture,maybe just the title of the picture, or fuzzy image, or a slower frame rate. in order tocreate this, we need a variety of capabilities. we need the ability to handlereplication services, file synchronization, predictive caching, adaptive databasemanagement, location services, tracking of people, devices, resource discovery,and profile discovery.in order for me to use [the telephone system] anywhere, all i need is coin ofthe realm and an empty telephone booth. i do not have to identify myself, registerahead of time, or pay for it ahead of time; i just go and use it.šleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesgrowth in consumer acquisition and use of pcs provides evidence that atleast more of those who can afford to purchase pcs are opting to do so. at thejanuary workshop, tora bikson of the rand corporation cited researchshowing that the proportion of income spent on access to pcs or access tonetwork services has increased (anderson et al., 1995). similarly, the growth ofcellular telephony suggests a willingness to alter household budgets to cover thecost of a valued service. the cellular pricing structure, which makes handsetsvery cheap and calls quite expensive (though prices are beginning to fall), givespeople the opportunity to experiment with using the service. growth in volumesuggests that many find it more useful than they expected, fueling the transferof this technology from businessfinanced use to more personal use.in addition to cost, ease of use was described by project contributors as aprimary consideration in consumers' willingness to use information technology.the white paper by oscar garcia discusses the issue. the user interface isclearly a crucial component in information technology use and one for whichresearch could bring needed improvements (see chapter 6 for a discussion ofresearch needs). experience with telephones and televisions, which aregenerally recognized as easy to use, illustrates that user interfaces can betailored to a single use. similarly, the common wisdom on fax is that it wasaccepted because it had a singleuse interface and worked over telephone lines.in contrast, tasks associated with moremaking technology work: individual and organized end users38about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.complex and emerging service objectives such as accessing and using theinternet are still perceived as complicated, with more variables and hardertouse interfaces.17although technology advances have enabled dramatic improvements overthe last several years, the generalpurpose pc is not yet as easy to use as eitherthe television or the telephone, largely because many of the tasks to beperformed with the pc are intrinsically more complex. this is a significantbarrier for many, and is likely to be one for many years to come.some of the difficulty in learning to use new technology is being offset bythe emergence of new service businesses that offer, for example, the capabilityof hosting web pages for customers who do not want to configure and operatetheir own web server. such businesses provide the storage for web pages, aswell as the service that translates the names for the web pages (the universalresource locators) into the appropriate address on the network. customers paymonthly fees for such services. other service providers intend to sell a turnkeycapability that a client can install to operate a web server.despite the need for continued improvement in ease of use, it is importantto emphasize that expectations for user friendliness should not be unrealistic. alocal, consumer market assumes that people will know what to do with thecapabilities available. the basic user will be able to accomplish a great dealwith navigation tools built into current and future television services, forexample, but skillful use of interactive environments, beyond entertainmentapplications, will require trainingšwhich is already taking place in thecorporate setting, in social groups for adults, and in the schools, especially forthe next generation of users.elaborating on paul green's characterization of the popular desire for easeof use as a pointclickresults capability, irene greif of the lotus developmentcorporation suggested the need to prepare for a greater level of sophisticationby building systems that accommodate the sophisticated as well as the limited:we do not want to build user interfaces so simple that the user who needs toundertake a more complex task, for example to issue a sequence of requestsšsome of which depend on the outcome of previous requestsšcannot do so atall. a simple pointandclick interface cannot easily express these morecomplex objectives.another issue for providers is responding to the need for access to thesame information from different user interfaces. people have different sets ofskills for finding and visualizing information, and they need different userinterfaces to allow them to make the best use of those skills. group systems thattake into account users' varying capabilities can bemaking technology work: individual and organized end users39about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.very valuable in making teams more productive and smoothing out theproblems inherent in people seeing things differently.18 different kinds ofinterfaces may also be needed to support access by people with certain physicallimitations. of particular concern are the visionimpaired, whose needs are notaddressed by the many activities aimed at producing a more visually richinterface, whether via television or pc.access devicesin homes, the three main access devices deployed at this time are thetelephone, the television (tv), and the pc. ninetyfour percent of u.s.households have a telephone (fcc, 1994, table 8.1), about 97 percent have atv (mcconville, 1995; veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 313), and 32 percent have apc (veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 313). at work, the access devices are telephonesand pcs. on the road, it is again the telephone (perhaps wireless) and theportable pc, with tvs ubiquitous in temporary accommodations.communication occurs over public and private networks. it is logical to startwith this installed base to understand how people will access future informationinfrastructures, even though current devices will evolve over time.the ''inevitable" merging of the various access devices into one, either thetv or pc, has been forecast. notable in the january workshop, however, wasthe expectation among participants from the computer, television, and telephoneindustries that these access devices would coexist, albeit with an increasinglypowerful and flexible set of capabilities. despite interest in speculating aboutfuturistic consumer devices, the roles of the principal access devices are notlikely to change for at least several years. the pctv combinations nowcoming onto the market appear to be basically a pc with augmented capabilitiesfor television reception. the television is not becoming a pc, although the pcmay be used as a television (and also as a telephone).given the enormous installed base and the substantial volumes of existingdevices that will be delivered in the next several years, it is likely thattelevisions, pcs, and also telephones will remain the only access devicesdeployed in enough quantity to qualify as consumer items. changes will takeplace, but, as has been seen before, a new service will not completely supplantan established one: as television service emerged, for instance, radio service didnot die, because it had a welldefined set of user modalities that continued toprovide value; as television emerged, movies did not disappear. the pc is anew medium whose capabilities can be exploited to provide new services, suchas those associated with the internet, as well as mature services whose operatorsunderstand and know how to capitalize on pc capabilities.making technology work: individual and organized end users40about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the personal computergiven the various uses anticipated for the niišincluding work, learning,business and commercial transactions, and entertainmentšthe pc's role as anaccess device will become increasingly important (see box 2.6).19 close to 60million pcs were deployed in the u.s. workplace at the end of 1994, with closeto 80 percent of them connected to a network (idc, 1995f). about 32 millionwere deployed in the home. 20 millions of portable pcs are used by mobileworkers. the most rapidly growing industry segment is the installation of pcsin the home (business week, 1995).the pc's importance for access to current and future informationinfrastructure raises concerns particularly about cost and ease of use.consumers now pay about $2,000 for a new computer, a price that hasincreased slightly over the last several yearsšas has the volume of pcspurchased. current industry trends are to keep prices relatively constant whiledelivering increasing power and capability in the machine. improvements inprocessor design and integrated circuit manufacturing techniques haveconsistently lowered the cost for a given amount of memory or processingpower,21 a trend likely to continue. these added capabilities are important bothin improving ease of use (graphical user interfaces, for example, requiresubstantial processing power and memory) and in delivering multimediacapabilities.although the pc thus provides the greatest and most general capabilityamong the common access devices, as an access device it is relativelyexpensive. consequently, the computer industry continuously asks the question,can we create a useful, under$500 access device? such a "model t" or "yugo"could boost the household penetration rate of pcs closer to 80 percent. to date,no such device has proved popular, in part because the compromises required infeatures and capabilities would be severe, but companies are experimentingwith limitedfeature, lowprice devices, and their experiences will help calibratethe market.22 the improvement in features at an approximately constant realcost will likely pace the replacement (or augmentation) rate. compounding thecosts for equipment and software purchase are other costs relating to networkaccess and support, which may raise the effective cost of a networked pc toseveral thousand dollars, or in large institutions, tens of thousands of dollars.given the expectation that pc costs will remain relatively constant at about$2,000 per system, what steps can be taken to ensure that the widest possiblecross section of society benefits from this technology? 23 what is likely tohappen has an analogy in how needs for transportation are satisfied: while noteveryone owns an automobile, most have access to transportation. similarly,electronic access to information is being made availmaking technology work: individual and organized end users41about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.able increasingly in libraries, schools, business establishments, and other publiccenters where pcs can be utilized by many. kiosks provide a means for accessin public places, although usually for a specified set of services accessedthrough specialized interfaces (and with less privacy than is possible in thehome or individual office).box 2.6 the growing role for the personalcomputerthe personal computer (pc) is interactive in both standalone modeand on a network. interactivity is fundamental to its design and use.when the pc is compared to other access devices, such as thetelevision, there are and will continue to be significant differences inwhat is meant by interactivity, driven primarily by the differences inusage modalities: one sits about 2 feet from a pc and about 10 feetfrom a television.the pc is massproduced. the installed base of workplace pcs in theunited states is almost 60 million units, according to internationaldata corporation (idc, 1995f); idc forecasts a base of 80 million in1999. home pcs represent the fastest growing market segment, withshipments increasing from 6 million in 1993 to 9 million in 1995(mcwilliams, 1995). jupiter communications estimates that there are34 million households with pcs in 1995 (maresca, 1995). marketresearch suggests that factors behind growing household pc useinclude increases in working at home, falling relative prices, increasingease of setup (due to more fully equipped hardware and preinstalledsoftware), and new choices of software and applications (kirkpatrick,1994).the pc is a de facto worldwide standard. in the computer industry,the volume of sales sets de facto standards, and hardware andsoftware compatibility are relatively good. furthermore, there are nogeographic barriers to pc use; over 50 percent of purchases areoutside the united states.pc technology advances. over the years the pc has evolved in cpuperformance, quality of the user interface, storage capacity, andconnectivity, among other characteristics. hardware improvementshave been accompanied by advances in applications. the rate oftechnological change is accelerating, with rapid improvement in suchareas as multimedia capabilities, connectivity, and mobility.the pc is adaptable. the pc is both a business and a consumerproduct that has business, education, entertainment, and other uses.with the emergence of realtime video communication capabilities, thepc will become a communication device augmenting existing voiceservices. simultaneous transmission of data, video, and audio is apractical possibility.11 chapter 5 presents statistic concerning introduction of new products that argument thecapabilities of pcs for communication, including modems and network equipment.making technology work: individual and organized end users42about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the televisionabout 97 percent of all u.s. households have a television, and about 62percent out of those have cable service (mcconville, 1995). television isclearly a ubiquitous access device, one that provides communication servicesfor substantial periods of time. it is part of our culture; much of ourentertainment and information comes from watching television. with thewidespread use of cable services, there is also an existing infrastructure tomanage the interaction between users and service providers. consumers canpurchase premium services, either on a monthly basis or on impulse, via the settop converter, which is the gateway between the television and the cable serviceproviders.terrestrial broadcast television uses wide bandwidth that potentially couldhelp to enable other services, via broader access to the bandwidth. the greatestsource of bandwidth to the home is terrestrial tv, but its 6mhz channelsprovide 20 mbps only for oneway communication into the home, supportingonly a fraction of the activities that can leverage the nii. broadening of accessis more evident in cable television. as digital video transmission is deployed,cable service providers will be able to increase the capacity of their networksand will also be able to offer additional, including interactive, services. in suchan environment, a customer would be able to access (purchase) contentšsuchas video programmingšmore or less on demand from a server. the settop boxwill play an increasingly important role and will likely go through rapidtechnological evolution over the next several years.the likely first step in migrating toward such an environment is theevolution of existing cable systems to hybrid fiber coaxial cable (hybrid fibercoax; hfc) systems, as discussed in chapter 4. the use of hfc will allow thecoexistence of digital and analog signals and will enable twoway, asymmetrictransmission of digital data (nist, 1994c; hodge, 1994). this is a basicinfrastructuren capability that, if properly deployed, will allow the network toconnect a number of access devices: television (via settop box), the pc, and thetelephone. while some in the industry would like to see a quick migration to analldigital delivery paradigm, the television community is concerned about themigration path from analog to digital transmission, combined with the rise ofinteractivity. in a white paper, allen ecker and graham mobley voice theexpectation that digital settop boxes will "also have analog tuning capabilitybecause you do not want to do away with the analog services that are currentlyproviding most of the revenues that cable systems enjoy, and most of theconsumer demand at the current time." advanced analog settop boxes have thecapability of sending digital applications such as onscreen displays of programguides, virtual channel information, and other digitalmaking technology work: individual and organized end users43about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data along with the analog video and audio. this capability allows an analog settop box to bridge the gap between analog and digital services that will evolve inthe future.as the television industry moves forward, costs will increase. televisionequipment will continue to become "smarter," requiring processing power,memory, and software. furthermore, modulation techniques to support digitalvideo transmission require highperformance and complex integrated circuits.the cost of such equipment is several times the cost of current settop boxes. itwill take many years before cost goals acceptable in the consumer market willbe realized. in the meantime, modest steps are possible such as expanding thechannel capacity by the addition of digital delivery to the current analog service.in summary, an upgrade of the cable plants to hfc, coupled with thedevelopment of advanced consumer systems, should allow for advancedtelevision services and an expanded use of broadband networks reaching thehome. while this will provide added business opportunities for the serviceproviders, it is highly likely that the role of the television will continue to bewhat it is today: an entertainment device (cstb, 1995c).advanced televisiondigital television channels provide more broadcast capacity as well asincreased data bandwidth in the available spectrum. they make use ofcompression techniques to allow up to four times the usual number of programstreams to be transmitted within a single broadcast channel bandwidth. inaddition, efficient channel utilization is likely to link digital highdefinitiontelevision (hdtv) transmission with unused data stream capacity that could beused for transmission of additional programming or a data service.hdtv has been the subject of significant levels of corporate and researchinvestment in recent years. it is also the subject of fcc activities in terms ofboth standards setting and spectrum allocation. experts are divided about thefuture of hdtv per se, with some believing that it will provide a very attractivehuman interface and set of capabilities and others foreseeing a much lesssignificant role. the steering committee generally discounted the impact ofhdtv as a force shaping communications and informationrelated behaviorand markets for the next 5 to 7 years, given hdtv's high initial prices and verylimited sales, and believes that it will be even longer before a significantamount of hdtvcompatible programming will be available.24 even then, thesteering committee considered the availability of new spectrum for other uses tobe more important than the availability of a higherfidelity television viewingexperimaking technology work: individual and organized end users44about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ence, in the meantime, tv programming displays on pcs are growing,presenting prospects for enhancing and otherwise using those images.the telephone and other access deviceswith about 94 percent of all u.s. households having telephone service,telephones rival televisions as the most widely used device for gaining access tothe nii and will continue in that capacity for the foreseeable future. althoughthe functionality of a telephone can be found increasingly in pcs and itseventual integration into television and settop box installations has beenvariously proposed, it is unlikely that such developments will affect thewidespread installation of telephones. the telephone is an inexpensive andhighly versatile consumer device that has become an integral part of ourlifestyle, and the ongoing introduction of a variety of telephonebased servicesfurther increases its functionality.25cellular and personal communication service (pcs) telephones nowprovide increasing communications mobility to a broadening slice of society.26 initially expensive business tools for senior executives, real estate agents, andother business managers who must operate untethered to landlines, cellulartelephones are now becoming commodity items for the general consumer; pcs"telephones" are expected to follow suit. over time, these telephones, too, arebecoming "smarter," linking into computer networks for data access or for basictelephony over broad regions of the world that have central billing.combining a range of computing and communications features in a highlyportable package, personal digital assistants (pdas) promise to provide"anytime, anywhere" communication capabilities of a broader nature than canbe found in pagers or telephones or a hybrid of the two.27 if that promise can berealized, then pdas may constitute a cheap ($200) pc with communicationscapability. greater support for wireless, mobile systems may spur developmentand use of such small systems, although their impact may be limited in thisdecade.28toward a fully integrated home systeman important question is how the three separate classes of access devicešthe telephone, the television, and the pcšwill interconnect and interoperatewith the various networks coming into the home. currently, there is no clear orconsistent model for how (or even whether) to achieve interconnections): theconsumer must obtain a separate interface unit for each access device beingconnected to each type of network. a pc requires a standalone device (a voicemodem, an integrated services digital network (isdn) interface, or (nowemerging) a modem for the cable netmaking technology work: individual and organized end users45about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.work); a television requires a leased or purchased settop box, satellite decoderbox, or simple antenna to receive television signals. the consumer must hookall these pieces together correctly. this task is, at present, a significant source ofuser frustration that is often compounded by the failure of the various parts towork well together. for example, televisions cannot offer advanced featuressuch as "picture inside the picture" through many settop boxes.29any business sector that provides infrastructure components must work toensure that there are suitable standards and interconnection interfaces in placeso that the consumer can assemble a system from parts or pay an expert toprovide the assembly service. failure to provide and implement such standardsis perceived as a barrier to market penetration (see box 2.7), yet prematurestandardization also remains a concern. some industry players see the settopbox as evolving to serve as a central point of interconnection for all networksand applications. this capability would require that the settop box (whichmight at that point be too large to actually sit on top of a television set) havesome internal modularity so that interfaces to different networks could beplugged into it, much as network interface cards today are plugged into a pc.see box 2.8. other project contributors cautioned against projecting thecharacteristics of today's settop boxes into the future. general instrument'squincy rodgers noted that settop boxes divert attention from "the real issue,which is where different functionality is to be performed in a network."additionally, robert aiken of lawrence livermore national laboratoryquestioned whether "what gets deployed [in the home] becomes a separatechoice from what gets deployed in the access network."a wellelaborated concept for staged evolution toward homebasedintegration is offered in the white paper by ecker and mobley. they describethe potential for a twopart home communications terminal (hct)šone partspecific to the particular network (network interface module) that could berented and one general part that could be purchased with features to meet theneeds of the consumer (see figure 2.2). 30 in the forum, mobley explained thata network interface module would be necessary "in order to come up with a boxthat a consumer can buy and know would be compatible in the future." thefinal phase of integration would be a fully integrated home unit or home set ofequipment that would connect broadband pc modems to the cable system,provide for power consumption monitoring, support telephony, and provideaccess to digital interactive entertainment. according to ecker and mobley, therate at which full integration occurs will be governed by a number of factors,including migration to digital transmission, development of multimediaoperating systems and user interfaces to support multiple applications, designfor "full interoperability at critical interfaces and [to] opermaking technology work: individual and organized end users46about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.7 the need for consumer interfacestandardsconsumers have a very interesting habit. if the industry is confused, thinkabout how confused consumers are. they simply sit on their wallets. if we want tomake the nii useful, we have got to deal with standards.švito brugliera, zenith electronics corporationthere will be opportunities for communication of applications betweenappliances within the home. that means that whatever we design in terms of anetwork has to comprehend access into the home, out of the home, and within thehome within the architecture.[there is a need to develop] something i would call the moral equivalent of therj11 for broadband. by that i mean a lot more than just the physical connector.what the rj11 has done symbolically for the telephony industry is turn on a verylarge set of creative applications of telephony, ranging from modem applications inthe data space to all sorts of remote voice mail with touchtone entry, and all sortsof answering machines. – [t]here is a national market in which a consumer can godown to – the local supplier, buy equipment, and know that it will plug in and worknot just in his current home, but also in whatever home he moves to. we need toachieve something like that for the broadband world. we need an architecture thatwill generate a standard consumer way of interfacing with the broadband network,which is independent of all of the choices we know we are going to have to make inthe access network.we have heard arguments about the differences between various hybrid fibercoaxial cabletype deployments, between that and fiber to the curb, asymmetricdigital subscriber line, and various wireless technologies for reaching the home.ultimately, i think the consumer is not going to care a lot about the accesstechnology. what he is going to want to be able to do is have his pc or his otherinformation appliance capable of plugging into the nii in a standardized way. thatis going to require the definition of a standard for connectivity both at a physicallevel and at an electrical level, and a protocol level that is common across at least anational market, perhaps a worldwide market.škevin kahn, intel corporationif you believe the pc is the device, then the answer is a 10base t ethernetplug: it is an rj45. it is the logical successor to an rj11. the wireless modemshave that plug on the back, the isdn modems have that plug on the back, and thet1 modems and the rf modems. guess what? pcs already come with ethernetplugs on the back and you plug them together and you are done. they are in factrouters. the settop box should be a router; it is a media converter. that is what itis. we are done. it is ethernet.šdavid clark, massachusetts institute of technologymaking technology work: individual and organized end users47about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ate efficiently within the regulatory environment," and in particular thecost of the fully interactive hct. currently such units do exist, but they arequite expensive, in part because of the highdensity integrated circuits needed tohandle the "complex digital and analog signal processing inherent in anyinteractive terminal."31box 2.8 computerbased settop boxes andmultisignal conversiongiven the several digital data delivery media entering the home includingcellular, broadcast, cable, telephone, and direct broadcast satellite, practicality,economy, and convenience demand a single "settop box" for the description,decoding, and processing of the signals for display. further, the increasing need forinteractive upstream communication suggests that, if it should ever achieveuniversal penetration, the computer, with its associated telephone modem, is themost efficient location for the multisignal converter functions. the convenience ofthe armchair remote control facing the television display will remain for the viewerof entertainment programs, but some of the switching functions it originates wouldbe performed in the computerbased signal converter. in this concept, the leadsfrom the terrestrial antenna, the satellite dish, and the cable feed would allterminate at the computer box where appropriate circuits would process the signalsfor display at, in many cases, multiple viewing locations in the home, each requiringdifferent signals for display. this aspect of convergence will minimize the cost ofequipment to be acquired by the consumer.švito brugliera, james a. chiddix, d. joseph donahue, joseph a. flaherty,richard r. green, james c. mckinney, richard e. ottinger, and rupert stow,"the nii in the home: a consumer service"what increasing use of generalaccess devicesimplies for networking technology deploymentthe increasing use of generalaccess devices such as pcs has implicationsfor architecture, facilities, and service offerings (see box 2.9). also importantare basic expectations about how access devices will be used and by whom,including the degree of enduser control over bandwidth and content selection.what technical capabilities should an advanced information infrastructurehave to support expected enduser needs? chapter 4 discusses options forresidential network access that are now under consideration or are currentlybeing deployed. in this section, the steering committee identifies severalessential service features for an nii:making technology work: individual and organized end users48about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 2.2 proposed twopart broadband digital home communications terminal.architecture to resolve interoperability and retail sales issues. source: "the evolution of the analog settop terminal to a digital interactivehome communications terminal," a white paper contributed to the nii 2000 project by h. allen ecker and j. graham mobley.making technology work: individual and organized end users49about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2.9 user behavior and architectural supportif i really wanted to be interactive, i would talk to my wife instead of watchingtelevision. most people watch tv. we've had (since 1950) 45 years that havedemonstrated pretty conclusively that a lot of people want to have a fair amount ofpassive entertainment. and i don't think it's necessarily because there is anunavailable interactive alternative. in fact it may be due to the availability of theinteractive alternative that you want that passivity. we may be bumping up againsta basic constraint on human demand.šsteven wildman, northwestern universitybut the web is based on a different model where the people of the world arecreating the content. it makes a great deal of difference in the architectures of thenational information infrastructure as we move forward as to where you assume thecontent is coming from. if it really comes from people everywhere, then you need atwoway, broadband infrastructure. – however, if the content is primarily providedby hollywood and the likes of the current content providers, if the primary market ispay per view, then you can have servers that broadcast essentially to the people.šrobert lucky, bell communications research[there is] value out of being able to present views, present them to one ormany specific others, and to communicate as a participant in varied interactions. –[t]his implies an architecture quite different from the kind that would mainly supportdownloaded entertainment. it also implies a set of addressing mechanisms that wedo not necessarily get with other kinds of connectivity.štora bikson, rand corporationin the future you will see much more sophisticated things of that nature, wherethe content is created on the fly by the user in a collaborative sort of an application,collaborative design, or whatever, where you are mixing graphics and simulationwith voice and video, and so on. so i would actually characterize it as three generickinds of applications. i think that you are either going to have three separatenetworks for those purposes, or you are going to have a single network thataccommodates them all in a relatively costefficient way.šdavid messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyit all depends upon who gets clicked. if i am at home and i get clicked [by adistant web user], i need bandwidth back into the network to respond to that click.šleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesmaking technology work: individual and organized end users50about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. high data rates to the endpoint, adequate bandwidth in both directions, multiplesession capability, continuous availability of service, realtime, multimedia communication, nomadicity, and security.associated with these service features, to make them viable in the market,are ease of attachment and low cost. none of these capabilities are static; theywill evolve with the technology and its uses. there are strong ties among thevarious components: the applications, the computing capability at the end point,and the network capability.high data rates to the end pointthe network connection, or ''last mile," must be able to support high datarates (high bandwidth) in order to allow the use of rich, multimedia data types.in the corporate setting, this level of access via local area networks is taken forgranted. however, to the home, most users currently use conventionaltelephonyrate data communications, with current data rates at or below 28.8kbps. enhancements to cable tv systems offer the potential of receiving data at20 mbps, but that bandwidth is not available to subscribers to transmit with.the capabilities of the video delivery systems are being further expanded. forexample, inherent extra capacity in the television vertical blanking interval isnow being used by service providers to carry content other than conventionalbroadcasting, from programguide information to web pages linked tobroadcasts through the intercast technology. yet even with intercast, atelephone return path is needed for interactive applications.32many contributors identified isdn, which offers a data rate of 128 kbps,as the next obvious step in upgrading link speed to the home. isdn is thecheapest way to gain a factor of 5 to 10 in bandwidth without having to rewirethe home; it allows reuse of the existing infrastructure at a relatively smallincremental cost.while these speeds are applicable for tasks such as exploring the web orexchanging mail, they can constrain more advanced jobs involving access tohigherresolution images or video. these services are better served by data ratessimilar to those for today's local area networks, with peak transmission speedsbetween 1 and 10 mbps. the steering committee concluded that residentialbandwidths in this range would be very desirable to serve emerging applicationsneeds.33making technology work: individual and organized end users51about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.adequate bandwidth in both directionsin a typical corporate network environment the end user is able to receiveand send data at the same rate. this symmetry is also present at lower speedswhen a pc is connected to a network via a modem through conventionaltelephony or isdn circuits. however, because of the features of some advancedtechnologies such as those used by the cable industry, the service that cableproviders are anticipated to provide is typically highly asymmetric: users areable to receive data at a higher rate than they can send data. chapter 4 givesmore details on the performance to be expected. although this upstream orreversechannel speed is adequate for many applications, many believe that itmay become an increasingly limiting factor in achieving the promise of anadvanced nii.34 it is important that network architectures take such potentiallimitations into consideration and allow for future upgrades to assure thatdemand for everincreasing bandwidth can be satisfied economically.multiplesession capabilitynetwork access must be able to support multiple sessions simultaneously.corporate networks are able to provide this capability today. for such acapability to be available to the home, some sort of packet switching isrequired. packet switching allows a user with a single telephone connection tocommunicate with multiple remote sites. inexpensive packet switches are nowbeing marketed for the home or small business that will allow multipleindividuals (workers or family members) to have network accesssimultaneously without having to sign up for multiple service connections.increasingly, isdn and conventional telephony modems are being used fromthe home to carry data packets exactly for this purpose. current data modemsfor cable now being evaluated also use the packet mode of transmission tosupport this objective.continuous availability of servicecontinuously available service is important because it saves having to dialup to be able to receive information. for example, a user can be notified ofreceived mail as it arrives, not just when the user thinks to check for it (theassumption is that the user is not billed for passive connect time). whenavailability is continuous the user can offer a service on demandšthe user canbecome a provider. continuous availability of service is often found in largebusiness or institutional settings. in the home today it is most evident intelevisions left on for long periods of time.making technology work: individual and organized end users52about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.realtime, multimedia communicationthe network must be able to support advanced, realtime, multimediacommunication capabilities. audio and video will become increasingly usefulmodes of information delivery. consider, for example, video clips as a part of aweb page advertising some product or a component in an electronic mailmessage. another important application area is teleconferencing, especiallyvideo conferencing, which many think will be a key facilitator of "telework."the requirement for multimedia, realtime communication implies a need foradequate bandwidth (isdn may not be enough), bidirectional bandwidth (theteleworker will both send and receive a teleconference), and specific tools forbandwidth management. improvement of compression is allowing better andbetter video to be supported on comparatively narrow bandwidths. videoconferencing on 128 kbps looks much better and is much cheaper today than afew short years ago.nomadicitynetwork access must be available from multiple pointsšat work, from thehome, on the roadšwhether tethered to a wireline system or through wirelesscapabilities. different mechanisms for access will most likely have differentcharacteristics, both in the physical and logical connection, but the applicationsmust be able to scale with available resources. nomadicity (any time, anywhereaccess) is a critical capability for an advanced information infrastructure (seekatz, 1995). it bears on lower physical and services levels of the architecture aswell as middleware and application levels. the challenges of providing fornomadicity were outlined in forum comments and in a white paper by leonardkleinrock; see box 2.10. nomadic users must adapt to differing bandwidthlevels from different locations and increasingly will embrace wireless andwireline transmission at different times and locations .35 supporting themplaces a premium on interoperability and accommodation of differences in thenature of the error rate, fading behavior, interference levels, and so on betweenwireless and wireline networks as well as accommodation of multiple wirelessarchitectures that may or may not involve base stations.securitysecurity considerations will be increasingly important. although the needfor security is currently appreciated more in businesses than in homes, even inbusinesses there is limited awareness. the topic of security is well beyond thescope of this project, but contributors clearly notedmaking technology work: individual and organized end users53about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the need for capabilities that allow for the protection of individual privacy, thesecurity of funds transfer and protections for intellectual property, and theintegrity of material transmitted. several contributors commented on how thisissue is being tackled within industry domains (e.g., banking and finance,manufacturing), including attempts to use the internet more securely;deployment issues relate to securing of infrastructure links and endtoendapplications and therefore affect all levels of the architecture and all players,including users themselves.box 2.10 nomadicitythe kinds parameters we have to worry about are the usual ones: bandwidth,latency, reliability, error rate, delay, storage, processing power, interference,interoperabilityšand, in addition, size, weight, and battery power, another set ofkey concerns in the things we carry around with us. – we have to deal with theunpredictability of the user, of the network, of the platform. we have to deal withgraceful degradation. we have to scale with respect to everything: number, size,quality of service, and so on.šleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesdependence on networking activities in more and more social andeconomic activity will broaden concerns about security. irene greif describedthis process at the forum:once your community is all hooked up so that everybody can talk to everyoneelse, if you volunteer to organize a pta committee to do a surprise party forthe teachers, you are going to have to figure out whether the discussion bulletinboard that you have put in place for that process can be read by all of theteachers, the principal, some of the students, all of the parents. you will bedoing access control and database design, and building a whole application.that is not easy. we have had quite a bit of success in the business world withgroupware products, getting some of those kind of capabilities out of the handsof the skilled programmers, mis [management information systems]departments, and into the hands of office workers. but that is still very far fromwhat home users will want.concluding observationsas outlined above and based on many inputs, the steering committeeconcluded that the following capabilities are essential service features of aninformation infrastructure evolving to meet end users' varied and inmaking technology work: individual and organized end users54about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creasingly generalpurpose needs: high data rates to the end point, adequatebandwidth in both directions, multiplesession capability, continuousavailability of service, realtime and multimedia access, nomadicity, andsecurity. together, they compose a very different set than is currently available.comments by representatives of various user domains suggested concernabout two alternative and undesirable prospects. on the one hand, decisionsregarding financing, timing, bandwidth, symmetry, standards, services, andvirtually every other aspect of residential and smallbusiness access appear tomany to be driven today by the presumption that home entertainment is theresidential "killer app." industry and government service representatives,concerned about their business or functional needs, are unsure what will resultunder this scenario. would the infrastructure deployed as a result be ofsufficiently low generality to lock out either some currently viable applicationsor deployments, or some future ones? or would deployment of any sort beslowed because of uncertainty about the viability of this business model?on the other hand, responses by different infrastructure providers tovarying business pressures might result in an nii characterized byheterogeneous technologies and architectures, interoperating poorly, if at all.investment in the reengineering of access facilities to the home will be slowedby the difficulty of making an integrated business case for infrastructuredeployment, because the potential uses for infrastructure appear in a number ofbusiness sectors and are difficult to evaluate. at the same time, development ofmultiple delivery systems can foster innovation in technology and businessesand can provide more choices to meet diverse user needs and wants. willcitizens and sectors of the economy, as they become sufficiently sophisticatedin their use of a range of applications, recognize the implicit crossapplicationdemand for generalpurpose capabilities too late to motivate timely provision ofsuch capabilities?the disconnect between users and infrastucture providers must be resolvedlargely by the user and application domains better articulating their needs andmaking clear the importance of enabling broad infrastructure use. this issomething the user domains have not done well. a second approach to bridgingthe gap is to bring the infrastructure builders into the industry or sector planningand implementation processes so that the two can deal jointly with the technicaland financial models required to serve both. a good example of this approach isrepresented by the north carolina health information and communicationsalliance established by the state legislature but funded almost entirely byprivate industry. this project, truly a joint effort of state government, healthindustry professionals, health industry information vendors, and inframaking technology work: individual and organized end users55about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.structure providers, illustrates that installing infrastructure can be handled morequickly and easily than can working through the political, social, and highlevelbarriers to usešproblems that are expected to take several years to resolve.despite real concerns and choices, the nearterm barriers to enduseraccess are not the technical features of the access infrastructure. a modernmodem and internet access from a macintosh or "windows" pc constitute asufficient baseline for the next stage in widening access to generalpurposeinformation infrastructure. users today have concluded that they can experiencethe world wide web quite successfully from a home or a school over telephonelines. one possible path forward involves encouraging further use so that peoplecan learn how to benefit more fully from the information technology. ratherthan emphasizing the need for more bandwidth as a minimum, users shouldperhaps focus on minimizing barriers related to cost, ease of use, a naturalprocess of familiarization and acceptance, and maturation of standards andinterfaces, so that the consumer is better able to purchase and integrate theneeded components.the enduring issue of standards and interfaces for consumer equipment hasramifications that range to the competitive position of u.s. companies, giventhe international nature of information infrastructure goods and services. fordata access, the steering committee sees a trend toward an ethernet interface,the so called 10baset standard, as the connector for consumer data devices.36 in the television industry, the organization of the next generation of product(e.g., the eventual role of the settop box and the television) is not currentlyclear. a number of developments point to progress in the area: the advancedtelevision systems proceeding at the fcc is likely to settle on a wide range ofcharacteristics of digital systems for broadcast television, 37 the preponderanceof which will apply to all methods of network distribution; mpeg2, while nota complete system, has standardized a wide range of digital videocharacteristics, and the advanced television standard is expected to beconsistent with mpeg2; telephone companies have begun the process ofprocuring video equipment, several settling on an architectural structureconsistent with that described in the white paper by ecker and mobley andbased on a separation of security and network functionality into two partsšnetwork equipment (a network interface module) and other features inconsumer equipment (a digital entertainment terminal); and standards bodies(such as the digital audio visual council) are currently working towardstandardizing digital video over cable television systems. it should be noted,however, that there are advocates both for the marketplace setting the standardsor for technologists seeking to do themaking technology work: individual and organized end users56about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.same by setting standards prior to the introduction of a given technology. bothapproaches have advantages and disadvantages.notes1. see cstb (1994c) for a discussion of technology needed to support telework. according to arecent survey of internet users, over twothirds connect to the internet from the office asopposed to from home (see swisher, 1995).2. these comments apply primarily to white collar work, but the increasing role of serviceactivities in all manner of industry and sector implies that the kind of work that can be donefrom the home composes a growing share of the occupational mix.3. "killer app" is a term of art that refers to an application that enables the informationinfrastructure environment in a way not economically possible before. this is in markedcontrast to "killer technology," a term in the electronics industry that refers to a new technologythat drives prior technologies out of the marketplace (e.g., what solidstate electronics did tovacuum tubes).4. the need to generate adequate return on investment fuels the search for the elusive "killerapplication." while derided by some, it is a simple expression of the business appeal ofsomething that sells in large (enough) volume to support the kind of traffic aggregation thatmakes increasing bandwidth supply costeffective. the value of simply covering a significantpercentage of the market seems particularly apparent in the cable industry, which, whileconsiderably smaller and more cashpoor than the telephone industry, appears committed toextensive and expensive facilities upgrading to hybrid fiber coaxial cable systems based largelyon the revenue expectations associated with entertainment.wendell bailey and james chiddix observe in a white paper that the networks being deployedare sufficiently generalpurpose that they could support other applications besides videoentertainment if the market demands them. for example, time warner is now providingwireline telephone service to customers in rochester, new york, in competition with theincumbent telephone carrier. bailey and chiddix calculate that with 15 percent penetration ofhomes passed, the incremental cost of supporting telephony will be under $1,000 per customerin the short term. increased penetration and improvements in hardware priceperformance couldlower this cost further. (cable and telephone company entry into one another's lines of businessdepends, of course, on regulatory issues in addition to economic and technical factors.) cablesystems originally designed for delivery of video to the home do not typically have largenumbers of connections to business premises or to facilities of interexchange carriers;interconnection with the local telephone company is necessary to provide these connections, ashas occurred in the rochester case.5. because of the video component, entertainment is linked to higher bandwidth than isconventional telephony, leading some to argue that if the infrastructure is built to supportentertainment it will support other applications. the amount of support it can provide willdepend on architectural parameters (e.g., symmetry).making technology work: individual and organized end users57about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6. terrestrial television broadcasting revenues are derived overwhelmingly from advertisingand size the industry at about $30 billion annually (veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 104).7. new information and entertainment services coexist with currently available services incompeting for the consumer's attention and resources. in 1993, the average u.s. adult spent3,304 hours using communications media, such as television, radio, recorded music,newspapers, books, magazines, theatrical and videotaped movies, and video games. (thesedata, from veronis, suhler & associates, do not include time spent using telecommunicationsservices such as telephony.) this total has varied within a 3 percent band since 1989, andveronis, suhler predict only a modest 1 percent increase in the next 5 years. the most popularmedia in terms of time spent were television (1,560 hours, almost half of the total), radio (1,102hours), music (294 hours), and newspapers (169 hours). educational software and consumer online and internet services are the segments projected to increase most rapidly in terms ofconsumer use over the next 5 years, at over 20 percent and over 36 percent per year,respectively. because both start from comparatively minuscule shares of consumer time, theyhave the capacity to grow substantially without having to drive out mature services such astelevision and radio. (see veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 15)another recent survey (hamlin, 1995) by npd group found that respondents recorded about4.5 hours daily spent on "entertainment," which included televisionvideomusic, reading,hobbies, visiting friends, or outofhome entertainment, and just under 3 hours daily on "other"activities that included such disparate categories as gardening and online networking. thecontrast between the results of these studies underscores how little is really understood (orconsistently described) in terms of consumer behavior.8. kraut's home net project shows that the methodologies developed in workplaces are beingtaken into homes as well (kraut et al., 1996).9. key issues concern speed of change, kinds of change, perhaps obstacles to deployment due tonaive analysisšor absence of analysis about costbenefit distribution (as documented in olsenet al., 1993). see greif (1988) for historical background and technical and social papers. aninstructive example concerns the version manager added to lotus 123: early focus groupevaluators disliked the idea of a group spreadsheet but could grasp immediately the need foralternative versions of ranges in their individual "whatif" analyses. sometimes during thecourse of a single 2hour session, some subjects' attitudes about group spreadsheets turnedaround completely as they talked through for themselves how having personal "versioning"would then make it more likely that they could share their spreadsheets. incremental change andperceived personal payoff paved the way to acceptance of a technology that initially seemedunfamiliar and of benefit primarily to others.10. the rise of the magazine wired may be emblematic: it "has become the totem of a majorcultural movement" (keegan, 1995).11. according to irene greif, lotus development corp. has learned about the advantage ofsupplying more features than a developer can sell at the outset. people who thought that theywere buying into lotusnotes to share information later learned the value of the access controland authentication features. themaking technology work: individual and organized end users58about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.design tools also come into play in fairly short order, as end users realize that their group needssomething slightly different than other groups.12. the majority of individuals who use pc software may utilize only the basic capabilities ofthat software, without taking advantage of its more advanced features. similarly, there are thosewho hardly use video cassette recorder features beyond hitting "on" and "play" for a rentedvideo. even years of exposure to personal computers have left most end users uncomfortablewith the informationsharing potential of nii technologies. groupware systems have beeninstalled at many forwardthinking corporations only to be rejected by users who were notready to embrace such technology.13. in many instances, these issues reflected major changes taking place within a particulardomain and hold significant implications for the nii (e.g., the trends toward managed care andhomebased patient care will have profound effects on the health care domain as well as its niirelated requirements). with regard to health care, for example, the council on competitivenessobserved that "telemedicine will not be used until it is considered a proper standard of medicalcare, and it will not be considered acceptable care until it is more widely used" (coc, 1994, p.7). even industries with considerable experience using networked systems, such as banking,continue to innovate. for example, a new effort to interconnect banks, the edi bank alliancenetwork exchange, has been described as an alternative to more traditional forms of electronicdata interchange that will provide more flexibility to banks but also affect internal bookkeepingand reporting (see messmer, 1995a).in institutional settings, in particular, the accumulation of technical infrastructure relates toservice demand and use. for example, one of the biggest obstacles to deployment oflotusnotes has been lack of infrastructure. sales initially were made to large customers whocould show installed and working pc lans and serious support for networking, on the groundsthat otherwise the customer would have to make too large a change at once and would not beable to separate issues of infrastructure deployment from those of applicationlevel deployment.14. federal program attention to health care and other major domains that have been called"national challenge" areas has fostered progress in scientific and technical applications ofinformation infrastructure in those domains. as noted in the project white paper by randy katzet al., those applications involve small numbers of dedicated (and motivated) users, but theyhelp to validate the promise of information technology and illuminate domainspecificchallenges. addressed as one of the goals of the federal high performance computing andcommunications initiative, national challenges include work in digital libraries, public accessto government information, electronic commerce, civil infrastructure, education and lifelonglearning, energy management, environmental monitoring, health care, and manufacturingprocesses and products (cic, 1995). see also cat (1994a,b).15. businesses, too, are unhappy with current tax law on depreciation. the mandated 5yeardepreciation cycle on computer hardware means that new technology purchases are oftendelayed while thousands of pcs complete their depreciation term. says one chief informationofficer, "you have a tax accountantmaking technology work: individual and organized end users59about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.driving is [information systems] policy, and that's bizarre." as a result, some companies arequietly expensing their computer hardware, while others are exploring leasing options. seehalper (1995).16. affordability is a concern for small businesses as well as residences.17. the u.s. chamber of commerce and others recently launched a businessservice suite (a setof bundled specific services) aimed at small businesses (see anthes, 1995b) that includes suchresourcelocation functions.18. for example, users of collaborative software might be confused in a realtime conference ifthey are unable to make "here" and "there" references, unless a system translates these forseparated users.19. the white paper by avram miller and ogden perry discusses this point further. earlyreports of the endofyear sales patterns suggest that consumer purchases of highspeedmodems for home pcs grew, reflecting an estimated increase from 70 to 90 percent of (all) pcssold with modems, most also featuring installed software for online service access (templin,1995).20. see veronis, suhler & associates (1995), p. 313. some sources offer a higher estimate, upto 35 percent; see, for example, maresca (1995).21. other pc components, not central processing unit (cpu) or memoryrelated, that carrysignificant costs include the color display, power supply, communication interface, and diskstorage, which have improved more rapidly than the cpu. a breakthrough in the cost of thedisplay unit would rapidly contribute significantly to the prospect of developing a costreduceddata access device. the white paper by brugliera et al. notes that the display and cabinetconstitute 75 percent of the total cost of television equipment.22. see clark and rigdon (1995), ziegler (1995a), and burgess (1995). oracle has proposed a$500 "network computer" intended to allow internet access over telephone lines (see wallstreet journal, 1995c). apple computer has developed pippin, a multimedia player and internetaccess device that attaches to the television. pippin is expected to be available in 1996 for lessthan $1,000 (hamm, 1995).23. attaining universal access was the focus of a rand corporation study that called foruniversal electronic mail (anderson et al., 1995). there is an obvious economic barrier facing aportion of households that would like to own a pc. one study reported that while 59 percent ofhouseholds with income of at least $50,000 own a pc, the number is 29 percent for those in the$30,000 to $49,999 range and 19 percent for those below $30,000 (krt graphics, 1995).24. each week, 50 hours of hdtvcompatible programming is available now in the form of 35mm film used in most primetime productions.25. voice messaging, call forwarding, caller identification, and other services are obviousexamples.26. the white papers by robert roche and mary madigan give details.27. by extension, various wearable computing and communications devices are also expectedto reinforce use of information infrastructure. features and costs are even more speculative forthese products than for larger portable communications and computing devices.28. philips electronics recently announced plans for a video telephone that could be worn onthe wrist and offer internet access (bloomberg business news, 1995).making technology work: individual and organized end users60about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.29. this kind of incompatibility between cable service offerings and advanced consumerelectronics features motivated the cable compatibility element of the 1991 cable act (p.l.98549), amending 47 usc sec. 544. it required that ''[w]ithin one year after october 5, 1992,the commission shall prescribe regulations which establish minimum technical standardsrelating to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality. the commission shall updatesuch standards periodically to reflect improvements in technology. a franchising authority mayrequire as part of a franchise (including a modification, renewal, or transfer thereof) provisionsfor the enforcement of the standards prescribed under this subsection. a franchising authoritymay apply to the commission for a waiver to impose standards that are more stringent than thestandards prescribed by the commission under this subsection." the provision led to standardssetting activities (and associated debates) within the cable industry.30. the inclusion of both rented and purchased components assumes some continuation ofcurrent business practice whereby some service providers, such as cable multiple systemoperators, supply equipment to facilitate upgrades, protect against theft of service, and influencehow consumers use their offerings.31. a fully interactive hct requires about nine customintegrated circuits, 975,000 gates, andmore than 1,500 interconnections between the integrated circuits. with advances in integration,the number of required integrated circuits may be improved to perhaps two by 1998, whichwould improve the marketability of the hct to consumers.32. eventually, technology (e.g., plugin boards) may support consumer access to the verticalblanking interval, thus facilitating more direct interactivity (intercast, 1995).33. as discussed in chapter 4, there are a number of options for more advanced transmissionservices to the home. in addition to copper wire, 60 percent of u.s. homes have cable televisionservice. since 93 percent of homes are passed by cable service, further deployment of coaxaccess, as for hfc, is relatively easy in these neighborhoods. the evolution of traditional cablesystems to hybrid fiber coaxial cable increases the potential for provision of advanced networkservices with higher bandwidths.broadcast is another path to the home. there is today limited ability to carry data in the unusedportions of the video signal (e.g., the vertical blanking interval), and the anticipated move todigital video broadcast will provide much greater capacity. the rapid emergence of directbroadcast satellite is another path to the home, with similar opportunities for generalinformation delivery. interactivity for these two paths is hampered by the fact that the telephoneis the most likely back channel for the foreseeable future.cellular, and eventually pcs, telephones are also points of access from the home. however,they are lowbandwidth connections and are likely to be used for data access only whenalternative wire services are not available.34. isdn is used to support video and data conferencing, for example, but it is difficult toupload a great amount of data.35. meanwhile, software to support nomadic users is providing options for conserving onbandwidth (e.g., through compressed file transfer and transmissionmaking technology work: individual and organized end users61about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of only changed portions rather than the entirety of files) as well as remote control of networknodes (e.g., printers) and security (watt, 1995).36. ethernet is a mature and inexpensive technology. as other technologies, such asasynchronous transfer mode (atm), mature and become widespread, it is conceivable that theywould be used for such purposes.37. the fcc will be building on voluntary standards setting that is ongoing in industry.making technology work: individual and organized end users62about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3where is the business case?factors shaping investment in informationinfrastructureperceptions of business opportunities pace deployment of informationinfrastructurešhow much money can be made, with what investment and risk,over what period of time? in and around 1993, when the administration releasedits national information infrastructure: agenda for action  (iitf, 1993),private and public discourse seemed to reflect greater confidence concerningdirections and opportunities. in 1996, however, the inputs to the nii 2000project suggest that the only aspect of the business case for deployment onwhich there appears to be broad consensus is uncertainty compounded by afocus on associated risk. 1the current uncertainty is accentuated by a combination of ongoing oranticipated transitions in technology (see chapters 4 and 5), regulation andpublic policy, and industrial organization. key technology transitions includethe shift in computing power and functionality from the center to the edge ofnetworks; the separation of services from the physical infrastructure; and theshift from analog to digital storage, transmission, and processing. the keypublic policy shifts relate to relaxation of regulation and other changes incompetition policy, plus associated business incentives (e.g., permissibledepreciation schedules). supply and demand are complicated by regulation,which variously (1) affects who can enter which markets, the cost ofinterconnection, capital formation, and product and service pricing in some butnot all segments of the nawhere is the business case?63about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tional information infrastructure (nii); (2) has different implications forincumbent and newentrant enterprises; and (3) motivates some investmentdecisions based on anticipation that the framework will change. shifts inindustrial organization draw on both technology and policy trends and are fedby the declining costs of bandwidth, increasing consumer investment forinfrastructure (cable, end nodes, information services), and surging commercialinterest and activity in the internet.among market participants and analysts, there is agreement that marketsfor information and communications goods and services will grow continuouslyand that there is a variety of markets, with many kinds of investments, costs,revenue generation models, and buying patterns. there is also recognition thatmarket growth is a function of cumulating purchases and uses that, in turn,build on technical foundations (e.g., expanding priceperformance ofmicroprocessorbased devices) and behavioral ones (e.g., growing comfort andsophistication in the use of personal computers (pcs)).2 nevertheless, the lackof agreement on how much of what kind of services will likely be purchased (ata given price and time) leads alternately to hedging, experimentation, or stalling.the clearest trend is toward considerable experimentation by network,service, and content providers now and extending perhaps for another 5 years.the foundation for various experiments is a solid business case in telephony,television delivery, and (more variable) online services. at this time, though,corporate commitment to a complete strategy relating to networkbased servicesappears unrealistic, and even companies that had made public strategiccommitments have been backing off. for example, among the regional bellholding companies (rbhcs), enthusiasm has diminished for video dialtonesystems, extending to cancellation, deferral, or alteration of plans for deployingvideo delivery systems.3 the market reaction to the netscape initial publicoffering may be emblematic of the current ambivalence: despite considerableuncertainty, there is also considerable investor interest, some of it reflected inalmost incredibly high initial stock prices.4technical, business, and regulatory uncertainty is yielding a degree ofbusiness paralysis as well as experimentation. the difficulty of expanding themarket is seen in the fact that many proposed and attempted informationservices are alternative methods of delivering known products (e.g., (near)video on demand vs. video cassette rental). robert crandall of the brookingsinstitution cautioned that where capital investment requirements are high,competing wireless investments may retard progress inasmuch as they drainpotential revenues from new wireline facilities by targeting similar applications.by analogy, he noted that "cable evolved not in the novel ways that some of thepieinthesky optimists envisioned in the 1960s and 1970s, but rather byproviding uswhere is the business case?64about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more sports, more movies, more replays of sitcoms, and perhaps more newsprograms." on the other hand, comments generated by the project suggest thatsuch variations on a theme are more likely to come from the obvious players,the existing businesses, and that newer ideas hatched by entrepreneurs may beless visible, at least at first.5box 3.1 a 20year horizon?[w]hat is wrong with 20 years? if you look at the evolution of infrastructure, 20year is close to a microsecond. if you look at how long it took for digital technologyto roll out just into the telephone switching plant, that was a 20year process. if youlook at the development of the pc, which we tend to think of as happeningovernight, that was literally a 20year process as well. if you look at the timeneeded to introduce any of the fundamental technologies over the last three or fourdecades, it has been a 15, 20, or 25year process. indeed, if fiber optics in thehome was 20 years from now, i would say that would be a revolutionarily shorttime, given the fact that the marketplace is going to have to pay for all of this. and ifyou tried to make it faster, you would probably be distorting the marketplace. youwould have to do it with some sort of premature subsidies. consequently, i amlistening to the conversation and saying i do not really understand why we arebemoaning the 20year period. we should really be rejoicing.šhoward frank, advanced research projects agencyconfident of the potential for innovation, james chiddix of time warnercable observed that "there are thousands of people who will begin to putcreative energy into trying to find ways to harness these technologies to findsome new wonders and surprises. it is very hard to predict what those things areand what their social implications are. but i think that time is the only issue,whether it is 5 years or 20." howard frank of the advanced research projectsagency (arpa), reflecting on the forum discussions, maintained that 20 yearsseems reasonable. see box 3.1.information infrastructure businesses can be split roughly into twocategoriesšfacilities and servicesšand the investment required accordinglycan be incremental or "greenfield," can support processes that are capital orlaborintensive, or can be long or shortlived or sunk.6 particular investmentchoices will drive the amount of bandwidth available, the features that can thusbe provided with the bandwidthšespecially openness and symmetry giving thecapacity for upstream communicationšand the application services enabled forthe public as a result. caution and anxiety about the size and profitability of themarket increase with the degree to which a business is dominated by facilities,and therewhere is the business case?65about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fore by capital investment. investments in facilities are crucial for expandingthe deployment of bandwidth, while investments in services that make use ofthe facilities and in devices that make use of the services are lower in magnitudeand shift at least some of the cost away from the facilities providers. thegreatest costšand the highest level of riskšappears to be associated withdeploying access circuits, facilities serving homes. three alternatives seem tobe seen for the nearterm deployment of networkbased infrastructure:1. some people will spend large amounts of money to take theinfrastructure (especially access lines) one big step forward,installing technology we will live with for a long time; or2. we will live with access technology that evolves continuously, notin big jumps or after long pauses; or3. we cannot afford to do what companies or commentators arecontemplating. 7the remainder of this chapter outlines several issues: the investmentchallenges associated with evolving the nii, the role of the internet, andalternative models for generating revenue to recover and drive futureinvestment. a number of themes emerged from the different inputs to theproject; this chapter reports, as well as comments on, some of the tone or flavorimparted by different types of facilities and service providers (and by industryanalysts) to the debate on information infrastructure investments. who saidwhat is sometimes as meaningful as what is said at all.investment in facilitiesthe problem of how much bandwidth to invest infiber is being deployed by many parties, setting the stage for competition,since as noted in chapter 4, sunk investments in fiber facilities can supportmultiple application services. the investments are being made despiteuncertainty that was captured somewhat cynically by jack thompson ofgnostech incorporated when he observed:– [t]he telephone people are saying, i can't make money in telephonyanymoreši have to get into cable. and the cable guys seem to be saying, ican't make any more money in cable; i have to get into telephony. so why iseverybody trying to get into a business where there is no money left?j.c. redmond et al. of gte laboratories address this query specifically ina white paper, noting two possibilities: either current participants canwhere is the business case?66about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modify their networks "to handle the total communications needs of customers(voice, data, video) by relatively modest incremental investments"šfosteringcompetition to dominate and survivešor unprecedented growth and demandfor new services may occur, fostering entry into adjacent or complementarybusinesses. given these possibilities, and moderated by the difference in thecosts to upgrade a cable tv system to support telephony or to upgrade atelephone system to offer broadband services (telecommunications reports,1995i), companies are both posturing and making actual investments in thehopes of reaping the advantages that may accrue to successful first movers.in the context of investment in facilities for access to information, theproblem of whether, when, and where to gamble on fiber is emphasized bytelephone companies, because deployment of fiber represents a high fixedcostinvestmentšcreating the desire for highvolume use to recover costs.8 seebox 3.2. in telephony, despite compelling arguments for fiber in backbonefacilities, the lack of local traffic volume may make deployment of fiber to thehousehold unlikely in the near future outside of highdensity urban areas.9 forcable companies, the upgrade path to fiber is clearer. because they already havecoaxial cable networks reaching into homes, cable firms are building fiber outfrom the center toward homes in a hybrid architecture (see chapter 4).noting that net capital stock has been declining with changes in accountingmeasures, if not in economic terms in the telephony business, robert crandallunderscored the need to "keep the flow of new funds coming into this sector ofthe economy if we hope to build these extremely riskyšparticularly if they areto be wirelinešsystems with a substantial amount of fixed costs." with a nodto the major presence of telephone companies, he estimated that "if the nii is tobe built by established telephone companies with technology now underdevelopment, it would probably require a near doubling of these companies'assets." 10the scale of the investment, combined with both competition andconstraints on the nature and remuneration provided by business activities togenerate revenue, poses the threat of asset stranding to telephone companies.stewart personick of bell communications research expressed the problem inthe context of sustaining demand, in a competitive environment, for twowaycommunications capacity:if i had to spend $30 a month personally to operate a server, and i found outthat for $20 a month i could put my material on someone else's server, with a155megabitpersecond incoming line, redundancy, and everything else, whywould i month after month pay the $30?hal varian of the university of california at berkeley explained that theproblem is one of survival over the long term, given the underlying economicsof the business. he spun scenarios (see chapter 6, box 6.4) thatwhere is the business case?67about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.might arise if "chronic excess capacity" were to result from "two or morebroadband wires to the house providing essentially the same service." otherthings being equal, there would be price wars, producers could not cover fixedinvestments in facilities, and there would be financial distress.box 3.2 in search of volumejoel engel of ameritech explained that "fiber is an extremely costeffectivetransmission medium. it is not costeffective because it is cheap, but because it hasvery high capacity. the unit cost is very low, so anywhere you can aggregatetraffic, where you can share among many users, the unit cost is quite costeffective.but, if you run fiber out to the individual subscribers, individual homes or smallbusinesses, they do not generate enough traffic to support that cost, and they haveto pay the cost of the whole thing because it is dedicated." in his white paperbellsouth's robert blau describes the regional bell holding company (rbhc)environment as one in which competitive entry into the relatively lucrative exchangeaccess and intralata (local access and transport area) toll markets has bothconstrained rbhc traffic growth and led to lower prices, depressing growth inearnings. in addition, increases in rbhcs' fixed costs as a proportion of total costs(as may occur with upgrades) may make earnings more volatile.jim chiddix of time warner cable spoke of his company's full servicenetwork experiment in orlando, florida, as "an expensive project. but if there is avolume market there, the nature of the technologies that we are discussing willforce prices down very quickly." john redmond, reflecting on gte's experiment incerritos, california, emphasized the need for low prices to induce use: "it was notclear that people were going to pay that much more for anything that they could getfree off of the television now." intel corporation's kevin kahn related the problem tomass production in the businesses of information appliances and services: ''at theend of the day, the fewer the choices, the higher the volumes; the higher thevolumes, the lower the prices, and the more ubiquitousštherefore, the moreattractive as a consumer productšit is."risk aversion pervades the comments and concerns expressed by thebiggest players in the nii arena, the telephone companies (especially the localexchange carriers; lecs), which appear to face both high costs for theassociated access circuit investments and high uncertainty in expected circuituse.11 see box 3.3. in his white paper robert blau of bellsouth points out thattelephone companies can and do choose to invest in apparently less risky"opportunities outside local networks," and he suggests that "decisions by bellcompany managers to accelerate the introduction of advanced network gear didnot have a positive effect on shareholder returns."12 his analysis points out thatinvestment is deterred by the prospect of delays between deployment (andassociated investment) and the generation of returns on that investment. (investwhere is the business case?68about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ment advisors alex. brown & sons inc. (1995), however, have recommendedagainst considering earnings as the key valuation metric for online serviceproviders because they are "investing heavily ahead of expected revenues";revenue (subscriber) growth and projected cash flow are better indicators. otherfinancial analysts reportedly expect delayed returns and advise postponingprofits in the interest of investing for growth and position (higgins, 1995b).)box 3.3 risk aversion and investment in circuitsbusiness says you spend money where you think you can make money. youdo not spend money today to make money 25 years from now.šedmond thomas, nynex science and technology inc.even in a noncompetitive environment, if you invest the capital significantlybefore the revenues come in, you are in deep trouble, because typically the interestthat you have to pay when you borrow the money is about equal to the rate ofreturn when the revenue starts coming in. when there is a 2 or a 3year gap inbetween those two events, you never catch up.šjoel engel, ameritechif shareholders believe that riskadjusted returns on investment in advancednetwork technologies will remain competitive with returns on alternative investmentopportunities, then those technologies will be deployed and the new servicefeatures they make possible will be brought to the market in a timely manner. if, onthe other hand, shareholders do not regard prospective returns on networkinvestment to be high enough to compensate for risk incurred, then lesser amountsof discretionary capital spending will be committed to new network technologies.šrobert blau, bellsouth corporationinvestment posture also reflects the nature of the business; the degree ofoptimism and the aggressiveness of investment prospects voiced by contributorsto the nii 2000 project varied with the speaker's affiliation. leslie vadasz ofintel corporation related the differences in attitudes about financing to thedifferences in culture between the computing and communications sectors: "i goto computer meetings, and we don't talk about how much we are going to investin this, or how much return we are going to get on that. we don't ask, is there amarket? is there no market? we run as fast as we can." vadasz expressedconcern that absent comparable attitudes among telecommunications providers,"the capability of the access device is going to go up, and up, and up, and up,and thewhere is the business case?69about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bandwidth available for a [public switched] network environment is not goingto keep up with it." the conservatism voiced by telephone company executivescorresponds to their observed pace of investment; the impatience voiced bycomputer companies, among others, begs the question of whether a differentoutlook, combined with prudent investment strategy, might acceleratedeployment. yet cultural differences do reflect some fundamental differences inthe computing and communications markets, such as the greater uncertainty incommunications markets; differences in market power and industry structure(e.g., monopolies may be slower to innovate); and regulatory constraints, all ofwhich contribute to a tendency of communications providers not to run as fastas many computer firms.13federal licenses as an influence on deployment of newwireless systemsin contrast to the uncertainties regarding deployment of wireline facilities,the minimum investment in facilities for wireless cellular and personalcommunication service (pcs; also paging and other mobile radio) systems ismore or less determined by spectrum licensing buildout requirements and bycompetitive pressures. while licensesand competitive pressures drive theminimum rate of investment, license holders may also invest in upgradesrelative to licensure requirements, which may affect the number of cell sites,interoperability (capability for roaming), and other features; the term set forth inlicenses do not precisely determine deployment. 14, 15licenses do not obviate the risks associated with investment (and arguablycould increase them to the extent that deployment proceeds faster than apparentdemand would justify). industry representatives privately acknowledge greatuncertainty regarding the evolution of wireless systems, as noted by one projectreviewer: "the industry is growing so fast and in so many directions that fewpeople really have a grasp of the whole." one indicator is the reported scalingback by licensees (0.5 mhz) of interactive video and data services of theirexpectations for the original target markets. moreover, while attempting toreconceptualize the services they can offer and reduce financial risks, they maytransmit only test signals to meet federal communications commissionrequirementsšan illustration of the fact that investment and deployment do notnecessarily add up to commercial service availability (see arlen, 1995a; andmills, 1995b).although cellular license holders were not allowed to bid for pcs licensesin their own territory, the two markets are expected to coevolve, with the pcsshare of the combined market increasing and interoperabilitywhere is the business case?70about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing to help sustain the cellular market base.16 a key positioning elementwas the success of the top broadband pcs license winners in aggregating bidsto achieve nationwide geographic coverage and contiguous spectrum coverage.private mobile services (including those for police and fire protection and thegrowing industry for unittounit communications for personal and businessuse) already support tens of millions of units in service worldwide, with leadingedge technologies in use and planned.while regional small wireless systems involve industrywide and majorcityinvestments on the order of $20 billion,17 spacebased satellite systems aimedat provision of global telephony (voice and data) include teledesic's $9 billion,840satellite, lowearthorbit system; hughes communications' $3 billion, 8satellite system; motorola's 66satellite iridium system; and many more(samuels, 1995; cole, 1995). these global systems will be able to provide"cellularlike" service throughout the united states. the white paper by robertblau cites a wefa group forecast that suggests that excess capacity will resultfrom commercial wireless investments.18 however, since some unused capacityis normal for lumpy infrastructure investments, the key unknown is the size andduration of the gap between capacity and demand.investing to achieve infrastructure generalitycompounding the problem of how much bandwidth to invest in is theproblem of deciding to what extent that bandwidth should be provided in ageneral and flexible form. decisions about providing for generality affectdeployment of services, over and above deployment of facilities. see box 3.4.the computer industry designs and builds computers that are used for a widerange of applications, not just for a single predetermined application such asword processing. uncertainty about the eventual application forces thedevelopment of devices with general and flexible characteristics. as discussedin chapter 4, the internet similarly attempts to be a general infrastructure thatcan support a range of applications. this generality provides insurance againstthe unpredictability of demand. a specific example that came up in severaldiscussions at the workshop and forum was whether it was justifiable to installsignificant bandwidth for traffic from the user into the network, usuallydiscussed as upstream, backchannel, or symmetric bandwidth. symmetry is aquality inherent in telephony (albeit with limited bandwidth). a related issue isthe extent to which the capabilities of the network should be provided in anopen manner.open interfaces may stimulate the creation of new applications but mayalso open the door to unwelcome competition. at the forum and inwhere is the business case?71about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.4 investment for generalitythe real question is, are we going to have enough capacity in this basichardware infrastructure and some of the supporting application software that makespossible differentiation so that we can have appropriate differentiation where it isneeded?šsteven wildman, northwestern universitythe most important characteristic of the nii from the perspective of users isprobably the flexibility to accommodate new applications in the future, most ofwhich we cannot anticipate today – [allowing] application developers to target abroad set of nii infrastructure and terminals with new applications without having todeal with an exponentially growing set of new cases as new technologies aredeveloped, but rather – develop generic applications that can target the entireinfrastructure and all of the terminals out there, no matter whether they are wirelesspda[personal digital assistant]type devices or desktop supercomputers orstandard telephony devices. that is not very easy to achieve. it requires a verycareful definition of architecture, and scalability of applications to the capabilities ofterminals and to the capabilities of the transmission infrastructure. one of the keycharacteristics is the capability to deploy new applications without any modificationsto the network itself. because once you require modifications to the network, thenthat puts a huge obstacle, economic and otherwise, in the way of new applications.šdavid messerchmitt, university of california at berkeleyi would like to see systems that allow upstream bandwidth from individualhomes to be considerably higher –, and then deal with the aggregate upstreambandwidth on the hfc [hybrid fiber coaxial cable] system, for example, as a trafficengineering problem. if we do a fixed static allocation of upstream bandwidth, wehave precluded any reasonable way of saying, "i am going to put a media server inmy home because i have a really clever idea for serving media on the internet." onthe other hand, if it is strictly a question of doing traffic analysis on a deployedsystem, and then deploying additional spectrum or changing the bandwidthreservations around in order to increase the upstream bandwidth when it becomesavailable, then that is a much more hopeful situation. – i have some difficultybelieving that in a system with 125 homes you are going to find 125 web suppliersthat are running full media out of their homes. what i have no difficulty believing isthat you will find, within the relatively nearterm future, some people out there whoare doing that. if the allocations are static, such people are precluded from runningfull media out of their homes. if the allocations are dynamic allocations, then it isreasonable to experiment and to let people have that kind of outbound bandwidthwhile others are simply sitting there, pointing and clicking with their infrared control,and we will not have precluded part of the space for purposes of experimentation.škevin kahn, intel corporationwhere is the business case?72about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.his white paper, david clark of the massachusetts institute of technologyrelated observations from the internet environment to the evolution of thetelephone system (see chapter 4), describing its process of opening up certaininterfaces:the reason we want to look at architecture is that the decision to provide aninterface, both in a technical sensešwhether to implement it at allšor in abusiness perspectivešwhether to open itšis in fact a critical businessdecision. – if you open an interface, then that is where your competitors showup.providing for such openness may have broader business ramifications aswell. for example, the steering committee noted some concern in the businesscommunity lest open access for new services be invoked as political grounds toforce provision of mature services in an open way. (some cable providers, forinstance, have expressed the concern that providing open access services suchas the internet might establish a precedent suggesting that video services shouldbe similarly open. the extreme form of this concern is fear that the eventualconsequence of open access to specific service platforms will be the impositionof a common carriage status on all services.)openness and bandwidth symmetry were focal points of discussion in thejanuary workshop; the inability of people to quantify markets for these qualitiesseems to lead to market trials and deployment plans with limited openness andlimited upstream bandwidth. overall, comments by representatives of variousindustries suggested that more closed and proprietary service packages seemedto offer more promise for profits, a view anecdotally supported by reports thatwall street attaches higher value to ventures with some element of proprietary,differentiating technology. other participants, notably those associated with thecomputer hardware and software industries, suggested that the open nature ofthe internet model may provide more stimulation for innovation.uncertainty about the market looms large when it comes to forecastingdemand for general infrastructure qualities and associated services.considerable skepticism is expressed by telecommunications industries andindustry analysts about the demand for symmetric communication. 19 observedgraham mobley of scientificatlanta:what will the consumer really want to do with the interactive services, andhow much is he willing to pay? there have been projections that show that,with interactive services, you could probably increase revenues by a factor oftwo between broadcast and incremental interactive services. on the other hand,nobody really knows what those interactive services are yet. therefore, cablesystems are not sure how much cost and investment to put into providing fullinteractivity.where is the business case?73about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.according to joel engel of ameritech, part of the confusion on this topiccomes from a failure to distinguish symmetric applications from symmetricnetworks. networks will support multiple applications, which will havediffering requirements for symmetry. engel argued that the overall demand isfor asymmetry:[d]uring any prime time period pick up the fiber or the coax and cut it andlook at the bits going in both directions. you are going to see that in theaggregate, the total traffic is going to be highly asymmetric because of all ofthe services that do not require any upstream at all.the cable industry's plans to incrementally provide greater upstreamcapacity (see the section "incremental increases" below) reflect its uncertaintiesabout consumer demand for symmetry and about the costs and revenuesassociated with providing more generality.inputs to the project attested to telecommunications providers' beliefs inthe profitability of infrastructure that is not fully open or symmetric. forexample, tim clifford, previously with sprint, questioned the extent of the needfor openness and interoperability, and at&t corporation's mahal mohanargued at the forum that interoperability mattered most at lower architecturallevels. see box 3.5.the problem telephone companies see with openness is the seeminginexorability of being reduced to a commodity transport business: those whomake investments face freerider competition and the prospect of being unableto recover costs.20 by contrast, closed systems provide more of an incentive toinnovate and be a first mover, and the various experiments with more or lessclosed systems offering different combinations of services suggest acompetition to be first with the winning formula. hal varian suggested that thiswas the problem with "plain old" internet transport service: "there are nobarriers to entry. there is no proprietary technology, no special inputs. sinceinternet transport is an undifferentiated commodity, consumers are going to buyon the basis of price." however, several internet service providers do useproprietary technology (e.g., some in routingšadvanced networks andservices inc.; some in securityšuunet, ans; and some in networkmanagementšmci, ans), which raises questions about the relative costs andsuccess of technologybased attempts to differentiate service offerings. moregenerally, these examples illustrate a variety of options for internet serviceproviders to differentiate their services without getting into the contentbusiness, such as control of bandwidth, security, private virtual networks,alternative access (e.g., wireless), roaming, multicast, and (good) networkmanagement.viacom's edward horowitz cautioned that "the incentive is to build thesenetworks to the point where there are maximum barriers to compewhere is the business case?74about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tition for a network visàvis another one and not go further." horowitz notedthat there are many points (such as operating system, storage, transport) in hiscontentcreating and contentdistributing business at viacom where he couldface higher costs because of the constrained choices of services that arise as aconsequence of "only one solution for a network." he emphasized the need foropen access to the settop device, explaining that "it is not a box per se; it is theprocess by which you extract information from transportation and you get itdisplayed or [converted] into usable form."box 3.5 interoperabilityservice providers want to differentiate themselves through advancedtechnology (such as better service) and through information services (or content).that tends to drive one away from interoperability. so, as we move into thisenvironment of competitive services, i think we have to start thinking about whatthe real need for interoperability is. does it truly have to be globally seamless orcan we allow essentially closed groups to provide interoperability through a limitedset of interconnect points?štim clifford, dyncorp (formerly with sprint)the interoperability is at a transport level, being able to get messages across,back, and forth. but the feature functionality is at a different dimension.1šmahal mohan, at&t corporation1as illustration, discussions are ongoing in industry to minimize incompatibility amongearly pcs systems, possibly by developing hardware to support multiple protocols. seecsenger (1995) and wexler (1995b).horowitz's concerns are examined in the context of alternative industryand government perspectives in a white paper by attorney jonathan band.commenting on how microsoft's competitive success has inspired argumentsand action by different industry groups, band observes:microsoft hopes to dominate the market for the operating system for the "settop box"šthe entry point to the information infrastructure into individualhomes or business. by controlling the standard for the settop box operatingsystem, microsoft will be able to exercise control over access to the entireinfrastructure. microsoft wants to encourage thirdparty vendors to developapplications that will run on its operating system; the more applications, themore desirable the operating system bewhere is the business case?75about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.comes and the more likely that the market will adopt it as a de facto standard.at the same time, microsoft wants to prevent the development of a competingsettop box operating system that is compatible with all the microsoftcompatible applications.21band discusses how the word "open" has been used by various industrysectors to describe interfaces that are controlled or protected in some way insupport of particular business interests. an important issue is that innovators ofnew features, functions, and interfaces may view these as valuable intellectualproperty and may wish to derive revenues from their use. standards bodies thatspecify open network standards must balance the rights of creators with theneed for users to have assured right to use the standards on predictable andreasonable terms.building on the implied potential for unbundling, james chiddix arguedthat "when our capacity is not limited, it is not in our business interest toimpede our customers' access to any service that they want to pay for." alsoreflecting on the changing cable environment, general instrument's quincyrodgers observed that "the customers are demanding open systems. they aredemanding licensing. – people are insisting that their networks will, forinstance, support multiple operating systems." wendell bailey of the nationalcable television association pointed out that the facilities by themselves donot guarantee openness, which also derives from business strategies:cable modems are about supplying wideband access to data service, [alsoincluding] multimedia clips or video in motion. but – they will not give youaccess to cable channels that are not carried by your cable operator. the fact isthat had there been such a model 15 years ago, you would not know what toask for now, because there would be no programs or services. people like thosein the cable television industry paid to create them, to put them up there to runon their platforms. now you would like a switched network to get at all ofthem. someday you will have that: you will have that when the incrementalcost of providing that is reasonablešwhen there is a business to be had forproviding that.as chiddix acknowledged, "clearly fiber to the curb with one fiber takingtraffic in each direction lends itself well to totally symmetrical traffic, whereashybrid fiber coaxial cable, as it is being implemented, is significantlyasymmetrical in its capacity." similar observations can be made aboutbroadcasting, which delivers considerable bandwidth that is controlled by thebroadcaster.the issue of who controls access to and use of circuits and who benefitsfrom associated revenues is key. mused john redmond, "we are going to haveto bundle our services, because we are going to have to go to customers and puttogether things they want. it may not be all ourwhere is the business case?76about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.services. it may be some of yours, and you may have to work with someoneelse to put a package together that someone wants." these comments appearedto focus on bundling with content providers, but they could apply equally toservices associated with other kinds of applications, as anticipated in chapter 2.stewart personick, noting that internetworking does not have to imply fullintegration of services, suggested that part of the problem was one of gettingstarted:there are two different meanings of interoperability. i can have large verticallyintegrated suppliers that represent closed systems internally, and they canalways gateway to each other so that they can exchange messages. customerson one system can access information on another. the question is, will large,integrated, competitive suppliers voluntarily allow niche players to leverageoff of their investments? that is, will they open up inside their system so thatsomeone who has a better server, application, or user interface can just use thatlimited advantage and start a business? i think that it is certainly not likely thatwe will have that type of openness, where there are open interfaceseverywhere, in the near term. however, it may be a very good longtermobjective because, as we know, that type of openness does promote innovationand does promote driving prices down.consistent with personick's speculation, the web and even the telephonesystem appear to provide counterexamples to arguments favoring closedsystems.22 thus, telecommunications executives also acknowledge the changein incentives provided by expanding bandwidth. as suggested above, greaterbandwidth raises questions about how to maximize the use of the deployedcapacity. noted engel, "perhaps sharing the cost to the individual customeracross many, many services may be the way to break the code on the last mile."from facilities to services and applicationsalthough the facilities owners dominate the public debate overtelecommunications policies, they are only a part of the process of deployingthe nii. separate innovation and rollout are also needed in services, especiallyservices other than commodity transportšthose relating to content delivery anda variety of communications and information applications.compared with deployment of facilities, deployment of services andapplications involves a larger number of players, in part because such playersneed not own their own facilities. market entry is cheaper, since it is drivenmore by software and human resources; capital to supply some services (thecanonical high school student in the home basement)where is the business case?77about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may be relatively small, involving leased circuits, switches or routers, andvarious servers.balancing investmentšsoftware ''capital"stanford university's gio wiederhold suggested in a white paper that "[t]here is an optimal trajectory in balancing investments in the systemsinfrastructure versus software application support." in at least the health carearena, the focus of his paper, he recommended moving "support to theinformation processing infrastructure, so that relevant applications can be builteasily and the customers can be satisfied." duane adams of arpa noted thatthe conceptual framework for that balance remains uncertain, in part because ofuncertainties surrounding software system interoperability. he remarked onopportunities for providing services that are basically tools to help thedevelopers create products that will become available over the nii. thatprospect was echoed by edward horowitz of viacom incorporated, whocharacterized five environments provided (or constrained) by informationinfrastructure for generating and distributing content, relating their value tousers to their degree of openness (box 3.6). similarly, charles ferguson ofvermeer technologies maintained in a white paper that software and networkinteroperability both depend on unbundling "viewers, servers, tools, operatingsystems, specific information services, and/or internet access provision witheach other."adams' observations also seemed to anticipate the explosion of interest, inlate 1995, in sun microsystem's java programming language for developingdistributed applications. java programs can be transferred from a server to aremote site over the network as needed, which expedites the deployment anduse of new applications. ferguson echoed the general point about softwarebased tools in his paper; see box 3.6.the separation of services from facilitiesš broadening thepotential contentthe applications business is the umbrella under which fall concerns about"content." inputs to the nii 2000 project underscored that the informationinfrastructure is an arena for both content as a product and content as abyproduct of other activity. content includes not only "packaged" contentprovided as a business activity, but also informal or amateur content in the formof material shared by individual creators in varying formats (voice, numericaldata, image, video), and content communicated as an adjunct to other, highervalue activities (e.g., for electronic commerce or distributed and telework; seecstb, 1995c).where is the business case?78about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3.6 software and other toolsstateoftheart commercial technologies applicable to the internet includevisual tools and wysiwyg [whatyouseeiswhatyouget] techniques that enableend users to develop applications that previously required programming, clientserver architectures, online help systems, platformindependent softwareengineering techniques, and systematic quality assurance and testingmethodologies. adobe, quark, powersoft, the macintosh gui [graphical userinterface], and even microsoft have used these techniques to make software easierto use. if these techniques were applied to internet software, the result could be ahuge improvement in everyone's ability to use, communicate, publish, and findinformation.šcharles h. ferguson,"the internet, the word wide web, and open information services: how tobuild the global information infrastructure"there is [1] an authoring environment, how you get your ideas and visionsdeveloped; [2] storage; [3] the transport; [4] deciphering for use or display; and [5]– invoicing, collecting the money. i look to the nii as being able to support multipleoperating systems, competitive operating systems, in all five of these environmentswithout permitting one operating system or one set of users to block those ofanother.šedward horowitz, viacom inc.content as a product is the emphasis of publishing, entertainment, andother businesses. as edward horowitz argued, "you have no bytes and bitswithout intellectual property; you have no business without something toconvey." some market analysts have gone so far as to suggest that the value ofinformation about a service can exceed that of the actual service.23 horowitz'scomments on the importance of packaging and marketing to content providersshowed that information infrastructure can be important for distributing bothinformationbased products and information about those products.ongoing developments suggest that the information infrastructure plays akey role in such trends as marketing goods as streams of services. the niifacilitates direct contact between advertisers and consumers, and in the processit is producing changes such as those observed for product "branding."24 a keydevelopmentšor sign of nii maturityšwill be the shift in emphasis away fromthe tools of access (appliances, networks) to the services and functionalitydelivered. market success on the nii may require figuring out how to sellcomputing and information profitably,where is the business case?79about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.much as manufacturers seek to sell a lifetime of clean clothes instead ofpackages of soap, ongoing oral care instead of toothpaste, pet care rather thandog food, and so on.depending on who is speaking, "free" or nofee information can be aproduct (as for scholars), a loss (where intellectual property is appropriated in away that bypasses a compensation system sought by the owner), or acomplement to a product that is intended to motivate the buyer. as terisasystems/commercenet's allan schiffman noted, "in cyberspace there is thepossibility of having a good deal more shelf space, but still the necessity ofcompeting for the attention span of prospective purchasers."perhaps because of the internet's legacy as a source of nofee informationgenerated in the research, education, and library contexts, and perhaps becauseof uncertainty about how to charge for intellectual property, several peoplespoke of the internet's value as a source of complementary information aboutcommercial products. andrew lippman of mit spoke generally about theinternet's potential for navigating various reservoirs of information; daniellynch of interop company and cybercash inc. spoke about the potential for theinternet to foster global brand identification. edward horowitz described actualuses of the internet as a marketing and promotion vehicle (see box 3.7). similarexperiences and ambitions have been chronicled in business press reports on awide variety of efforts to use the internet and web for advertising andpromotion, with some degree of contention among directly generated andadvertising agency efforts.25peter huber of the manhattan institute cautioned against assuming that thecontent tail would wag the infrastructure dog, inasmuch as communicationstransport businesses are the largest information infrastructure businesses interms of revenues. even factoring out known levels of data traffic overtelephony networks, their size attests to a huge market composed of humanstalking to each other. other contributors commented on the enduring strength ofcommunications relative to sharing of packaged information. for example, pastpresident of prodigy ross glatzer reminded forum participants that "all peoplecommunicate, but only a small percentage of the population really cares aboutany one topic of information."consistent with glatzer, michael north of north communications assertedthat rather than assume that the market will favor "networkcentric versus usercentric" services, we should expect people to be both "consumers ofinformation sometimes and – producers of information sometimes. sometimeswe are in readonly mode, and we like to see what others have to say, andsometimes we would like to be publishers ourselves." the separation of servicesfrom facilities enables both kinds ofwhere is the business case?80about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.behavior (assuming some degree of symmetry), and both will fuel marketgrowth.box 3.7 promotional information uses of theinternetthere are certain things that go over the internet which we love. we arepromoting a new movie. we throw it up on the internet, on our home page. when astar trek movie came up, we had half a million visits in six weeks through twomillion or three million pages of scripts and various other things downloaded duringthat period of time. the people who design the home page were ecstatic. – you donot get any money for it. the cost of creating that content comes out of themarketing budget, the marketing and promotion budget to manage the expectation.simon and schuster, for example, has huge amounts of educational programs.when you sell a program that consists of textbooks and ancillary material, thetextbooks are what they want to get paid for and the ancillary material comes alongwith it. we are probably going to put the ancillary material up on the internet.šedward horowitz, viacom inc.the internet and its use for businesseffects on provision of goods and serviceshow will the internet or other information services affect the basiceconomics of contentproviding businesses, which have historically been quiterisky, with a much higher rate (and expectation) of failure than, say,telecommunications? steven wildman of northwestern university explainedthat hollywood economics recognize that "for motion pictures, 10 percent ofthem make a profit; 90 percent fail. television programs aren't much better. cdroms are looking similar." he suggested a need "to develop a financialinfrastructure to average or aggregate those risks," as is currently done formotion pictures and television programs. wendell bailey described how thisriskiness is apparent in cable program turnover: "at the 1995 national cabletelevision association convention in dallas, texas, there were 27 new[program producers] seeking access to cable networks. i have been in the cableindustry for 14 years, and i counted up 181 programmers that i had seen at thatshow over the last 14 years that no longer exist today because no one wantedthem." yet the (current) cost of deploying a web site is much, much smallerthan the cost of making a movie or a cd. the result is much moreexperimentation and enthusiasm, since the definition of "success" (e.g., costrecovery) is muchwhere is the business case?81about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.different. this differential risk may lead to changes in the overall mix of contentavailable through the information infrastructure. in the short term, cost recoveryis an issue here as well as in other information infrastructure businesses; onlineservice providers, for example, have reportedly frustrated some contentproviders with revenue sharing terms that favor themselves, but thesearrangements, like pricing of internet service provider offerings generally, arevolatile (zelnick, 1994).a broad view of the information infrastructure and of trends in informationsupply and demand provides evidence that onetomany communications isbeginning to lose some of its effectiveness and efficiency.26 trends in productdiversification and customization suggest that if the slogan of the industrialrevolution was the manufacturer's or retailer's statement, "this is what i have,don't you want it?"šthe wave of the future is signified instead by theconsumer's demand, "this is what i need, can you provide it?" the directionand nature of the flow of information may well change considerably, with adecline in the tendency of businesses to treat consumers as either target ordatabasešrather, the manufacturer and the retailer will become both. thus, forexample, almost all print (and much television) advertising now contains an 800number, even if the objective of the advertising is to enhance a brand image;this practice is now extending to web and internet addresses. the growth of theinternet and the web themselves has been fueled by consumergenerated needs.drawing on his analyses of the television business, wildman suggestedthat greater individual control over the selection of information products couldhave profound impacts on various kinds of contentpublishing businesses:if the editorial function can be put in the viewers' hands, [to do] the pickingand choosing, the viewers can find what they want. then the power and theeconomic justification for being a network or a channel bundler is dramaticallyreduced. if we lose the networks, we have lost the major force in televisionover the last 50 years.wildman also suggested that changes could come as a result of ongoingaudience fragmentation (arising from greater ease in targeting segments and theincreasing difficulty of building a national audience).at the january workshop, j.m. tenenbaum of enterprise integrationtechnologies corp./commercenet speculated about the evolution of internetbased interaction to support more individualized services, including personalwebs and group webs:[e]veryone is – going to be able to grab things over the net that are ofinterest, annotate them, link them into their own things, post them on their ownweb server, and then selectively share some of those thingswhere is the business case?82about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with their friendsšinitially by providing access to a server or posting them ona group server which has broader access out into the world.charles ferguson argues that the web offers "the opportunity to liberatecomputer users, publishers, and information providers from the grip of theconventional online services industry," which he likens to the mainframecomputer industry because "it maintains its profitability only by chargingextremely high royalties and by holding proprietary control over closedsystems." rhetoric aside, the web clearly facilitates direct communicationsbetween information creators and consumers, which will affect the shape of avariety of intermediate industries, including publishing and advertising.the trend toward greater individual control across different kinds ofnetworks and media raises questions about prospects for providercontrolledservice packages, including those associated with contemporary market trials.similarly, notwithstanding existing provider comfort with asymmetry, oneinterpretation of recent shifts in broadcast company ownership is that despitetheir imperfections, interactive services and other uses of computers are shiftingconsumers' attention away from broadcast media, constraining expectations forgrowth in the business value of broadcasting.27the internetšlayering, incrementalism, and diversificationthe development of the internet epitomizes the separation of services fromfacilities. the rise of a variety of internet access providers derives from layeredinfrastructure architecture, which is described in chapter 4. one layer'smaterials are the next layer's framework. activity is happening at all layers atonce, beginning with a teasing apart of lowlevel services from physicalinfrastructure in the form of simple internet access business. this situationcomplicates assessing who owns what, who resells what, capitalization and risklevels, entry requirements, and so on. on a rough basis, however, businessopportunities can be seen in the area of transport service and access supply,"middleware" services, and applications.first there are the internet service and access providers. although there isno clean categorization, some of these are commodity providers and some addhigher value (e.g., information service providers that provide bothcommunications and information services); some target individual users(aiming for large numbers of small accounts) and some organizational units(aiming for modest numbers of large accounts). telephone, cable, and otherfacilitiesbased providers have moved over the past couple of years from strongreservations about the viability of the internet to increasing willingness toprovide and package internet access,where is the business case?83about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with some kind of added value (as illustrated by earlier comments on theproliferation of suitable cable modems).28 concentration among online serviceproviders has been increasing; the largest three (america online, compuserve,and prodigy services) served 89.3 percent of the market as of december 1995,and the largest six together served an estimated 96.9 percent of the 11.3 millionsubscribers (arlen, 1996). increasing concentration may underlie a movementfor some smaller service providers to become content providers servingcustomers through larger players (see arlen, 1995b). in their white paper, jionggong and padmanabhan srinagesh comment on the economics behind differentcategories of internet service providers, themselves displaying different degreesof layering depending on whether they own their own facilities:the variety of organizational forms in use raises the following question: canisps [internet service providers] with varying degrees of integration coexist inan industry equilibrium, or are there definite cost advantages that will lead toonly one kind of firm surviving in equilibrium? the answer to this questionhinges on the relative cost structures of integrated and unintegrated firms. thecosts of integrated firms depend on the costs of producing the underlyingtransport fabric on which ip transport rides. the cost structures of unintegratedfirms are determined in large part by the prices they pay for transport services(such as atm and ds3 services) obtained from telecommunications carriers.these prices, in turn, are determined by market forces. more generally, thelayered structure of data communications services leads to a recursiverelationship in which the cost structure of services provided in any layer isdetermined by prices charged by providers one layer below.next come the middleware providers, notably those firms springing up tooffer products based on the world wide webšwebbased publishingfacilitators, browser providers, and so on29 šand internet (or web) directoryservices (higgins, 1995b). commercenet, for example, is a consortium thatowns a web server for which it develops and supports applications; it does notown network facilities, per se.30 although middleware includes massmerchandised, consumeroriented, and corporationoriented products, thesegments and the providers are already appearing to consolidate (goff, 1995).also in this category are the security protection service providers, someacting as part of browser offerings (e.g., terisa systems); some separate (e.g.,rsa data security inc.), albeit possibly functioning through business alliances.another example of middleware services, again tied to the web, are the onlineequivalents of credit card verifiers, which mediate financial transactionsbetween purchaser and merchant. middleware business seems to fit into a newkind of "intermediate product"where is the business case?84about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.category (just as sheet steel is an intermediate good between the materials andautomobile industries).then come applications, such as business services (e.g., lexis/nexis) andonline games (e.g., sierra online). these range from final products (e.g.,games) to intermediate products (e.g., business services). 31 the proliferation ofapplication services that are themselves inputs to other activities illustrates thedifficulty of categorizing the products and businesses associated withinformation infrastructure. it also underscores the fact that infrastructurerelatedbusinesses are increasingly enmeshed in other, possibly highervalue, activities(e.g., education, commerce, research, work of different kinds), much as areother kinds of infrastructure.although activities can be examined from the perspective of differentlayers, stephen wolff of cisco systems inc. cautioned that a holisticperspective is also important. wolff noted that internet growth will not remainvery high unless facilities providers "increase their investment at commensuratepace, because the internet is a valueadded service on top of the underlyingbitway structure. so it's all got to go together or it's not going to go at all."similarly, @home's milo medin noted that despite its growth, the web's"potential is not going to be realized unless we can really scale up the level ofbandwidth in the network." in his white paper, robert blau describes the webas a driver of network market growth that could challenge local networkcapacity:as new resources come online, demand for access to the www will increasealong with its value to users as well as information service providers.similarly, as the value of the www increases (e.g., by the square of thenumber of new users added to it during any given period), online sessions alsoshould increase in duration (e.g., from current levels of 25 minutes per sessionversus an average of five minutes for local telephone call) for the simplereason that there will be more users and services to interact with. thecombination of more businesses and residents spending more time online,accessing increasingly sophisticated multimedia services that requiresubstantially larger amounts of bandwidth to transport, could press the limits ofmany local telephone networks within a relatively short period of time.blau's speculation about the web as a driver for demand and revenue isnotable, given his otherwise conservative assessment of the investment andrevenue horizons for telephone companies. on the other hand, he also notes thatinternet traffic can increase the efficiency of network facility use, suggestingthat such traffic "could help recoup the cost of deploying widerbandtechnologies that internet users will need" if "priced properly."as fast as the web's growth has been, the entire flow of internet traffic isvastly less than the capacity of the telephone networkšprobablywhere is the business case?85about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.less by two orders of magnitude.32 as a result, even with modest growth inlocal access capabilities, supply and demand for bandwidth may be inreasonable balance.hal varian provided a broader holism, relating the economics of networkmarkets, which depend on the presence of multiple users (who find value indirect proportion to the number of other users), to adequate distribution ofcomplementary goods and services:my favorite candidate for the "killer app" is multimedia video conferencingand wide area collaboration. but it is very hard to create critical mass in thiskind of industry, as att found out years ago with their picturephone initiative.people are not going to invest in the hardware, software, or learning costs untilthe technology is widely enough deployed to warrant their investment. but thisleads to the standard chickenandegg problem: overcoming that conundrumwill be the big problem for the industry.robert crandall also emphasized at the forum that services will evolvewith the information appliance (and other equipment) base, including accessequipment and other elements of applications.33 34 part of the growth of fax,for example, reflected the transition in equipment from telex as well as theacquisition of fax equipment by more and more people as a function ofdeclining cost.35 recognizing this problem and taking advantage of therelatively low cost of reproduction for software, online service providers (e.g.,america online and prodigy) have given away access software. similarly,marketleader netscape has made web browsers available for free or at lowprices in the interest of selling more expensive software for servers; the webserver market is forecast to grow dramatically yet still remain small for severalyears.36 notwithstanding the rate of growth of the internet and the world wideweb, user equipment cost and difficulty of use constrain the level of use ofemerging features and services, as noted in chapter 2.37both applications and middleware involve some kind of framework fororganizing material (content) that may be produced or distributed as part of theapplication. a white paper by randy katz et al. captures the perspective voicedby several in arguing that "a critical element of nii development is the fosteringof appropriate commonalities, with the goal of achieving broad adoptabilitywhile promoting efficient competition and technological evolution."38 middleware standards (for example, standards for data format and serviceinvocation39 ) enable a common application development framework;application standards enable implementation by a variety of providers and,ideally, access by users operating in a variety of environments. for example, awhite paper by david schell et al. describes needs associated with geographicinformation syswhere is the business case?86about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tems, while the one by katz et al. explains needs associated with digitallibraries. katz et al. underscore the importance of developing appropriatesoftware, as noted above: they relate crosscutting applications to theemergence of "a common service environment" for building domainspecificapplications, complemented by application development and support tools and"a marketplace of reusable subsystems." see box 3.8.box 3.8 middleware standards needscommercial need for better spatial data integration is already clear in areassuch as electric and gas utilities, rail transport, retail, property insurance, realestate, precision farming, and airlines. given the critical nature of applicationspositioned to combine "realtime" and geospatial attributesšemergency response,health and public safety, military command and control, fleet management,environmental monitoringšthe need to accomplish the full integration of [spatialdata] resources into the nii context has become increasingly urgent.šdavid schell, lance mckee, and kurt buehler,"geodata interoperabilityša key nii requirement"[digital libraries] are leading to significant advances in the generation, storage,and use of digital information of diverse kinds. the range of underlying servicesand technologies includes advanced mass storage, online capture of multimediadata, intelligent location and filtering of information, knowledge navigation, effectivehuman interfaces, system integration, and prototype and technology demonstration.šrandy h. katz, william l. scherlis, and stephen l. squires,"the national information infrastructure: a high performance computing andcommunications perspective"alleviating concerns about standards will depend in large part onattainment of consensus within an application domain (see chapter 2), but thatprocess should build, to the extent possible, on common or crossdomainstandards at the middleware level. this use of common middleware standardswill maximize the prospects for compatibility between implementations at thedomain level and will facilitate the eventual integration of inter and intradomain communication.the web provides an illustration: it embodies a framework and a set ofstandards that have made the internet more useful to more businesses,organizations, and individuals; it works through standards, and it has given riseto businesses that implement and advance those standards. whereasconventional or paper publishers own their own presses, trucks, and so on (orsubcontract to businesses that own such equipment), thewhere is the business case?87about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.web and the internet make use of more broadly shared distributioninfrastructure. another lesson from the success of the web is that an openstandard like the internet's tcp/ip protocols can be a very fertile field forinnovation, allowing experimentation with multiple applications.the inclusion in microsoft's new operating system, windows '95, ofsoftware for accessing an information service package, including internetaccess, reflects a business strategy based on tying two layers together: thesoftware provides the interface to physical network facilities (typically ownedor resold by others); it also provides tcp/ip support for customers alreadyhaving internet access. this development seems to go beyond the bundling oftcp/ip software with computer and network operating systems (higgins, 1995a)40 and the distribution by information service providers of access software withpcs and directly to consumers recently. the broader microsoft strategyappeared initially to tie three layers together by integrating various applicationswith networking (zelnick, 1994). microsoft network is an illustration of thegrowing emphasis on software to implement information infrastructure access.more broadly, hal varian suggested that the joint evolution of content andtransport businesses may well lead to some form of integration, raisingquestions about the market structures that are economically sustainable giventhe product or business and possibilities for competition that technologies arecreating. he commented on recent instances of cooperation and alliances amongbroadcast, cable, telephony, and entertainment companies, which embodyintegration that may or may not endure, at least in terms of which businessdominates:[v]ertical integration with the content providers seems to be the most popularsolution. we have got considerable evidence of this happening already. thereis u s west, time warner, disney, ameritech, bellsouth, mci, rupertmurdoch. america online just announced some joint agreements and mergersyesterday. it is not obvious that it will really work in the long run. these days,the cash is going from the transport providers to the content providers, becauseit is the transport providers that have all of the money. but, if the market fortransport becomes very competitive in the future and it becomes a commoditybusiness, then the money is going to have to flow the other way. you are goingto have to have the content crosssubsidizing the transport. what you buy is thecontent; the transport is thrown in for free. the big question is whether contentproviders will stick to their joint agreements once they have competingtransport providers clamoring for their business. that remains to be seen.consistent with varian's analysis, milo medin described how his newventure, @home, will combine web servers with cable facilities and cable andother media programming.41 taking a broader view of integration,where is the business case?88about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there are already signs of the integration potential of telecommunicationscompanies and banks, and yet other instances of integration may emerge. 42incremental increasesreacting to the risks, uncertainties, capabilities, and costs of varioustechnologies, contributors to the nii 2000 project seemed to favor investmentsthat allow for increases in bandwidth, openness, and symmetry on anincremental or expandable basis. david messerschmitt of the university ofcalifornia at berkeley related incrementalism to architecture: ''i would try todefine an architecture that had the characteristic that i could initially savemoney by deploying an asymmetric situation, but hedge my bets by having arather simple upgrade path to a more symmetric situation." decisions onarchitecture as well as facilities affect how easily decisions and investmentsmade today allow for or support the next incrementšhow easily evolution willoccur. for example, putting extra fibers in a bundle conveys significant extracapacity wherever they go. as robert powers et al. explain in their white paper,the capacity of a fiber pair has grown substantially over the past 15 years "basedonly on changes in electronic and photonic equipment attached to the fiber, notchanges in the buried fiber itself." that situation relates investment in fiber toincremental investments in associated equipment. decisions on architecture alsorelate to the split between incremental investment by providers and bycustomers (see "economic models" below). thus, at the january workshopdavid messerschmitt related integrated services digital network (isdn) and thetelephony activities associated with the advanced intelligent network initiative(see white paper by stewart personick) to architectures that allow moreintelligence in terminal devices and thereby provide more flexibility inprovisioning new services than do architectures that contain all servicefunctions in centralized switches.in view of the uncertainties associated with the economics of investment infiber, telephone companies have been paying significant attention totechnologies that allow them to better leverage existing copper plant and digitalswitches (through software and appropriate line cards), providing significantbandwidth advantage relative to conventional telephone service, albeit less thanthat available through fiber.43 two technologies dominate this approach:asymmetric digital subscriber line (adsl) and isdn.isdn is a phoenix technology, having been touted and then dismissed byexperts but now appearing to be relatively easily supplied.44 in the absence ofalternatives, both providers and business customers cite isdn as a vehicle fortelework and other dataintensive home communications.where is the business case?89about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commented edmond thomas of nynex science and technology, "therewere no terminals or applications for a very long time. – with the internet,terminals now becoming available, and, more importantly, application softwareto call on it, [isdn] is starting to find almost ubiquitous application." lesvadasz emphasized isdn's birdinthehand value: "the technologists areenamored with the next generation and the generation beyond; they are notrealizing what benefit we could get from [isdn's] bandwidth, which isavailable now."to make the point that incrementalism is relative, robert blau argued thatat about $3.4 billion (42 percent of the company's total capital expendituresbetween 1988 and 1993), making all of southwestern bell's access lines isdnready would be a major commitment. edmond thomas argued fordiversification even in the short term: "you have got to try them all: thetechnology right now is at best a first generation. and you could make a verybig blunder by choosing incorrectly." nevertheless, router, modem, pc, and online service vendors all seem to be moving to support isdn access, trends thatshould sustain some level of growth in isdn availability.adsl represents a way to reuse the existing copper plant for delivery ofvideo and some interactive applications to the home. mahal mohan explained ina white paper that adsl makes use of existing copper plant by installingmatching equipment at both ends of the loop. an incremental deployment,"adsl devices can be disconnected from one user and moved to another useras, for example, when the first adsl user decides to upgrade to a higherbandwidth medium such as fiber or fiber coax access."similarly, other forms of digital subscriber loop technology allow thecopper loop to be reused for other forms of new service. the symmetric highbitrate digital subscriber line (hdsl) may represent a way for the telephonecompanies to use their copper loops to sell interactive data services to the homeat speeds of up to 2 mbps. while products for this application are not yet fullymature, it is possible that this service might actually be less expensive to deployincrementally than the lowerspeed isdn service, because it could bespecialized for data only, rather then needing to support both data and voiceservice through the switch.edmond thomas related incremental investment in adsl to the differentcosts associated with providing service to different areas. see box 3.9. in hiswhite paper, francis fisher of the university of texas at austin underscores theimportance of relating deployment to area. he notes that there are relatively lowcosts of entry in dense downtown markets, fostering openness, whereas in theresidential market it is more difficult to assure universal service, let alone openservice, by a single provider. thewhere is the business case?90about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentive and profitability problems, of course, are exacerbated in the evensparser rural areas due to limited traffic aggregation.box 3.9 potential uses of asymmetric digitalsubscriber line technologyasymmetric digital subscriber line (adsl) technology probably will have, in theearly days, two major applications. one of them is in congested urban areas, suchas in apartment buildings, where you have conduit congestion and there is no wayto get to a customer's apartment without knocking down the walls. if you want toprovide interactivity, adsl may in fact be a way to do that. the other application isat the opposite end of the spectrum, in rural areas where you have a low populationdensity. you would like to provide those customers some interactivity and youcannot afford to put in fiber initially, but the copper is already in the ground. rightnow, our view is that fiber to the curb looks like it has potential in the very denseurban areas, and hybrid fiber coaxial cable probably in the suburban to themoderately dense urban areas. but my bet is also that our assessment right now isprobably wrong. as volumes increase and technologies improve, the areas ofapplications of these technologies may, in fact, change dramatically. if we make abig investment today in one area, i think we could be very, very wrong.šedmond thomas, nynex science and technology inc.the television industry has perhaps the strongest tradition ofincrementalism, in part because of expectationsšreinforced by a history ofregulatory requirements for backcompatibility with the installed television setbasešregarding consumers' limited ability and willingness to upgradetelevision sets. thus, scientificatlanta's allen ecker pointed out, "analog isgoing to pay the bills for a long period of time for the investment to get theinfrastructure, certainly in the entertainment part. –" some kinds ofinformation infrastructure require relatively modest incremental investments forconsumers, some require more, and, as discussed in chapter 2, the increase inintelligence and functionality in enduser devices suggests that more and moreof the total investment is migrating to the periphery of the network and intousers' environments. graham mobley noted that an associated issue isownership and distribution of access devices: "[i]n the cable environment theremay well be situations where interactive terminals would be leased from thecable company on a trial basis. if someone did not like the terminal, he or shecould give it back and go lease a lowercost or lowerfeatured box. these thingswill come along with time."the theme of evolution in cable (see box 3.10) was extended into thefuture by don dulchinos of cable television laboratories, who describedwhere is the business case?91about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hybrid fiber coaxial cable upgrade plans that will support delivery of about 80analog video channels and at least 100 digital video channels, and growth ininteractive applications (implying upstream capacity). he related capacitysupplied by cable providers to home equipment and demand. james chiddixalso commented on the fit between supply and demand, further suggesting thatthe evolving cable architectures do provide the flexibility sought by davidmesserschmitt.box 3.10 incremental expansion of cable service[t]he rollout of home digital terminals or highspeed data modems – is a veryevolutionary process. only those customers who demand service, as they demandservice, can be supplied with the terminals. the rollout of the technology would beclosely matched with the revenue made possible by that technology. then, by theyear 2000, you start looking at broadband types of fullservice networks, add videoservers and media servers in general, either at a headend location or distributedthroughout the network, and provide service that way.šdon dulchinos, cable television laboratories inc.since we have got this broadband pipe in place, we can reinforce it with a littlefiber, make it work a lot better for our core business, and then get into digitalbusinesses, whether they be telephony, pc modems, or interactive video, on anincremental basis, where most of the subsequent investment is variable. and itgoes into the modem, into the routers, into the settop boxes, or into the telephonyinterfaces. it is largely a traffic engineering problem; we can keep pushing fiberdeeper, and making it more and more granular, and getting fewer and fewer homesper fiber trunk. and then we can reconfigure which part of the spectrum in thecoaxial cable we use. those are not great problems, because they are forced bydemand, which means revenue.šjames chiddix, time warner cable[in 1975,] basic cable was about $7 per month. they introduced hbo foranother $7, a service that took effectively no bandwidth. they were able to doubletheir revenue and put in a simple box on a variable cost basis. we have a verysimilar situation right now. you can add lots of digital information on a cable systemtoday using an asymmetrical modem. i define "asymmetrical" as meaningbroadband for downstream communication and twisted copper pair coming back.you can charge probably $15 or $20 because you are going to a particular kind ofuser to deliver veryhighspeed data uniquely to that computer. it takes very littlebandwidth, and your capital expenditures are one box at a time.šedward horowitz, viacom inc.where is the business case?92about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in response to a question, chiddix indicated that it would be possible toprovide a choice of dataoriented radiofrequency modems supporting differentdegrees of asymmetry: "the beauty of having this radio spectrum in our coaxialcable is that we can have coexisting transport structures that behave verydifferently. we will build different businesses around them. in fact, we need tofind ways to get more revenue out of highvalue services than out of lowervalue services in exactly that way." edward horowitz cautioned againstexpecting too much too fast, observing that "the only thing that was displayed atthe [1995] cable show of any value was the fact that there is a move by thecable community to install broadband modems." significantly, a number ofcomputer hardware manufacturers (e.g., hewlettpackard, motorola) areseeking to supply these modems.wireless nonbroadcast networks have been incremental for consumers. atthe outset of availability of cellular and pcs services consumers have had alarger wireline base of equipment to receive calls, while providers must developsufficient infrastructure to support wireless service. pcs can be considered akind of incremental improvement over cellular, with digital cellular as a closerimprovement over analog cellular. there was some speculation among projectcontributors about the value of pcs and other wireless systems as a vehicle forrelatively near term experimentation with different product and serviceconcepts.45 mused harvard university's lewis branscomb, "let the wirelessservices try to capture these new markets, and then see how fast the cable firmsand the local exchange carriers get into the competition for the business."the comments of both cable and telephony providers referred to businesscalculations and "traffic engineering" intended to manage and minimizeinvestments in anticipation of delayed revenue growth. for example, indiscussing with other forum participants how to interpret deployment statistics,joel engel explained that providers do not assume that every home passed willbe a customer, which has implications for the translation from aggregatebandwidth to a neighborhood to bandwidth delivered or accessible to anindividual household, especially during the first stages of service introduction,but also when the offering is fully mature.engel said that ameritech has "engineered our system to take into accountwhat we think is a reasonable distribution across these services to allowsymmetry for those applications that require it." andrew lippman cautionedagainst excess conservatism: "start small if that is the economic answer. but donot view the ultimate design as one that still will be potentially too small forwhat is really going to be there."where is the business case?93about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.arrangements for interconnectionalthough technology may facilitate unbundling, the business arrangementssurrounding interconnection, which reflect underlying network economics andsuperimposed regulatory regimes, are key to associated investments andofferings. these arrangements, which relate to both interconnecting networksand gateways or other forms of connectivity to nonnetwork content and serviceproviders, affect the incidence of cost and the levels of revenue and profit.many questions arise, such as the following: who wholesales and who retails what in local and interexchangeconnectivity and information access? 46 how balanced will traffic flows be among interconnected systems? what capacity exists to charge different fees in different directionswhere flows are balanced or unbalanced? how will financial compensation (settlements) be governed in areaswhere traffic flows are unbalanced? how will endtoend impairments be allocated amongst the variousservice providers? and how can quality of service be maintained in a distributed network withmultiple providers?the arrangements for interconnection constitute a topic on whicheconomics research and analysis are under way, building from the experience intelephony.47 not surprisingly, telephonyexperienced participants in the projectwere the most vocal contributors on this topic. for example, teleportcommunications' gail schwartz and paul cain describe in their white paper theelements of central office interconnection facilities: interconnection electronics,cable, and services, plus local access and transport area (lata)based localexchange routing guides and the line information databases (associated withsignaling system 7) and other databases (for directory assistance, 800 numbers,and so on). they relate those facilities to business arrangements, noting that inthe internet "commercial service providers hand off traffic to each other with nosettlements, no exchange of money, on a senderkeepall or billandkeepbasis."48 at the forum, schwartz asked,are competing local exchange carriers terminating traffic on each other'snetworks going to pay each other or are they going to do a senderkeepallarrangement? if they are going to pay each other, given that the traffic will beunbalanced for a long period of time (that is, the incumbents will beterminating a lot more traffic than the new entries will be terminating), whatterms will they adopt for doing that? if it is not billwhere is the business case?94about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.andkeep, which might not be feasible because of unbalanced traffic, then theeconomic basis for the exchange of traffic would normally be, absent aheritage of regulation, a capacitybased charge rather than a minutesofusecharge. – if a new entrant has to price its own services in a manner that is tiedto the discount plans and the other rate schedules of the incumbent, then thenew entrant is economically impeded from using its portion of theinterconnected network of networks to its full capability, and thereforerecovering its own investment. –49although both established and new providers argue regularly in regulatoryproceedings about the balance of traffic flows and cost incidence, 50 there is atendency over time for flows to and from most areas within the country (and theproviders that serve them) to be balanced, at least in voice communications.the terms and conditions for interconnection are becoming a pressingissue as more and more networks connect with the internet and with each other.tim clifford noted that arrangements between local exchange andinterexchange carriers involve business mechanisms to track traffic flows andtranslate that information into financial settlements that are designed forswitched voice and private line services; because the experience in telephonytends to exclude interconnection between competitive service providers, thepast models may not apply. in their white paper, powers et al. note that amongthe factors leading to greater interexchange carrier (ixc) provision of endtoend services is "the interest of both ixcs and their customers in cutting thecosts of the lastmile links, which are now such a large portion of the costs ofproviding longdistance telecommunications." greater competition in localexchange or regulatory requirements for costbased access charges will alsoaffect those costs.local access charges also reflect another issue that has become urgent inthe telecommunications reform debates: costs associated with unequal providerobligations. baumol and sidak (1994a, p. 196) argue that the costs of serving asthe carrier of last resort and other regulatory "obligations are appropriatelytreated as sources of common fixed costs for the firm; the costs must be coveredlegitimately by the firm's prices."resolving the issue of settlements is far beyond the scope of this project,but contributors familiar with the internet identified internetrelatedinterconnection arrangements as a sleeper that could have an enormous impactin the future. the commercialization of the internet explicitly involves socallednetwork access points (naps). the naps interconnect internet backbones(interexchange components) and are federally supported now but will not beindefinitely; there is also a commercial internet exchange, which hasconnected member providers without settlement charges. although napsprovide a convenient location for interconnection, they offer no newmechanisms to facilitate settlements.where is the business case?95about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet protocol functionality makes settlements much more difficult toimplement than in historical telecommunications systems, most obviouslybecause the internet has no concept of a "call" against which individual datapackets can be counted and billed. this has been a major reason that manyinternet service providers have not been able to craft agreements: evenproviders that have agreed to the principle of settlements still have not figuredout how to act on it. in their "economic faqs about the internet," mackiemason and varian (1995) assert that a system of settlements is inevitable for theinternet, because ''resource usage is not always symmetric, and it appears thatthe opportunities to freeride on capacity investments by other networkproviders are increasing." they caution that as of mid1995, "the necessarytechnical, accounting, and economic infrastructure is not in place for naprelated settlements."economic modelsdeployment of highcapacity and more general facilities raises questionsabout how much revenue can be generated, and how fast, to pay back theinvestment. an unfortunate consequence of the term "national informationinfrastructure" is the tendency for most people to assume that it impliessomething monolithic and uniform as a bundle of services or businesses. butjust as it is increasingly clear that the nii embraces combinations oftechnologies that are optimized for the delivery of multiple services or servicegroupings, it is also clear that the nii does and will continue to contain multiplebusiness and social models. complicating the debate, the new constituentsentering the national information infrastructure discussion bring with themdifferent models and motives. these models drive experimentation with pricingschemes, which in turn drive the flow of cost recovery from end users and frominformation and online service providers that make use of facilities and evenother services owned by others .51 enduser pricing arrangements can andprobably will differ from the way carriers are or will be compensated forproviding underlying network capacity to information service vendors. thepricing of intermediate components (e.g., access to fundamentalcommunications facilities, interconnection among networks) will be animportant determinant of market conduct and performance, and itself calls formore analysis.padmanabhan srinagesh, an economist for bell communicationsresearch, related the telephony investment posture to a business model thatrecoups large upfront investments through streams of small payments (seebox 3.11). telephone (or cable) companies deploying fiber face a problem ofasset specificity: the wireline access circuits, in particular, link the provider toan individual consumer who may or may not want towhere is the business case?96about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.generate enough use to pay back the investment in a "timely" manner. somekind of forward contracting (longterm commitment to pay) could offset theuncertainty, although that is not a conventional market mechanism outside ofsatellite service or certain kinds of private networking, possibly because ofregulatory constraints. however, in their white paper, gong and srinagesh notethat "there appears to be an empirical trend toward term/volume commitmentsthat encourage consumers of private line services to establish an exclusive, longterm relationship with a single carrier." a consequence appears to be evidencethat nonfacilitiesowning internet service providers with such multiyear leasesare themselves beginning to offer longterm pricing options to their customers.box 3.11 cost recovery in the telephony model ofcommunicationsif customers were willing to pay $1,600 for optical fiber and symmetricbandwidth to the home, the way they pay for a computer, a competitive market withmany kinds of suppliers might emerge. the fact is that the communications industryworks in a different paradigm, where the onetime costs of facilities are recoveredthrough a steady flow of monthly charges. the risk that the asset may be strandedremains with the provider and not with the consumer. this is a major reason forslow change in the communications infrastructure.špadmanabhan srinagesh, bell communications researchboth nii 2000 project components (workshop, forum) and popular debatestend to characterize the telephony model as one that involves increasingconsumer cost with increasing usage. robert crandall pointed out that theincremental charges themselves reflect quirks of the regulatory history:in the case of the way states regulate telephone, we subsidize people's access tothe system, but then charge them prices which are far in excess of costs to usethe system. as a result, there is far too little usage of the communicationsnetworks we now have. – the assumption [appears to be] that we allsubscribe to a telephone service in order to sit and either look at our telephoneset and not use it, or to wait for some telemarketer to call us, so it doesn't costus anything to pick up the telephone. presumably if you want to use it, youshould be allowed to use it at a price certainly no greater than the incrementalcost to society of using it, and that isn't what we do today.in short, the telephony price structure is not directly related to the coststructure, which confounds the business challenge facing telephone comwhere is the business case?97about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panies that are contemplating how to proceed with information infrastructure.the business models associated with the nii involve differentcombinations of, and investments in, several key components: network facilities(e.g., circuits, switches, routers, base stations, antennas and receivers, headends); content (e.g., text documents, still and moving imagery, data filesšpresented as articles, photographs and videos, databases, and so on) andassociated facilities (e.g., storage servers, browsing and search systems);information appliances (e.g., telephones, televisions and settop boxes, personalcomputers, personal digital assistants); and skills (implying time and training)of people developing, producing, delivering, and using the informationinfrastructure. they differ in terms of who bears what costs and risks to deliverand use information infrastructure, including what costs are internal tocustomers or providers and what costs a provider can pass on to customers.cost incidence is particularly relevant to understanding what it takes toachieve some degree of equitable access, since users vary by income, education,and other indicators of willingness and ability to use a given service. providercosts are themselves uncertain. for example, early entrants in the onlineshopping business have found that "just being there" is no prerequisite forsuccess. there are significant investments that must be made in backendsystems as well as linking the manufacturer to the consumer via online access.the process of figuring out what technology is needed, where, can take time,producing a lag in matching business opportunity to consumer demand.52overall, variation in cost level and incidence as captured in differentbusiness models allows different parties to experiment with different offerings(goods, services, and price structures) at the same time, and it allows differentkinds of providers to serve different kinds of customers with a range of prices,levels of performance and quality, and commitments of resources. variation is alogical business response to the absence of a "killer app" and the enormousuncertainty about market demand. how much and what kinds of variation aresustainable over the long term, however, will depend on how the underlyingeconomics of the information infrastructure evolve with the deployment of newtechnologies as described in chapters 4 and 5. another important but uncertainissue is the cost of accounting mechanisms necessary to support differentapproaches to intermediate and enduser charges. such costs affect the relativeappeal of charging on the basis of time of use, quantity of use, and/or access.subject to applicable regulatory constraints, a range of business models shouldbe observable over the next several years.at least five models (and probably more), representing different comwhere is the business case?98about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.binations of cost recovery for content and for infrastructure, are evident today: metered telephone: the consumer pays by the minute (for time usingthe network and level of traffic); embedded or domainspecific: cost is hidden in some other service; broadcast tv and radio (advertising): the advertiser pays (by theminute), and the consumer does not pay for service; pcs: the consumer pays for unlimited use of a device (including standalone use, independent of networkbased services); and cable or flatrate telephone subscription: the consumer pays by themonth.the discussion below addresses how these various models are beingapplied to the evolving information infrastructure service menu. it highlightsthe emerging uses of the internet, which is changing conventional charging andother business practices. although the models overlap somewhat, they areintended to reflect different emphases and approaches to recovering the costs ofservices deployment.usagebased fees for communications and informationservicesthe model of usagebased fees for services is most like the meteredtelephony model, which involves monthly payments on a volumeofusage(e.g., message service units) basis. in this model, which embraces networkbased services that are both specialpurpose (lexis and nexis are goodexamples) and generalpurpose (compuserve and america online are goodexamples, in the context of use beyond a monthly base level), the informationuser is the key economic factor. market growth and competition pit perceivedvalue against cost. information consumers weigh the factors, and they verysufficiently that the market has supported both special and generalpurpose,and both nofrills and highvalueadded, services.53competition has kept the prices declining, and services continue toimprove in both usability and value. perhaps 7 million u.s. homes nowsubscribe to some kind of online service, and frequency of use in those homescontinues to increase.54 communication, chat and electronic messaging, andcommoninterest bulletin boards and consumer information continue to attractlarge volumes of traffic and growth. electronic transactions such as investmentactivity, including stock transactions and electronic bill paying, while modestactivities, continue to grow and proliferate.where is the business case?99about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.embedded or domainspecific servicesunder the nii umbrella a number of domainspecific applications orservices are being developed. it may increasingly be the case that thecommunications between businesses and between businesses and homes will be"included" in the pricing for core products and services. embedded deploymentof computing and network capability in the private sector is driven by thestrategies of the businesses to which the infrastructure application contributes.financially, such outreach by businesses may accelerate diffusion (assumingavailable facilities provide the necessary capabilities) inasmuch as theirinvestments are amortized in a relatively short period of time. associated costsfor distributing information or communicating may become viewed as anelement of overhead (somewhat analogous to climate control or electric power).this prospect suggests that much of the information infrastructure will becomedeeply embedded, like motors or solenoids, so that its costs are submerged.for example, remote access to medical instruments and specialists targetsphysicians in their offices, providing rural and other hardtoserve areas withgreater resources via information infrastructure. such services may provide pctype hardware devices, software, and widearea communications for physicianswithout charge.most of the currently envisioned health care uses of the nii in the homewill be paid for by providers and payers of health care or suppliers such as drugcompanies. they will be "free" to consumers. in the context of home banking,an example of a domainspecific service model is the recent introduction bycitibank of home banking services "free" to its customers with some supply ofsoftware and necessary equipment (modem, or terminal).55 obviously citibankfeels that this service will increase its competitive position, and it can absorbthese costs through its core business revenues. another example is provided bypacific gas and electric corporation, which is experimenting with an "energychannel" on cable television that allows users to more easily control their homeappliances, lighting, and heating and other climate control functions. althoughmore efficient monitoring and control of energy consumption will ultimatelysave on utility costs, meter readers, and other costs, pacific gas and electriccurrently plans to charge consumers about $10 per month for this optionalservice. on the other hand, kansas city power and light plans to offer a similarservice "free" to its customers because it believes that doing so will be profitable.although time will tell, domain contributors to the nii 2000 projectexpressed the belief that the kansas city model would dominate. one reason isthat support will also be provided by intermediate service suppliers. forexample, mastercard and visa plan to use a software standard supportingelectronic credit card transactions that will not involve chargeswhere is the business case?100about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to consumers (hansell, 1995b). communications arrangements for that creditcard system are left to consumers.56 that condition illustrates that a key toprogress for embedded or domainspecific services remains the underlying orcomplementary relationships between consumers and communications providers.the broadcast modelin the broadcast model, based on the traditional radio and televisionbroadcast environment, the advertiser pays. in several instances both before andduring the forum, contributors commented on broadcast model applications ofthe internet component of the nii, for example, to bring information aboutproducts and services to niche and casual users without a fee, at least for accessto and use of the information. the world wide web was the locus of much ofthis activity in 1995 and appears to be the place where this model is developingmost rapidly. however, there are a number of other instances associated withspecific businesses. for example, pharmaceutical companies are exploring online delivery of applications and networked information, which they intend todeliver free of charge, with advertising, to the doctor or clinic. one servicešphysicians onlinešhas more than 50,000 users (electronic marketplacereport, 1995). the motivation is simplešfacilitating the marketing of morequickly developed and more complex pharmacological compoundsšandeconomically sound; it can be equated with the airlines' motivation in makingcomputerized reservation systems available.57 the ubiquity of the internetinfrastructure adds the reach and efficiency of shared network infrastructure asthe enabling ingredient. in the broadcast model, the useršfor example, themedical professionalšsees only the service; costs come in the time and trainingneeded to gain the familiarity necessary to get to the information, in a realtimeway, but there is no direct outofpocket cost to the end user.robert crandall, speaking on behalf of an advertising group, commentedon the historic role of advertising revenues in the growth of various media,despite regulation, and relative to subscriberfunded telephony. he argued thatadvertising should continue to be exploited as a source of financing for newinformation infrastructure, speculating on possibilities for a mix of advertisingand direct subscriber paymentsšbetween services and for the same service: "[i]nvestors should be permitted to explore all possible sources of revenue from themarketplace if we expect them to commit such large amounts of capital to sorisky an enterprise." crandall's assessment is corroborated by a financialanalysis for video services by veronis, suhler & associates. veronis, suhler(1995) estimate that most households (which already pay more than $20 perwhere is the business case?101about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.month for basic cable and $35 if they subscribe to premium channels) will beunwilling to pay a monthly incremental subscription fee of $10 to $15, a feethat would be necessary for recovery of investment in interactive video capacityat a rate of 10 percent per year. hence they suggest an alternative strategy ofoffering interactivity at no extra subscription cost and paying for the upgradewith revenues generated by video on demand, a lower access fee (perhaps $5per month), and advertising.58reflecting on his experience managing prodigy services, ross glatzersuggested (while tacitly accepting the broadcast model) thateven the best of the online service advertisersšand some are very goodšmust get a lot better when they go on the net, because most of their customerswill be paying for the time to view their applications. – on the net i believethe advertiser will end up paying for the number of footsteps that cross histhreshold, and the amount of time that those feet stay in the store. – this thenputs a premium on closing a very high percentage of sales.as glatzer's comments suggest, the nature of advertising will have toevolve to meet new service contexts. with the exception of telephony andpossibly mail, all current media were developed in the service of a mass culture.newspapers, magazines, and radio and television with mass audiences wereencouraged and supported by mass advertising. little commercial informationwas targeted to specific audiences or individuals. while the public paid part ofthe cost of media such as newspapers and magazines, this revenue representedonly part of their economic value. advertising did and still does provide thebulk of media revenue. mass advertising in mass media represented the ultimatein downstream information in a society and economy driven by massproduction, mass distribution, and mass consumption.the case for advertising on the nii must be made in the context of whatadvertisers and consumers seem increasingly to want: direct contact with eachother. these contacts will, through interactive information infrastructure,become dialogues. these dialogues have the potential to become enduringrelationships among manufacturers, service providers or retailers, and theultimate consumer. unable to identify or separate loyal users from trialpurchasers or identify heavy users of other brands who would be well worthconverting, manufacturers have lacked the capability to create differentadvertising programs for each. it is the ability to acquire and build a base ofloyal, longterm customersšsuggesting a new definition of branding plus theability to better measure what action or behavior either advertising or newproduct introductions have stimulatedšthat provides the profit leverage formanufacturers of products, providers of services, or retailers.where is the business case?102about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how information is used and the direction of its flow are key. because realaccountability requires real information, abstract criteria such as "share ofvoice" and "share of mind" will give way to a brand's "share of customers."information infrastructure will provide manufacturers with the information theyneed to convert products into longterm services. in the future a brand mayidentify the quality of the relationship as well as that of the product. it will alsohelp target both advertising and the charges for same: an increasing number ofadvertisers want to know what action or behavior their advertising hasstimulated. companies will not, in the future, manage sales, but rathercustomers: the blind spending of billions on advertising and promotion forproduct trials will be replaced by a more focused and longerterm discipline thatwill manage and increase the lifetime value of customers. thus, the subscriptionand membership approaches to selling are already used to encourage thepurchase of books, magazines, newsletters, audio recordings, video cassettes,participation in museum activities, telephone and cable service, online services,and even coffee and heating oil.enduser devices paid for by consumersin the model based on consumers paying for use of a device, theinformation user invests the capital required to access the network (via acquiredpersonal computers and modems). in the internet or online services case, theuser also pays for services; in radio and broadcast television the service isreceived without such fees. in both cases, advertising can be an importantsource of cash flow, reducing the charges to consumers. consumer investmentsabsorb some of the risk of obsolescence and of slowerthanforecast growth indemand; they also disaggregate the investment.this economic model is subordinated to the broadcast and the consumerpay (usagebased fees or access subscription) models. it assumes thatconsumers will possess more intelligent information appliances in addition tothe nearly ubiquitous basic televisions and telephones.59 it also recognizes thatfundamental to the growth of the internet and private networking has been thegrowing capital investment by individuals and organizations in computerequipment and associated local networks, modems, and related goods andservices. as discussed in chapter 2, the growth in number, diversity,sophistication, and cost of household information appliances is a majorindicator; as discussed in realizing the information future (cstb, 1994b), theearly growth of the internet in the research, education, and library environmentsand the growth of private networking among corporations and other largeorganizations illustrate the varying willingness and ability of organizations ofdifferent kinds andwhere is the business case?103about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sizes to make investments in intraorganizational networkrelated infrastructure(devices, local area networks, support, and so on), internalizing relevant costs.dependence on consumerowned pcs raises two concerns, as noted inchapter 2. the first is affordability. at $2,000 and perhaps three to six times thecost of a television set, the average pc system is beyond the reach of manyconsumers, who may need to depend on access via large institutions (places ofwork, employers, schools, government agencies, libraries) or public kiosks. asecond concern is upgrading home equipment to match changing servicecapabilities .60 contributors involved with television made many observationsabout the long lives of television sets in homes, not least because consumerslack the investment incentive provided to businesses under the tax code todepreciate expenses for tax purposes.one middle ground might come from more versatile software, but there isdebate on this point. queried stewart personick, "is there a model that peoplewill get used to the idea that these things are really disposable and throw themout every 3 to 5 years? is the model that service providers will subsidize themlike wireless cellular telephones, and it will be possible to get a new one for$29? – the theoretical solution of a programmable [and therefore upgradable]box is not very likely." serviceprovider ownership of access devices is oneresponse, illustrated by leased settop boxes provided by cable companies or bythe bundling (without separate fee) of equipment with services (see thediscussion above of the embedded or domainspecific service model). yet thatpath raises other concerns, such as the incentives for multiple service operatorsto minimize functionality to contain costs or the incentives to minimizegenerality to preserve profits via control over services.the access subscription modelthe access subscription model is best described by the cable tv and online information and communications (including internet access) providers; itcan also be seen in flatrate telephony (so much per month for unlimited calls).in both cases the cost to the information consumer is an attachment charge. thatcharge may include lease of reception equipment (e.g., settop box) by theservice provider.61 unlike the usagebased fee services, in this model one paysa flatrate fee, usually on a monthly basis, for access to the facilities andinformation. of course, illustrating the fact that these models are not pure, cablecharges do reflect some offset from advertising revenues to providers, and theymay relate to payperview and/or premium services as well as the basicpackage. in thewhere is the business case?104about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access subscription model there is a basic assumption that use time is not a costfactor. for example, in basic cable service, the basic investment and the cablesignal delivered over it are there: if 100 or 1,000 subscribers tune in, there is noinfrastructure cost element to factor into the price. payperview cable, on theother hand, equates to the usagebased fees model, in which the owner of theinformation or intellectual asset wants to recover the cost or value of that assetby charging for its use.a key question with this model is the nature of the service itself. if it isessentially a commodity, it is hard for a firm to remain competitive if eachprovider offers essentially the same service. thus, cable provider prospects areaffected by the introduction of direct broadcast satellite (delivering cablelikeprogramming) and online service provider prospects by the burgeoning entryinto internet access, including entry by providers offering little added value butlow prices.payment models and the internet phenomenonas discussed at the forum, many economic projections relating to the niiseem to be building on the experience of the internet. the internet todayembodies an infrastructure of sizable dimension, with perceived values in manyareas of science, education, government, and commerce. it was built to one setof economic principles and is in transition to another set of economic principles,with all the attendant angst. in the recent past, the widearea backbone of theinternet was provided through a contract from the national science foundation(nsf), reflecting the origins of the internet as a research project within the u.s.government (primarily the advanced research projects agency of thedepartment of defense and the nsffunded use of the internet in support of theacademic and research community). but with the expansion of the internetbeyond these uses, and the entrance onto the scene of commercial providers, thensf orchestrated a transition away from its backbone onto a fully commercial,competitive set of backbone providers. this transition has now occurred, andthere are a number of internet service providers that offer widearea internetservice, as well as regional and local providers. consequently, payment forservices by users is increasing, through subscription services offering internetaccess, while federal support (historically targeted to members of the research,education, and library communities but often overestimated by bothbeneficiaries and observers) via nsf is being restructured to further precipitatethe maturation and commercialization process. this secondstage transition, likethe larger development of the commercial market for internet access, is stillunfolding; financing for internet access in research, education, and librariescontinwhere is the business case?105about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ues to be a source of uncertainty and concern, as do other, technical andbusiness, aspects of commercialization.the internet brings a unique perspective to this discussion from theunusual economic environment in which it exists. fundamentally we have avery valuable and effective artifact and network of providers and systems thathave been assembled according to a social benefit model. the costs of theinfrastructure have been borne by the institutions, both governmental andprivate, that have desired the connectivity and services that the internetprovides. the information providers on the internet likewise have contributedtheir intellectual assets and ideas freely, and the user or customer base in factdisdains, as evidenced by the tradition of ''flaming," attempts by commercialenterprises to breach the freeflowing and noncommercial etiquette observed onthe network. based on this model, commercial interests have begun to take root,the growth and exploitation of the web being perhaps the prime example.the steering committee heard discussions reflecting a wide range ofvisions about how the internet could be used in support of business. someproject participants spoke of the internet as a vehicle among businesses: forelectronic purchasing or joint design projects among several companies. someproject participants spoke of business needs that involved broad access to smallbusiness sites: offices of retail stockbrokers, insurance agents, or doctors. somespoke of needing access to the home in support of their business: "telework,"retailing, or home health care. and some believed that access to the consumerin the home was the business. as discussed in this report, these different visionshave different implications for the business model and modes of payment, andfor the needed infrastructure deployment. but the basic internet services andfunctions can be provided in all these cases.notes1. as robert crandall of brookings noted: "[t]he number of competing technologies isgrowing and – the ultimate winner or winners is not known or even likely knowable at thistime. – however one interprets the recent technological and economic developments in thissector, it is quite clear that building versions of the nii is not becoming less risky."2. growth conforms to a diffusion model characteristic of network markets, often modeled withan sshaped curve.3. see telecommunications reports (1995n). according to one assessment that focuses ontechnical difficulties, "interactive fare from the bells that combines video andtelecommunications seems unlikely to reach even one quarter of u.s. households until wellafter the year 2000." see also computerworld (1995). even for some companies willing tomake the investment, business case analysis suggests that breakeven points will be reachedonly after 9 to 10 years, if at all.where is the business case?106about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concerns raised by cable companies netted this response from u s west: "the key is notwhether u s west or any other local exchange carrier can predict video dialtone revenues andcosts with any certaintyšthey cannotšbut whether other telecommunications users will beharmed as a result of allowing lecs to provide video dialtone service." seetelecommunications reports (1994).4. "here was a company with negative earnings, $17 million in halfyear salesšand a marketcapitalization of $2.2 billion at the close of august 9." see hardy (1995), p. 206.5. the problems of measuring and tracking new products and industries are well known;typically, relevant activities have to achieve some degree of scale or volume to be captured inreliable statistics.6. note that for existing entities there are investments to maintain or replace existing plant andequipment as well as investments for upgrades and growth, implying some need to net out whatis investment for growth or upgrading.7. the telephone companies, of course, would say that they do continuous upgrades, but the last100 yards has not changed, in part because of regulatory constraints. they still offer the sameservice, and (again reflecting regulation) they still have very long depreciation cycles.8. stewart personick of bell communications research explained that alternatives for localexchange facilities investment are sensitive to relatively small (5 to 10 percent) differences inassumptions ("take" rates, actual applications, geographic density, supplier pricing).9. john redmond of gte and edmond thomas of nynex drew from their companies'experiences and concerns to make similar observations. also, there is some evidence that lecsupply of t3 lines is growing, nurtured by falling prices that include discounts for fiberchannel terminations rather than copper. see rohde (1995b).10. however, it is not clear whether recent or prospective changes may reflect enhancedproductivity of capital in telephony, which would imply an ability to produce more with lesscapital than historically; similarly, it would be interesting to compare investment andproductivity in wireless and/or competitive access businesses to those qualities in conventionalwireline telephony.11. in the report new age media ii (friedman, 1994), analysts with the investment firm of bearstearns predict that lec investments in fiber deployment within the local loop will ultimatelysurpass cable company investments. choices between hybrid fiber coaxial cable (hfc) andfiber to the curb (fttc) architectures depend on firms' estimates of likely rates of subscriptionamong the homes passed by the system. (current penetration for cable television is about 60percent of homes passed and for the telephone is nearly 100 percent.) deployment of a newhfc network with full telephoneswitching and videodelivery capabilities is estimated to costabout $1,000 per home passed (see the white paper by stewart personick). the cost to deployonly the basic transport infrastructure of an hfc transport network, excluding telephone andvideo, is estimated by ameritech at approximately $300 per home passed (see the white paperby joel engel regarding ameritech's plans filed with the federal communications commissionto deploy an hfc network in its service area). however, upgrading an existing coax network tohfc is estimated by wendell bailey and james chiddixwhere is the business case?107about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in their white paper as much less costly, at about $120 to $130 per home passed. this wouldgive cable television operators, who already have coaxial cable networks, a substantial lead indeploying hfc. the review by the steering committee of network deployment plans by cableand telephone firms tends to bear this out.a july 1994 analysis by financial analysts at veronis, suhler & associates estimated capitalcosts for deploying a new fiberoptic cable television network as being between $1,200 and$1,800 per household. they identify the cost of file servers and settop boxes for twowaycommunications as variables that may drive the network cost higher than these estimates. asdiscussed in the white paper by bailey and chiddix, however, these are incremental costs; whilethe cost of building the basic transport infrastructure must be incurred completely before anyservices can be carried, incremental investments supporting interactivity and video on demandcan be incurred gradually, while market demand for services builds.12. blau presents an "inverse relationship between the ratio of network investment to operatingcash flow from local telephone operations, and total shareholder return." it is not clear howmuch this analysis takes into account varying conditions among the regional bell holdingcompanies examined, including different initial capital stock, different geography, and otherfactors that might lead to variation in investment requirements and behavior.13. robert blau of bellsouth and howard frank of the advanced research projects agencynoted the constraints on accounting rates for depreciation and amortization and for othersources of return on investment in wireline telephony.14. note that wireless systems suggest a very different concept of facilities investment than dowireline systems. the public is a provider of spectrum, the use of which is licensed to theservice provider, who in turn invests in transmission and other systems. due to growingdemand for spectrum resources, the federal communications commission recently adoptedrules to reallocate spectrum below 512 mhz. see private radio docket 92235, cited inwireless messaging report (1995b). the personal communication service (pcs) auctionsrepresent a departure from past spectrum allocation practices, in which the public has arguablygiven away spectrum rights (in the form of operating permits for broadcasters) and in implicitexchange for performance obligations, to one where license fees imply greater private paymentfor use of scarce spectrum. broadband pcs licenses grant broadcast rights to a pair of 25mhzchannels. two licenses were auctioned off for each of 51 major cities, and carriers paid anaverage of about $15 per person (the maximum was almost $32 per person) for the licensesšaprice that covered the right to launch a network, with construction and other operating costsover and above an additional expense. according to one calculation, with 50 million pcscustomers, the cost per customer would be $154 to the provider, versus $1,500 if there wereonly 5 million customers in 5 years. see wireless messaging report (1995d). see the whitepaper by peter huber et al. for a description of the nature and economics of licensing.15. similar licensing rules will likely affect the digitization of television broadcasting by settinga date for the termination of analog transmission. in the broadcasting area, the problem is notone of local access, given essential saturation ofwhere is the business case?108about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the market, but rather quality and other features of the service. the essential investment issuesrelate to movement to digital systems and eventually to advanced television (atv) service(s).see information & interactive services report (1995a) and telecommunications reports (1995a,b,c,d,f,h,k,l, and m). note that positive government reactions to pcs auctions has fedproposals to auction digital television spectrum.16. see wireless messaging report (1995d,e). wireless data and local area network offeringsare expected to help fuel the wireless market. see wireless messaging report (1994).17. this estimate is for a 5year period, for nationwide majorplayer pcs networks, andincludes license acquisition ($7.7 billion), radio and switching equipment, construction andinstallation, site acquisition and leasing, system design and engineering, and relocating currentusers. see naik (1995a).18. "[o]ver the next ten years, increases in network capacity available on commercial wirelesscommunications systems (e.g., cellular telephone, pcs, etc.) will be large enough toaccommodate not only natural growth in demand for mobile telephone services, but also nearlyall narrowband voice and data traffic carried over wireline networks –" (see blau's paper).19. for example, a recent alliance among nynex corp., pacific telesis group, and bellatlantic corp., doing business as teletv systems, announced plans in september 1995 toprovide wireless cable television delivery via thomson consumer electronics inc. settopboxes that will offer at least 120 channels but support only limited interactivity (trachtenbergand robichaux, 1995).20. see, for example, the white paper by jiong gong and padmanabhan srinagesh.21. see clark (1995b). band further notes that if microsoft's settop operating system were tobecome a de facto standard, there would be no entity or authority that could enforce theavailability or fair terms of its licensure. however, since an operating system is just code, a newor compatible one could be written. the recent antitrust investigations of microsoft suggest thatthe threat of enforcement action might itself motivate broader access.microsoft's reported plans and actions relating to microsoft network, its interconnection withthe internet, and its development of nonstandard extensions to its web browser supported by itsnew content creation tool ("internet studio") appear consistent with band's characterization.although the introduction of microsoft network inspired various strategic responses by otheronline service providers, it did not command an initial market share as high as some hadexpected, and microsoft's strategy is subject to change. those expectations are a measure of theuncertainty and volatility that characterize the online service arena. see clark (1995c).22. this was a theme at the january workshop, and it is addressed regularly in the businesspress, conferences, and various policy forums. one bold perspective offered by charles r.morris and charles h. ferguson (now marketing webbased products) is as follows: "ingeneral, however, we feel that companies tend to underestimate the opportunities for increasingthe space for proprietary architectures, in part, no doubt, because of two decades of oftenthoughtless propaganda for 'open' nonproprietary systems." see morris and ferguson (1993).where is the business case?109about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.23. patrick mcgovern, chairman of international data group, a market research enterprise, wasquoted in an interview as saying that "the airline guide is more valuable than the airlines. –tv guide was sold for $2.5 billion, [making it] more valuable than any tv network."24. according to one reviewer who provided many insights into advertising, "branding wasoriginally a way of identifying the manufacturer of a product so that consumers who liked itcould repurchase it with the assurance of ongoing similarity. this became necessary because ina mass production economy, the manufacturer and the ultimate consumer of his product wereseparated by several layers of distribution. they never saw each other. but branding too hasentered the virtual world. a product in action, whether it be soap, soup, automobiles, airlinetickets, or financial services, is not the object seen at retail. there it is inert and frequentlymeaningless. coffee is just a can with words on it. soap is only a package with words on it. anairplane or car is a mechanical object. but as commercial information, these products becomeservices. soap is seen making clothes clean. brewed coffee in a cup makes family breakfastsjoyous. automobiles are seen in motion. airplanes become the site of friendly service.commercial information has provided these objects with valuable 'brand personalities,' whichare wrapped around products to prevent their commoditization."25. see clark (1995a), elliott (1995b,c), and goldman (1995). see barboza (1995) for adiscussion of the internet as a medium for advertising.26. many newspapers have closed or consolidated. magazines have had to fight harder tomaintain circulation and advertising revenue despite their attempts at greater relevance. radioformats have changed. "talk shows" are the beginning of audio interactivity. networkbroadcast television is finding it more and more difficult to find programs with a mass commondenominator. "mass mail" has become inefficient and its irrelevance has earned it the unhappydescriptor of "junk mail." the growing public ability to consume information and relatedservices at home, rather than going out for them, is reflected in payperview television, withmore than 1 million homes willing to pay $50 to view mike tyson's return to prizefighting. inthe future, "opening nights" or "you are there'' political, sporting, and cultural events may wellcreate enormous new revenues.27. kessler (1995) noted that "the fundamental values of broadcasting licenses have topped. –as pc screens become more televisual, they will attract still more eyeballs. – tv is not dead,but its economic model is subject to revision."28. cstb has tracked this shift in perspective through a series of briefings and discussionsrevolving around its 1994 report realizing the information future through major industrymeetings (e.g., ncta '95) and the activities associated with the nii 2000 project, which furtherengaged key industry leaders.29. see anthes (1995a), blodgett (1995), gillin (1995), and messmer (1995b).30. personal communication, cathy medich, executive director, commercenet. smartvalleyand the associated bay area multimedia technology alliance also provide infrastructure andtechnology support for applications development, feeding the proliferation of softwarebasedservices.31. for example, intuit has contracted with several banks to use its quicken software forindividuals to transfer money between accounts, pay bills, and extractwhere is the business case?110about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.account data for use on pcs. actual transactions will be processed through a service unit. seeflynn (1995).32. evaluating the actual volume of internet, web, and online service use is notoriouslydifficult. "[i]n cyberspace, – online firms massage membership figures, cloak their calculationmethods in secrecy, snipe at rivals' claims and make their numbers impossibly hard to compare"(sandberg, 1995c).33. according to crandall, "there is a huge incentive already to figure out how to makeinteractivity work, and then to provide interactive services. – until there is a breakthrough, sothat we all have interactive devices in our homes, i suspect that the major media types aresimply not going to get terribly interested in it. the appeal is still to have things going throughdistribution channels such as hbo, motion picture theaters, whatever, because that's where thehardware is today."34. see liebowitz and margolis (1994) for a discussion of the literature on and definitions ofnetwork effects and related phenomena, as well as work by economides (1994) andeconomides and white (1994).35. for a discussion of fax, see economides and himmelberg (1995); see also economides(1994).discussion of "killer apps" also appeared to be a proxy for some of the concerns about the needfor greater ease of use for more advanced forms of information infrastructure. cautionednorthwestern's steven wildman, "what's really going to slow things down or what has to comealong is the development of a human infrastructure making it possible to take advantage of thenew capabilities." according to wildman, existing market trials illustrate the difficulties ofintegrating hardware, software, and human infrastructure at the provider and consumer ends.quincy rodgers of gi held out more hope, observing that increasing bandwidth provides"incentives to make the user interface as friendly as possible, because, in order to get back theinvestment that he has made in his network, [the provider] has got to have as many users aspossible."36. see rigdon (1995b), sandberg (1995b), and wireless messaging report (1995a). someobservers note that the web phenomenon may be less than reported: "getting onto the internetwith your home computer is a lot like sex in junior high school: far more people talk about itthan actually do it" (mossberg, 1995).37. the windows '95 experience may be instructive: beyond the early adopters, who are usuallywilling to pay for the incremental investment needed to try new software, are the averageconsumers who may be interested in trying the product on a current machine and may require asizable investment to upgrade memory, and so on; others may combine software and new pcinvestments. see farrell and shapiro (1992) for a discussion of the diffusion of severalconsumer electronics technologies. they note, for example, that consumer acceptance of colortelevision lagged broadcaster implementation until sufficient programming became available,pointing to the multifaceted nature of the diffusion process in that case.38. "commonalities," they continue, "include standard or conventional interfaces, protocols,reference architectures, and common building blocks from which applications can beconstructed to deliver information services to end users."where is the business case?111about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39. for example, secure electronic commerce has motivated a variety of standardizationactivities. see, for example, the discussion of "s/mime, a specification that combines the multipurpose internet mail extensions standard and rsa data security inc.'s security algorithm, thepublic key cryptography standards (sic)" in timmins (1995).40. netscape is also facilitating internet service provider access (see booker, 1995b; corcoran,1995b; and information & interactive services report, 1995b), as are some pc vendors (seezelnick, 1994).41. cauley (1995b) and information & interactive services report (1995c). for other examples,see robichaux (1995a) and ziegler (1995c).42. in an analogous setting, banks are finding value in forming alliances with telephonecompanies in a kind of vertical integration: "banks transmit huge amounts of data. phone linescarry lots of data. so, why shouldn't bank own this means of production, just as it owns branchoffices. –" although decreasing transaction costs may be the initial motivator, both partnersoften develop new lines of business. one bank, for example, has plans to use "mobile phonesand a network of temporary computer kiosks to provide financial advice" to millions of tourists.nynex and chase manhattan recently unveiled a system to "handle payments over newinteractive television systems" (bray and carroll, 1995).alternatively, direct links between retailers and manufacturers may diminish the role of banks;the directionality of the outcome, although constrained by regulations (themselves subject tochange), is not entirely clear. see bray and carroll (1995).43. at&t's mahal mohan describes in a white paper how the expansion of bandwidth intelephony is being accompanied by a steady expansion of service offerings in circuitswitchedvoice (and data) networks, including 800number and other related services involvingintranetwork databases, plus directory services and specialized security services. according tomohan, "currently these features are offered in rudimentary form as part of data andmultimedia services, often to a limited base of users," but their deployment is expected toexpand "rapidly over the next several years – supporting a broader user base."44. recent fcc action reversing plans to require separate perchannel charges has helped tolower the effective isdn charges, although state regulatory decisions remain critical. see bettsand anthes (1995), fitzgerald (1995), and andrews (1995a).isdn remains imperfectly available, as noted in a recent commentary: "so why isn't isdn aspopular as, say, cable tv? there's still the half of the country that can't get it. even if you areentitled to order the service, you will probably have to suffer through several phone companyordertakers before you find one who knows what you are talking about. also, your internetservice provider may not have isdn at its end. another hangup is the fact that you can't enjoyisdn's benefits without replacing some of your hardware and software. and then there are thetechnical glitches. although isdn is supposed to be a standardized service, there are subtlelocal variations–" (see shaffer, 1995).45. bell atlantic is taking this tack to experiment with "wireless cable"; see mills and farhi(1995).where is the business case?112about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46. see the white paper by robert powers et al.47. for example, baumol and sidak (1994a, p. 202) observed that in network markets "–regulators must ensure that access prices enable the incumbent firm to remain financiallysolvent. the price of access, in other words, must cover not only the incumbent's incrementalcost of providing access, but also the opportunity cost that such provision of access implies forthe incumbent's ability to cover its common fixed costs, including its regulatory obligations toprovide universal service." tye (1994) adds that how this is achieved may depend not only onregulation but also on contractual arrangements between interconnecting parties, whichthemselves may be guided by regulation.more generally, there is considerable discussion in economic and antitrust legal literature aboutthe applicability of the concept of an essential facilityšto which access (as throughinterconnection) may be required. problems relate to defining and measuring the quality ofbeing essential and to the side effects (including discouragement of investment by freeriders)of compulsory access. see, for example, areeda (1990).48. for an indepth discussion of interconnection pricing, see brock (1995).49. schwartz explained that in new york, nynex and tcg have a relationship for exchangeof local traffic using a capacitybased port charge, where loops and ports are unbundled and theinbound traffic is about a quarter of the outbound traffic.50. issues raised in regulatory proceedings include whether incumbents or competitors havehigher costs for terminating calls. see telco competition reports (1994a,b).51. the interplay between network architecture and pricing strategy was the theme of aninterdisciplinary panel on the topic "architecture and economic policy: lessons from theinternet" at the 1995 telecommunications policy research conference. as discussed there,economic theory presents principles for pricing goals and tactics; network architecture affectsthe feasibility and desirability (in terms of impacts on use and implications for provisioning) ofalternative pricing approaches; and discussion among network architects and economists cancontribute to better design of network enhancements to support flexible pricing policies.52. a related challenge is adjusting traditional marketing strategies to the emerging onlineculture. retailers who have enjoyed success on the web appear to be those who pass savings onto the customer (as much as 10 to 20 percent below store prices) and who open themselves to"intelligent agents" used by consumers to search out web sites with the best bargains. other,less successful, online merchants often resist the use of such agents, believing globalcomparison shopping presents a major threat. see rigdon (1995a).53. there is some evidence that consumers prefer the flatrate model. "when you're foolingaround online and you're worried about minutes ticking by, you simply don't use it as much. –you see pennies going by your eyeballs." the implications of various pricing schemes for thefuture of multimedia communications are drawing service providers, users, and regulators intoan ongoing debate; see mills (1995a).54. since many subscribers use more than one service, the number of onlinewhere is the business case?113about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.service accounts (approximately 11.3 million as of late1995) overstates the number ofhouseholds (arlen, 1995b,c; 1996). by contrast, note that the increase between 1993 and 1994in pager subscriptions was about 7 million (wireless messaging report, 1995c).55. see corcoran (1995a), new york times (1995), singletary (1995), rohde (1995a), reporton electronic commerce (1995a), hansell (1995a), and o'brien (1995). according to citibank'sadvertising flyer for this service, there is a "free" 800number modem line; customers can movemoney between accounts, check balances, check whether checks have cleared, pay bills, andobtain stock quotes without charge. citibank has reported some 100,000 subscribers through thethird quarter of 1995 (see arlen, 1995b).56. the concern here is with the business relationship; from a technical point of view, it isreasonable and even desirable for the credit card protocols not to be bound to a particularcommunications solution (i.e., a particular type of communications technology and therefore aparticular class of provider).57. see booker (1995a) and sullivantrainor (1995).58. perhaps because of difficulties guaranteeing cost recovery, they conclude that cabledelivered interactive services will be a choice available to only about 2.5 million households by1998, but will accelerate and reach 40 million households by 2005.59. while there is much discussion about interactive television (broadcast and cable), thatalternative is not likely to rival services delivered via pcs between now and the year 2000.however, whereas with cable the providers make investments and spread costs amongsubscribers, with direct broadcast satellite (dbs) consumers bear substantial capital costs upfront. market research data suggest that consumers spent between $0.5 and $1 billion on digitaldbs receivers in their first year of availability (communications daily, 1995d). this comparesto a total u.s. business localarea network investment of approximately $5 billion (seechapter 5 section, "data communications"). see markoff (1994), landler (1995), and shenon(1995).60. some argue, however, that relatively modest levels of capability may be sufficient tosupport basic access; this is part of the argument behind the case for universal access toelectronic mail as a first step in broader universal information infrastructure access (see, forexample, anderson et al., 1995).61. as discussed at the january workshop, whether settop boxes should continue to be leasedor be made available for purchase is a matter of debate within the cable industry.where is the business case?114about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4technology options and capabilities:what does what, howthe market cannot explore a space that technology has precluded.šdavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologythe technology landscape of today is marked by rapid evolution, andadvances in technology intertwine with evolution in the communicationsindustry itself. this chapter offers an overall perspective on the drivers ofchange and on the capabilities of and trends in communicationsrelatedtechnology, with the goal of putting into perspective many of the specificdevelopments of today. it also presents some of the steering committee'sassessments of specific technology trends. chapter 5 contains complementarystatistics and an analysis of the deployment of these technologies.the changing nature of technology andcommunicationscommunications services have been transformed by a long series ofinnovations, including copper wire, coaxial cable, microwave transmission, andoptical fiber. each has expanded the available bandwidth, and thereforecarrying capacity, at reduced unit cost. over many years the cost per voicechannel has fallen annually by about 10 percent. with the huge increase incarrying capacity enabled by fiber and optoelectronics, the potential for costreduction has become even greateršbut only if the newly available bandwidthcan be utilized profitably. during the sametechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how115about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.period, silicon integratedcircuit technology has allowed the price of computerperformance to fall at a rate of 15 to 25 percent per year. this rapid progress inreducing the cost of computing is what makes computer technology the meansto exploit the great growth in communications carrying capacity made possibleby satellites and fiber technology.advances in the power of the generalpurpose processor are easy to seeand well understood; workstation speed has more than doubled every 2 years,and memory sizes have grown at equivalent rates. in the more specialized areasof communications, this increased processing power can be exploited in anumber of waysšto achieve a simple increase in speed, for example, and tomake computers easier to use (simplicity and natural logic in the user interfacerequire very complex processes in software and hardware). continued rapidprogress assures continued advances in both function and usability. butincreased processing power can also often be used to greater advantage toincrease flexibility and generality, attributes that are key to much of the ongoingtransformation of communications technology and thus the communicationsindustry itself. three specific trends relating to increased flexibility andgenerality are relevant to the steering committee's assessment: the increasinguse of software rather than hardware for implementation of functions, theincreasing modularity of design, and the increasing ability to process andtransform the data being transported within the communications system.implementation of functions in software can reduce cost and permitmodification of a function by upgrading the program. costs can also be reducedby replacing a number of specialpurpose or lowlevel hardware elements witha single integrated processor, which then performs all the same tasks as themultiple hardware elements by executing a program. continuous cost reductionis central to the current pace of technology advance; it permits rapid technologyrollover and restructuring of the hardware base. implementation in software,however, has the added advantage of permitting the functions of a device to bechanged after manufacture, to correct "bugs" or meet evolving user needs,whereas hardware, once manufactured, is frozen. the flexibility to change aproduct during its lifetime is critical, because of rapidly changing userrequirements driven by new applications.one way to build more generality into a system is to make the design moremodular, dividing the system into separable elements that implement differentparts of a function. these modules can then be used in different ways to createnew services. adding modularity requires the implementation of interfacesbetween the elements of the system, and this step adds cost, especially if themodules are physical hardware elements in the design, but to some extent evenif the modules are software modules and the interfaces are subroutine calls.however, even though modutechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how116about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.larity and interfaces do add cost, current trends in design and implementationsuggest (compellingly) that modularity, if properly done, has a powerfuljustification in the generality, flexibility, and potential for growth of theresulting system.a third key trend resulting from increasing processing power is the abilityto process and transform data carried in the communications system. oneconsequence is increased interoperation among previously incompatiblesystems. for example, the broadcast video formats in different parts of theworld, ntsc, pal, and secam, were a real barrier to interchange of videocontent until, as is now the case, it was possible to build economical formatconverters. today, digital and analog telephone systems interwork, as do digitaltelephone systems with different voice codings, such as the several emergingdigital cellular systems. in the future, as digital television broadcasting isdeployed, digital and analog systems for television broadcasting will interwork.these trends act in combination. for example, data transformations such asthe realtime encoding and decoding of video streams or data encryption orcompression are now migrating to software. inexpensive digital signalprocessors permit the manufacture of $150 modems (today) that encode data at28,800 bits per second (bps) for transmission down a phone linešan excellentexample of the power of a processor chip and software to replace dedicatedhardware.these three trends together lead to a communications world withincreasing generality and flexibility and increasing options for interoperability,with additional interfaces permitting the reorganization of the communicationsinfrastructure to offer new services and support new applications. in turn, theincreasing modularity of communications technology has transformed thewhole landscape of the business environment. interfaces represent atechnological form of unbundling, which permits new forms of competition andnew business strategies.how trends in technology are changingcommunications infrastructure and servicesthe various effects of technology on the nature of communicationsdiscussed above have three specific consequences, which represent majorfactors that shape the future of the information infrastructure:1. the separation of infrastructure facilities and service offerings,2. the construction of services layered over other services, and3. the tension between supporting mature and emerging applications.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how117about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.separation of infrastructure facilities and service offeringsin the past, there were two important communications services, telephonyand television. each of these services drove the development of a technologyinfrastructure to serve its needs, and both of these infrastructures are todayprevalent and of great economic importance.telephony and television have evolved considerably since their inception.the telephone system started with copper wires and mechanical switches;moved to modulating many calls on a wire, and then to digital representation ofthe speech channel and electronic switches, which together led to the currentdigital hierarchy; and next evolved to the use of fiber optics to carry theaggregated data and cellular wireless technology as an alternate access path.television delivery (like radio before it) started as overtheair broadcast butdeveloped the cable infrastructure, and more recently consumer satellite dishes.for both of these services during their initial evolution, the serviceobjective remained the same: specifically, the delivery of a telephone call or atelevision channel. however, in both the telephone industry and the broadcastand cable industries, the trend now is to add modularity to the technology and todefine explicit interfaces to the infrastructure that permit offering a wider rangeof services and applications over a common infrastructure.perhaps the earliest significant example of this trend toward separation ofinfrastructure and service offerings is the selling of trunk circuits by thetelephone industry. these circuits, such as t1 at 1.5 mbps and most recentlyds3 at 45 mbps, were first conceived to carry aggregated voice. but they arealso sold as a separate component, to carry either voice or data for privatecustomers. this splitting out of the lowerlevel infrastructure facility byrevealing and marketing the interfaces to the pointtopoint circuits is the singlecritical change in the facilities infrastructure that has created the longhaul datanetwork revolution. it is these trunks that permitted the construction of theinternet and the switched packet networks such as frame relay and switchedmultimegabit data service, and in the past, x.25 networks. these trunkspermitted the construction of online information service networks and theprivate networks that today serve almost all of the major corporations.recent developments more clearly articulate the separation of service frominfrastructure. the telephone industry's new technology approach, calledasynchronous transfer mode (atm), will offer much greater flexibility inservice offerings: atm can carry voice, provide private circuits at essentiallyany specified capacity (rather than at just 1.5 or 45 mbps), and also supportmore advanced services in the data area. cable technology is following asimilar path. while the early cable systems were practechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how118about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tical only for the transport of video, their recent evolution to hybrid fibercoaxial cable allows the infrastructure to be used for a range of services,including telephony and data transfer.the separation of facilities from service offerings makes good sense in thecontext of current business trends (see chapters 2 and 3). the regulatoryopening of more communications markets to competition, for example, puts apremium on infrastructure that facilitates rapid entry into such markets. videoand telephony providers alike wish to be poised to enter each other's business,as well as to participate in new businesses that may emerge. also, as pointedout in previous chapters, the steering committee has concluded that the nii willnot serve one "killer app" primarily, but rather will enable a wide range ofobjectives and applications arising from a broad set of business domains andsocietal functions. many of these applications do not yet exist, and thus acritical objective for the nii is to be open to the development and deploymentof new applications.building services on each otherjust as the separation of infrastructure facilities from services permits theconstruction of a range of services on top of a common infrastructure, so, too,can one service be constructed by building it on top of another. this layeredapproach to constructing services is a consequence of the trends discussed abovešincreased processing power, and more modular design with defined interfacesto basic infrastructure facilities. in fact, a wide and sometimes surprising rangeof service offerings is being created by building one service on top of another.the teaching of networking often involves a simple, layered model oftechnology, in which infrastructure components are installed and then used as afoundation for nextlevel services, and so on in an orderly manner. currentreality is much messier and much less well structured. neither the technologynor the business relationships show a simple order, but instead reflect a verydynamic and creative building of services on top of each other, with the playersboth competing and cooperating to build the eventual service sold to theconsumer.this layered building of services, of course, has been going on for sometime, as noted above in the discussion of telephone trunk circuit sales. there aremany other examples of service overlays, some of which are quite unexpectedand at times confusing. with the expenditure of enough evercheapercomputing cycles, one kind of service can be made into an infrastructure foranother in quite creative ways. for example, software is available that permitsthe creation of telephone connections (with some limitations) over the internet.the data stream that drives thetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how119about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.starsight onscreen television guide is carried, for lack of any better transportservice, in an otherwise unused portion (the vertical blanking interval) of thepublic broadcasting service broadcast signalšan example of transforming,presumably with considerable processing power, an applicationspecific service(ntsc video; named after the standardsdeveloping national televisionsystem committee) into a more general transport service. perhaps the mostconfusing situation occurs when two services each can be built out of the other:the internet can carry digital video, and video delivery facilities can be used tocarry internet service; frame relay service can be used to carry internet packets,but at least one major provider of frame relay today uses internet packets tocarry frame relay packets.beneath these services and overlays of other services lie the physicalfacilities, such as the fiber trunks, the hybrid fiber coaxial cable and cablesystems, the local telephone loops, and the satellites, as well as the switches thathook all of these components together. these are the building blocks on whichall else must stand, and it is thus the technology and the economics of thissector that require detailed study and understanding.the tension between supporting mature and emergingservicesfrom an engineering point of view, the existing network infrastructure isstill largely designed and constructed to achieve the objective of very costeffective and highpenetration delivery of mature services, in particulartelephony and video. while the separation of facilities from services hasimportant business advantages, adding generality to the infrastructure, so that itcan support a range of future applications, raises the critical concern ofincreased costs for infrastructure. the tension between costeffective delivery ofmature services and a general platform to support emerging applications isillustrated by the issue, often raised by participants in the nii 2000 project, ofhow much bandwidth should be provided to the residence, especially backchannel capacity from the residence into the network. a number of participantscalled for substantial backchannel bandwidth, often to avoid precluding newapplications.1 but the infrastructure facilities providers voice the real concernthat adding backchannel capability in too large a quantity would addunacceptable cost to the infrastructure and could threaten the economics of theirbasic business, which requires considerable bandwidth to the home for videobut only enough bandwidth from the home to support voice or lowbandwidthinteractive control. they emphasize that new applications must provethemselves and that investment in new infrastructure capabilities can beundertaken only incrementally. from their perspectechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how120about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tive, it is important to have enough capability to allow the market to explorenew sectors, but they cannot be expected to invest fully until an application isshown to be viable. this stance may limit the rate of growth of newapplications, but there seems no economical alternative. research, as noted inchapter 6, may illuminate ways to reduce investment requirements or enhanceapplications to accelerate return on investment.the steering committee concluded that the resolution of the tensionbetween supporting mature and emerging applications was a key factor indetermining the shape of the future nii. two conclusions emerged from thediscussions and materials presented. first, current technology plans show astudied balance between a costreduced focus on provision of matureapplications and provision of a general environment for innovation of newapplications, and second, there is broad recognition that the internet is theprimary environment for such innovation.resolving the tension: the internet as anexamplethe simple approach to separation of infrastructure from service involvesdefining an interface to the basic infrastructure facilities and then constructingon top of that interface both costreduced support for the mature services andgeneral support for new applications. thus, the telephone system providesinterfaces directly to the highspeed trunks, and the television cable systemsdefine an interface to the analog spectrum of the cable. however, to supportemerging applications, the interface to the underlying infrastructure is not byitself sufficient. new applications should not be constructed directly on top ofthe technologyspecific interfaces, because doing so would tie the applicationstoo directly to one specific technology. for example, a very successfultechnology standard for local area data networking is ethernet. but building anapplication directly on top of ethernet interfaces locks in the application to thatone technology and excludes alternatives such as telephone lines, wireless links,and so on.what is needed is a service interface that is independent of underlyingtechnology options, and also independent of specific applications. an earlierreport from the computer science and telecommunications board, realizingthe information future (rtif; cstb, 1994b), advocated an open interface withthese characteristics to support innovation of new network applications. thereport called this interface the technologyindependent bearer service and calledthe network that would result from providing this interface the open datanetwork, or odn. this interface would normally be effected in software; it isan example of a generalpurpose capability that would be implemented in acomputer as the basic building block for higherlevel services and applications.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how121about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the architecture of the odn was modeled somewhat on the architecture ofthe internet, which has a form of the bearer service in its internet protocol.however, rtif was careful to discuss this critical interface in general termsand not prejudge the suitability of the internet protocols to meet this need.the importance of the internetit would appear at this time that the internet and its protocols represent thebest approach for providing a general service for the support of emergingapplications because of the effectiveness with which the internet protocol servesas a bearer service and the overall architecture functions as an odn. in thecourse of this project, the steering committee heard from a wide range ofapplication developers in areas such as electronic commerce, informationaccess, and businesstobusiness collaboration. in nearly all cases, theapplications were based on one of two kinds of interfaces to the technologybelow. either they were modeled on some mature service and used the existingservice interface of that technology (such as video on demand over existingcable systems or fax over voice) or they were based on the features of theinternet. the steering committee heard repeatedly that the internet standardswere the basis on which new applications were being crafted, and even in casesin which the internet was described as unsuitable, a careful exploration of theconcerns usually suggested that the issue was not the standards themselves, butrather the existing public internet as a delivery vehicle, with its current level ofsecurity, provisioning, and stability. the current volume of deployed devicesusing the internet standards, together with the observed level of investment ininternetrelated products and services, constitutes a unique foundation, one forwhich there is no alternative now or in any reasonable time frame. see box 4.1.based on its assessment of industry trends, the steering committee thusconcluded that the call for an open, technologyindependent bearer service as abasis for emerging applications, as voiced in rtif, was correct, and that a moreconcrete conclusion is now justified: the internet standards are being widelyused to enable new applications and are seen by a great majority of commercialplayers as the only viable option for an open, applicationindependent set ofservice interfaces at this time.for this reason, the steering committee further concluded that specificattention should be paid to ensuring the viability of the internet, in terms of bothenhancing the standards to meet evolving application needs and making surethat networks based on these interfaces are deployed and made widely availableas an environment for the innovation of new applications. the key topics toconsider, then, are (1) what aspects of thetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how122about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 4.1 commercial importance of the internet: aselection of viewsthe commercialization of the internet is already happening, with commercialusers representing the largest user domain type registered in the united states.participants in the january 1995 workshop and may 1995 forum commented on thepresent and future importance of the internet for their conduct of business. somefocused on the barriers to commercial use, such as needs for guarantees ofsecurity and intellectual property rights and the difficulty novice users experience inusing applications on the internet. others noted that commercial services availabletoday can meet these needs, indicating there may be at least a temporarymismatch of perceptions between providers and users. in the longer term, theinternet's sheer ability to build connections was seen as a powerful draw.the internet is not about technology fundamentally. it is a social phenomenonthat is basically the world's largest interconnected set of computers. that is whatmakes the internet have all the energy behind it and what gives it the power of themarketplace and interoperability at all kinds of levels.šmarty tenenbaum, enterprise integrationtechnologies corporation/commercenetwe want the ability to coordinate among the industries. yet we need somepush. we need some standardization to make interoperability, encryption, and anumber of other things happen. we need culture change on the internet from theinformation provider's standpoint, from the educator's standpoint, from the healthcare perspective. our users need to better understand what we are trying to givethem, and we need to better understand what they want, how they want it, and howthey need to get it.šcynthia braddon, the mcgrawhill companiesthe internet excites a variety of people, but there are – a lot of people outthere that are not going to be excited about the internet in the next 10 years. –how do we get lowerlevel software for the part of the population that is not capableor is not interested in – sophisticated stuff? – how do we get all this aimed at allsegments of society?šjoseph donahue, thomson consumer electronics inc.not a lot of people, including me, had the nerve to raise our hands this morningwhen bob lucky asked the perhaps inappropriately phrased question aboutwhether the internet is the nii or not. but the truth of the matter is, if you have theinternet, you do not need much else to have the nii.šandrew lippman, massachusetts institute of technologytechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how123about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet have contributed to its apparent wide acceptance in thecommercial world and (2) how the internet will need to evolve and mature overthe next decade to meet the growing needs of this sector. box 4.2 discusses theorganization of the protocols of the internet and explains how its design allowsfor a general service to be constructed that takes advantage of the costreducedinfrastructure that is engineered for the delivery of mature applications. thesection titled ''the internet," included below in this chapter, further clarifieswhat the internet really is and elaborates on some of its future directions.box 4.2 the architecture of the internetmost users of the internet see it through experiencing its applications, mostobviously the world wide web, but also the ubiquitous electronic mail, remotelogin, file transfer, and other applications. but from the perspective of the internetdesigners, the essence of the internet is not the applications, but rather the morebasic functionality that makes the internet a suitable place for those applications tooperate. the structure of the internet reflects two major design objectives: first, tosupport as many sorts of applications as possible, and second, to operate over asmany sorts of network infrastructure as possible.although this may sound rather odd at first hearing, the internet is more like acomputer than a traditional network. the point is that most computers are designedto be generalpurpose devices, capable of running a wide variety of applicationsšspreadsheets and word processors, databases and process control, and so on.similarly, the internet was designed to support a wide range of applications,including those that had not been conceived at the time the design was undertaken.the recent explosion of the world wide web, clearly not envisioned when theinternet was born, is a measure of the success of this ambition. in contrast, mosttraditional networks were designed to support a specific application, in particulartelephony or video delivery.at the same time that the internet was intended to support a range ofapplications, it was also designed to utilize a range of network technologies: lans,telephone trunks, wireless links, and so on. over the last 20 years, it has evolved tooperate over different underlying technologies with a wide range of speeds,distances, and error rates. it is organized to permit this adaptability as follows. itprovides a set of basic functions, which all applications then use to obtain theirnetwork service. tothe coexistence of new and mature servicesexperience with the internet shows the power of a general bearer serviceas an environment in which new applications can come into existence. thesudden advent of the world wide web makes this point emphatically.however, advocacy of a network with bearerservice interfacetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how124about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.architecture, as called for in rtif, raised in some industry players the concernthat a more inclusive approach was being suggested, that is, that allcommunications services, including mature services such as telephony andtelevision, should be migrated to this general architecture as an objective of thenii. this objective was not what was advocated in rtif or in the materialgathered for this project. nor is it advocated in this report.permit the use of as wide a range of technology as possible, these services aredefined not in terms of the detailed features of one technology, but rather in a verygeneral way that does not depend on specifics such as bandwidth or latency. foreach sort of infrastructure that is put into use, software is then written thattranslates the specific features of that infrastructure into the general, universal formof the service. the applications invoke that software, which in turn calls on theactual network technology.this ability to operate over different sorts of network infrastructure is a key tothe success of the internet and its protocols. hfc, for example, is one possibleinfrastructure that might be used to extend the reach of the internet to homes athigher speeds (see section in text below titled "hybrid fiber coaxial cable"). anumber of products are now available that make it possible to carry the internetprotocols across this form of network technology. while the details of hfc differfrom those for other network technologies, the internet can operate in this contextprecisely because the details are hidden from the applications by the interveningsoftware.as discussed in the beginning of this chapter, the trend in the evolution ofnetwork infrastructure is that the infrastructure itself is separate from the servicesthat are offered on it. the internet is an example of this trend and an illustration ofits power. in almost all cases, internet service providers do not install separateinfrastructure for their internet service. they make use of existing facilities, such aslongdistance trunks installed to support voice, "dark" fibers in metropolitan areas,copper pairs and cable systems for residential access, and so on. the onlyhardware items normally purchased and installed by an internet service providerare the devices that connect the different infrastructures together, the routers, and,for providers that support dialup access, the equipment to terminate thesetelephone calls. most of the expenses for an internet service provider are the costsof renting the underlying facilities and the costs associated with supporting thecustomer.voice (telephony) is a case in point. the standards specific to thatapplication of course predate the internet standards. the infrastructure andinterface standards supporting the telephone system are mature and stable andhave been engineered to provide very costeffective delivery of the service.meanwhile, the growth in technology to support voice communications over theinternet has caused some speculation about the transfer of voice traffic from thepublic switched telephone network to the internet. there is no reason to migratethis service to a network such as the internet that might be less costeffective forvoice, since it was not optimized for that purpose. the recent fad of voicecommunications andtechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how125about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telephony over the internet may suggest to some that the internet is perhapsmore rather than less costefficient than the existing telephone system. a morerealistic conclusion is that voice over the internet currently appears appealingdue to differences in pricing (in part a reflection of regulatory circumstances),differences that must prove temporary if internet telephony becomes asignificant component of total telephone traffic.it is critical to understand the following distinction: the internet must beable to carry voice (and video), but it is not necessary, or indeed desirable, thatall voice and video be carried on the internet. today, the internet is onlypartially suited for carrying realtime voice, because traffic overloads can causeexcessive delay in the delivery of voice packets, which disrupts the playback ofthe speech. plans are now under way to evolve the internet so that it can carryrealtime voice streams with predictable delays. voice, and other realtimetraffic such as video, can then be used as a component of any multimediaapplications that might emerge. achieving this objective does not require thatthe internet carry voice with the same efficiency as the telephone system, sincethe goal of the internet is generality, not costreduced application solutions.the internet has shown clearly that an open and level playing field leads tovigorous innovation, and the steering committee believes that this opportunityfor innovation should be open to anyone willing to offer a new service orattempt a new application. since the eventual business structure of an unproveninnovation is usually unclear, it seems reasonable by default to innovate in anopen context, which the steering committee sees as maximizing the chance ofsuccess. the interface that needs to be open is the applicationindependentinterface (the bearer service, or in specific terms the internet protocol).new physical infrastructure need not be deployed if, in 10 years, somenowemerging application has become so prevalent that economics justifiesmoving it to a new set of specialized service interfaces. precisely becausephysical infrastructure is being engineered to be decoupled from service, itshould be possible to build a new specialized service on the deployedinfrastructure. none of this effort would interfere with the longterm viability ofthe general bearer service (or, in concrete terms, the internet), which wouldcontinue to support both new services and those mature services that operatewell there. experience with the mechanisms of the internet suggests that theiruse of bandwidth is sufficiently costeffective for the services the internet hasspawned that so far there has been little pressure to move any applications offthe internet to more costreduced delivery services and interfaces.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how126about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current technologyševaluating the optionsthe discussion above has alluded to a number of technologies ofsignificant current relevance, such as hybrid fiber coaxial cable or the internet.this section briefly reviews the key features of several important technologiesand assesses the extent to which they address some of the concerns raisedabove, such as a capability for generality and flexibility.hybrid fiber coaxial cablefiberoptic cable has an informationcarrying capacity that is orders ofmagnitude greater than that of copper. in the long term, some time in the nextcentury, ubiquitous deployment of fiber to every home and office would openup vast amounts of bandwidth to end users. (see the white paper by paul greenfor a complete discussion.) however, deployment of fiber requires a largeinvestment to cover the costs not only of the fiber cable and associatedoptoelectronic equipment, but also of the labor and construction needed to layphysical cables through cities and suburban neighborhoods. thus, althoughfiber has been deployed extensively in the backbone sections of telephone andcable television networks nationwide, it is only relatively recently that theaccess portions of these networksšthe multitudes of separate links that connectend users to the networks and that account for most of the total mileage in thesystemšhave begun to be upgraded to include fiber. wireline access networkscomprising a mix of fiber and copper elements are now being deployed inresidential areas.for such access networks, a very important technical approachšcurrentlyembraced by many cable providers and also being evaluated by telephonecompaniesšis hybrid fiber coaxial cable (hfc; often abbreviated as hybridfiber coax). this approach is best understood as an extension of current cabletelevision infrastructure. in firstgeneration cable systems, a distribution systemof coaxial cables and amplifiers fans out from the community head end to eachhouse. in an hfc system, fiberoptic links connect the community head end tosmall neighborhoods, and the traditional cable technology is then used to fanout inside each neighborhood to reach individual homes. the advantage of thissystem is that the fiber replaces long cable runs that include many amplifiers,each of which represents a point of failure, a limit on capacity, and a potentialsource of signal degradation.the expectation for hfc is that it will transform an existing cable plantdedicated to analog video delivery to a more general infrastructure capable ofsupporting a range of consumer services. the higher bandtechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how127about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.width capacity from the head end to each home will permit traditional analogvideo services and newer digital video services to coexist. additionally, thereduced number of amplifiers and better noise characteristics of the hfcenvironment will permit practical use of the reversechannel capacity of thesystem, which will thus allow for twoway services such as telephony and datatransmission.although different vendors offer different specific technical features, thebasic characteristics of planned hfc systems are well understood. traditional,allcoaxial (coax) systems can carry no more than about 80 analog televisionchannels. in most cable systems currently being upgraded to hfc, an additional200 mhz of spectrum is available for digital services. the digital modulationtechnique most commonly contemplated for this context, called 256 qam,yields a downstream digital capacity of 1.4 gbps within this spectrumšenoughto deliver multiple digitized video and other data streams to each usersimultaneously.some assumptions about service penetration suggest how an hfc systemcould be used for delivery of digital services. a typical hfc network isexpected to pass 500 homes per nodeša neighborhood of homes served from asingle fiberšof which about 300 might be customers of the system. if about 40percent of those customers subscribe to the digital services (at some extracharge), then 120 homes are sharing the available bandwidth. if it is assumedthat perhaps onethird of the subscribers might be using digital services at agiven moment, then the likely peak load is 40 homes. divided among 40 homes,the downstream capacity is about 35 mbps per home, which is sufficient tosupport several video streams to each home.2given the considerable interest in what sort of data services might bepossible with an hfc approach, it is useful to look at what can be achieved withcurrent products. in the last year a number of devices called cable modems wereoffered to the cable industry that use one or more video channels in eachdirection to carry bidirectional data across coax and hfc systems (robichaux,1995b). at a current cost of $500 to $1,000 per consumer (a cost expected todrop to perhaps $200 with volume), they seem to represent a studied balancebetween provision of generality and controlled cost. existing cable modems usea single analog television channel on the cable (6 mhz of bandwidth) totransmit about 27 mbps of data downstream, which is almost three times thecapacity of an ethernet. (commercial cable data modems available within 1 to 2years will provide for 39 mbps per channel based on 256 qam.)traffic in the upstream direction uses the 5 to 40mhz portion of theavailable spectrum, which is used today (if at all) by community accesstelevision for feeding video back to the head end. this part of the cablespectrum has generally been found to have problems of electrical noisetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how128about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but can be utilized if specific technical issues are attended to. in particular, amore robust, lowerefficiency modulation technique must be used, which yieldsan upstream bandwidth inside a single analog channel of perhaps 10 mbps.most cable data modems today divide this upstream capacity into smallerchannels, either 1.5 mbps (the same as a t1 telephone circuit) or 128 kbps (thesame as the basicrate isdn telephone service). another approach takes the full10 mbps and allocates it dynamically among all the potential usersšmuch asan ethernet lan is operated. thus today's cable data modems using onedownstream channel and one upstream channel, can currently provide up to 27mbps downstream and up to 10 mbps upstream.this capacity can be shared by all the homes in a fiber neighborhood,typically 500 homes, noted above. however, to allow for increased demand,most hfc systems are being designed to permit eventual separation ofneighborhoods into units as small as 100 homes, in which case the 27 mbpsdownstream and the 10 mbps upstream per channel (however subdivided)would be shared among no more than 100 potential customers. for video orother advanced services, it is reasonable to assume that only some of thepotential customers would subscribe to the service and that of those, only somewould be active. the resulting degree of sharing would be similar to what isexperienced today on many corporate lans such as ethernet. in addition, morethan one down and/or up channel could be allocated to data services, if therewere sufficient demand or if different sorts of data services were to be providedon a single cable. while there is not yet a great deal of operational experiencewith these cable data modems, the prospect is that twoway data services overcable can be successfully deployed.deploying cable data services today requires that the cable system beupgraded at least by the addition of upchannel amplifiers and the use of fiber toserve a neighborhood of reasonable size. even if the cable provider does notadd the additional downstream amplifiers to activate the additional 200 mhz ofcapacity discussed above, it is still possible to deploy currentgeneration datamodems without disrupting existing services. at least some of these cablemodems transmit data toward the home using a frequency above that of all ofthe channels carried by current cable systems today. data services thus can beadded to an existing cable system without requiring the cable operator to giveup any of its existing cable video offerings.current cable infrastructure can be upgraded at a fairly modest cost(estimated at perhaps $125 to $130 per house passed, on average) to yield themore advanced hfc system, which would give existing cable operators a shortterm advantage (compared to new entrants, such as telephone companies) in thecapability to move to a more general infrastructechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how129about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ture. however, there was considerable discussion in the workshop, forum, andwhite papers about the degree to which cable hfc systems would actuallyprovide sufficient bandwidth in a general form (as opposed to being tied tovideo delivery) that could serve as a practical infrastructure for emergingapplications, or more specifically to support the internet standards for thispurpose.despite some disagreement, a reasonable conclusion is that although thehfc systems may or may not provide enough capacity to serve a fullydeveloped market of as yet unknown applications, there is enough capacity toexplore the marketplace and to let consumers who wish to lead the marketpurchase enough capacity to get started. it was the opinion of various of thefacilities providers that if this point could be reached successfully, furtherinvestment to upgrade the capacity would not be an impediment. in fact,additional technical steps already exist to increase the capacity further. forexample, as fiber is deployed further into the network and the number of homesper node decreases, an upper range of frequencies (such as 900 mhz to 1 ghz)could be made available for upstream traffic as well.3 chapter 3 discussesrelated issues of economics, including the appeal of incremental investment, ingreater detail.fiber to the curbhybrid fiber coax is not the only approach to bringing higherbandwidthservices to the home. "fiber to the curb" (fttc), an alternative that has beenproposed for broadband access, is a term that could, of course, be applied to anytechnology that carries fiber to this point in the distribution network, with eithertwisted pair copper or coaxial cable reaching from the curb to the home. insome discussions, the term "fttc" is used to describe a system for delivery oftraditional telephone service and narrowband switched services. in other cases,fttc is used to describe a system for the delivery of video and broadbandservices. fttc systems designed for video are in general designed foradvanced services, and not for distribution of analog television signals, since foranalog video there are more economical points at which to terminate the fiber.thus, fttc systems are typically alldigital. further, because most fttcproposals envision services such as video on demand, the head end for thefttc system often includes a highcapacity digital switch, which can routedifferent video signals to different channels on the fttc system. cost estimatesfor fttc systems may increase substantially if the cost of such a switch isincluded in the components, a factor that makes it difficult to compare the costsof hfc and fttc systems.a typical fttc system might carry several hundred digital channels. thefiber carrying these signals would terminate at a small electronic unit,technology options and capabilities: what does what, how130about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.typically in a pedestal, which would serve 10 to 30 residences. the connectionfrom the pedestal to the homes could be coaxial cable, twisted copper pairs, orboth. over such a short length of twisted pairs, coding schemes can carry anumber of channels of video on copper wire, so that fttc schemes could, insome cases, provide a means to reuse some of the existing copper wires in thetelephone system.the pedestal in fttc systems is somewhat more complex than the fibertocoax converter in an hfc system, but the increased costs might be somewhatbalanced by the option of cheaper equipment in the residence, since the veryshort wire runs permit use of a simpler coding scheme on the wire. however, amajor cost issue for fttc is powering the electronics in the pedestal. runninga power cable from the head end along with the fiber adds to the system cost.one proposal for using fttc is to build an fttc system alongside some otherolder system, such as a simple coaxial system, so that the coaxial cable can beused to carry power as well as to deliver basic analog video.beyond fttc systems are systems that carry fiber all the way to the home.several participants in the forum and workshop observed that the issue of fiberto the home is one of economics. as discussed in chapter 5, it was predictedthat this step might occur within 20 years. however, systems such as fttcwith coaxial cable to the home are capable of delivering very substantial datarates into the home, potentially hundreds of megabits per second, depending onthe specific approach used. thus a lack of fiber all the way to the home shouldnot be equated with an inevitable bottleneck for bandwidth in the path.digital services and the telephone infrastructurecentral to alexander graham bell's invention of the telephone was theidea of analog transmissionšthat the voltage transmitted was to be proportionalto the sound pressure at the microphone. thus for almost a century thetelephone plant was designed to transmit analog signals in a narrowband channel.beginning with the introduction of the t1 carrier circuit in the 1960s, thetelephone plant has evolved to digital operation. essentially all interofficetelephone networks are internally digital, designed around the notion of voicesized (64,000 bps) chunks of capacity that are set up and taken down to formconnections that last typically for many seconds. first the intracity links weredigitized, followed by the switches, and then optical fiber made the digitizationof the longhaul links economically possible in the span of only a few shortyears. optical fiber has increased the capacity of the digital longhaultransmission system to the point that the cost, if computed as a cost per bit, isnearly free. although there aretechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how131about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.obviously costs associated with the longhaul system, there seem to be fewconcerns that it can meet the capacity requirements of an evolving globalinformation infrastructure.the current standard for transmission of digital information over fiber issonet (an acronym for synchronous optical network). sonet is largely atool of the telephone companies to provide capacity, both for data and for voicetelephone traffic, whereby each voice telephone connection is granted a twoway, 64kbps data stream. sonet uses the raw bit capacity of a fiber stream tocreate multiplexed substreams of synchronous data. thus sonet turns a bigpipe into a collection of smaller pipes, which are individually synchronized atspecified bit rates. longdistance fiber trunks are now utilizing the sonetstandard, and in the metropolitan areas, the telephone companies have widelydeployed sonet fiber rings.now only the "last mile" remains as the vestige of the analog telephoneplant. but of course much of the economics of communications resides in thisubiquitous gap between the homes of the country and the reservoir of digitalcapacity in the network beyond. this part of the system is now being digitizedfor voice service through the use of a digital overlay known as digital loopcarrier technology that enables a number of homes to share a single connectionback to the central office by converting the analog signals from the telephonesinto digital streams, and then multiplexing the streams from the different homestogether on the single connection at a point near the home. these digital loopcarrier systems can be more economical than individual wire pairs to eachhome, but they complicate the problem of sufficient broadband access byallocating to each home only the equivalent of one voice channel of digitalcapacity. this constraint prevents the use of the copper pair to support higherdata rates, a capability that telephone providers have sought for several years, inorder to be able to support delivery of video or interactive data access.data over the telephone systemto provide data services, the telephone companies have over the last twodecades evolved a series of changes and overlays to the access network. thesimplest is of course the bruteforce approach of a voiceband modem, whichessentially turns a data stream into a voiceband analog signal that can betransmitted over the telephone network just like any other voicelike signal.although modem technology has become very sophisticated and ubiquitous, itis limited by the voiceband capacity of the telephone networkšultimatelysomething less than 64 kbps; currently available products enable 28.8kbps datarates.for the digital transmission of higherspeed data over the access loop,technology options and capabilities: what does what, how132about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a number of approaches have been developed, most prominently integratedservices digital network (isdn) and asymmetric digital subscriber line (adsl)technology. in either case a special modem is used on the customer premises toenable the transmission of digits directly into the network. for isdn the rate is128 kbps, full duplex, while for adsl the rate is 1.5 mbps from the network(up to 6 mbps over shorter distances) and considerably less in the upstreamdirection. both isdn and adsl solutions depend on the particularcircumstances of an individual home, such as the distance to the central office,the presence of a digital subscriber line, and the amount of interferenceencountered.adsl was developed with a view toward the transmission of video signalsover the existing access circuits. there are other forms of digital subscriber linetechnology as well, such as the symmetric highbitrate digital subscriber line(hdsl), which can transmit 1.5 or 2 mbps over two pairs of copper wire for upto 18,000 feet. broadband digital subscriber line (bdsl) technology, also underdevelopment, carries data downstream at rates of 12 mbps to 52 mbps andupstream at 1.5 mbps to 3.1 mbps over distances of a few thousand feet. thesenewer forms of digital subscriber line technology could be used over theinstalled copper wires, where distance and other characteristics permit, forinteractive data access (such as connection to the internet) and would providehigher data rates than does isdn. for data services, the hdsl or bdsl pathfrom the residence would be connected to a packet switch located either in thecentral office or remotely in the serving area, if necessary, to ensure that thecopper runs were not too long. equipment of this sort is now being tested infield trials.making effective use of access circuits is not the only problem to be solvedif data are to be transmitted over the telephone system. it is also necessary tospecify the format of the data, the signaling to be used to control thetransmission, and all the other components of a transport system. thisinformation is necessary so that switches within the telephone system canoperate on this data. a number of proposals have been adopted by the telephoneindustry, with varying degrees of success, in the last two decades. these datacommunications standards relate to isdn; x.25 and its newer incarnation,frame relay; switched multimegabit data service (smds); and asynchronoustransfer mode (atm) (see table 4.1 for a concise description). these standardsare not strictly comparable, in that the associated services are organized insomewhat different ways, but they all deal with the packaging and handling ofdata by both the end terminals and the network itself.internet service, which is also defined by data communication standards,has not yet been offered widely by the telephone providers, although several arenow marketing it, or have declared their intention totechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how133about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.do so. internet service is different from the services listed above in that itsdelivery is less directly tied to a set of hardware technologies. thus, from theperspective of a telephone provider, the internet is a service that would operateon top of one of the services listed above.table 4.1 data communications service standards adopted by the telephoneindustrystandardspeedtypeintegrated services digitalnetwork (isdn)128 kbps basic rate,1.5 mbps primary rateconnectionorienteda streamsframe relayup to 1.5 mbpsvirtual private lines,connectionorienteda switched multimegabitdata services (smds)from 1.2 mbps to 34mbpspublic addressing,connectionless packetsb asynchronous transfermode (atm)155 mbps (other ratesavailable)small, fixedsize packets,connectionorienteda a ''connectionoriented" means that the call route is prearranged, as in today's voice telephonecall, so that a packet (or cell) carrie only an indication of the connection with which it isassociated.b "connectionless" means that each packet contains the routing address, like an envelope inthe postal system.while isdn was originally defined as a switched service fully capable ofcarrying data across the entire telephone system, today it is important to theinformation infrastructure primarily as a fast method for accessing private datanetworks and the internet. as mentioned above in the discussion of digitaloptions for access circuits, it may be thought of simply as a "better modem." tosupport internet access, the customer establishes an isdn connection from theend point to some internet access packet switch and then sends internet protocol(ip) packets over the isdn connection.frame relay represents a way to provide a virtual private network among anumber of sites, such as a closed corporate network. the term "virtual" has beenused to describe these networks because, while they appear to the user as a setof private connections among the sites, there are no separate circuits that havebeen allocated from the telephone infrastructure to support them. frame relay isa packet service, and the packets of various frame relay subscribers are mixedtogether across the underlying trunks. this statistical multiplexing, typical ofservices that aretechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how134about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.called virtual, provides a much lower cost service, at the risk of someuncertainty about instantaneous capacity. such uncertainty about allocation ofcapacity does not seem to be a serious issue for many users, however, sinceframe relay is proving popular in the marketplace.smds is another packet service like frame relay, but it differs in that itdoes not involve preestablished paths among a set of sites. instead, it can beused as a public network, in which any site can send to any other by putting theproper address on the packet. in this respect smds is somewhat similar to theinternet protocols. however, its addresses are in a different format (theyresemble telephone numbers), and smds can also be configured to provide aclosed user group, similar to the service provided by frame relay.whereas isdn, frame relay, smds, and the internet are overlay servicesdesigned to deliver data access over the existing telephone infrastructure, atmrepresents a radical rethinking of the network itself. atm has grown from amere descriptor of payload within what was previously called "broadbandisdn" to a force of its own that uniquely has gained support from both thecomputer and telecommunications industries. since atm will probably be animportant building block for the networks of the future, it is explained in somedetail below.asynchronous transfer modethe aim of atm is to provide a flexible format for handling a mix offuture trafficšon the one hand, streams of highspeed, realtime informationlike video, and, on the other, packetized, nonrealtime information likeelectronic mail. atm represents one attempt to handle both kinds of trafficefficiently based on a technical compromisešsmall packets or "cells" with afixed length of 48 bytes, and a connectionoriented approach built around"virtual channels" and "virtual paths'' so that routes for packets arepreestablished and packets within a given connection experience similar delayson their trips through the network. the design goal for atm is to optimizenetwork cost and speed by adopting a single compromise for all applications.thus atm is seen as flexible, powerful, economical, and particularly suited formultimedia applications.atm is being commercialized on two major fronts. telecommunicationscarriers are preparing to use it as a backbone infrastructure for flexibleprovisioning of the multimedia services of the future. meanwhile, the computerindustry has adapted atm to the needs of highspeed lans. the two industrieshave joined in forming an independent standards body, the atm forum, whichhas been focusing on formulating "adaptation layers" for atm that specializeits operation for particular classes of application.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how135about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.if atm is to serve as the common building block for digital services in thetelecommunications industry, it must be able to provide effective support for theinternet protocol, since most data networks today communicate through thenetworks using ip. to accomplish this, the ip packets must be broken up intothe smaller atm cells so that the relatively large ip packets can "ride on top of"the small and nimble atm cells. next, the connectionless addressing of the ipmust be converted to the connectionoriented atm system; i.e., a "call" must beestablished for the ip packet's route via atm. third, the congestion control andbandwidth allocation mechanisms of atm and the internet protocols must bemade to work together. these issues are not trivial, and much work is currentlybeing done to resolve the efficiency of internet transport through an atmsystem. but if these issues can be resolved, both atm and the internetprotocols should benefit, since the telecommunications industry will acquire anew technology that it can deploy for highspeed data transfer, and the internetwill acquire a new and advanced infrastructure over which it can operate.the potential benefits of internetbased networking over an atminfrastructure are illustrated in the white paper by gregory bothun et al. thepaper discusses operational trials in oregon and colorado, where an atmswitched network running ip was used to dramatically increase the capacity ofuniversity networks. because the new infrastructure supported ip, universityusers did not have to abandon their existing protocol structure. moreover, thisapproach facilitated collaboration with other institutions, particularly local k12schools, whose networks were not based on atm but did support ip. asbothun et al. point out,one might assume that highend transport options would preclude theparticipation of secondary schools; however, this did not prove to be the case.the use of ipbased networking provided the ability to costeffectively bringsecondary schools into the networked environment. – with the centraldominance of ipbased routers, telecommunications transport became atransparent commodity to be mixed and matched based on costperformanceanalyses for each individual location.local area networksthe last few years have seen major advances in the performance and costeffectiveness of network technology for the local area, ranging from the workgroup to the multibuilding campus. indeed, there was very little discussion ofthis technology area in the white papers or the forum, largely because it doesnot seem to represent any serious impediments to progress.in terms of performance, the major advances have been to increasetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how136about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.speeds. atm local area network (lan) technology with 155mbps hostinterfaces has now entered the marketplace. in parallel, standards have beendefined for ethernet operation at 100 mbps, and host interface cards for thisoption are now also on the market. the faster ethernet is seen by many inindustry as the next generation of faster lan, since the interface cards are nowpriced at not much above the cost of a premium 10mbps ethernet interfaceonly a year ago.a closely related advance has occurred in hubs, the points at which thecables from hosts are connected, which now include a range of products withdifferent levels of performance (at, of course, different costs). higherperformance hubs incorporate switching among the interface ports, whichmeans that separate pairs of hosts can communicate at once without interferingwith each other, in contrast to the earlier hubs in which a packet from only onehost could be handled at any one time. atm has always been based onswitching at the hub, but both 10 and 100mbps ethernet now also offerswitching as a product option.wirelesswireless communication offers a number of options for local networkingas well as for advancing access to the information infrastructure. this sectiondiscusses wireless in the telephony and data transmission applications. trendsin overtheair broadcast, and the impact on the broadcast industry, arediscussed in the next section.wireless is being used to address two problems in network operation. thefirst is mobility, the ability of the user to move around while being connected.mobile users are now increasingly evident, ranging from agents at rental carreturn facilities and roving checkout clerks in shopping areas to traveling officeworkers in locations lacking access to wireline devices. the other role ofwireless is to reduce the cost and complexity of deploying new services. someof the new video distribution services clearly illustrate the latter objective,whereas cellular telephony seems to illustrate the formeršbut perhaps the latteras well, since in some developing countries cellular is seen as a cheapertechnology to deploy for general telephony.current trends in wireless telephony suggest that there will be rapidchanges and advances in the market. the providers of advanced cellularservices and personal communication service (pcs) believe that their marketwill be demand driven, as chapter 5 indicates. the recent federalcommunications commission (fcc) auctions of spectrum for pcs and theevolving standards for cellular telephones both suggest a substantial industryinvestment, which should lead to increased product availability in a very fewyears. indeed, since the fcc licenses mandate a schedule oftechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how137about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transmitter installation for pcs, the time frame of new facilities deployment ismore or less predictable (see box 4.3). in most cases, the fcc licensingparameters have 5 and 10year penetration targets, with the 10year targetrepresenting substantial (50 percent to 75 percent) penetration.box 4.3 personal communication servicelicensing parametersnarrowband 1 nationwide: (50 states, d.c., american samoa, guam, northern mairanaislands, puerto rico, u.s. virgin islands, generally)base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of 750,000square kilometers, or serve 37.5 percent of the u.s. population, within5 years of the date that an initial license is granted.base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of1,500,000 square kilometers, or serve 75 percent of the u.s.population within 10 years of the date that an initial license is granted.regional: (5 regions: northeast, south, midwest, central, west)base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of 150,000square kilometers, or serve 37.5 percent of the service areapopulation, within 5 years of the date that an initial license is granted.base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of 300,000square kilometers, or serve 75 percent of the service area population,within 10 years of the date that an initial license is granted.major trading areas (mtas): 47base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of 75,000square kilometers, or 25 percent of the geographic area, or serve 37.5percent of the population of the service area, within 5 years of thedate that an initial license is granted.much of the interest in wide area wireless has been in cellular telephonyand narrowband services such as paging. this focus reflects the relativematurity of those markets, which permits somewhat better business planning. italso reflects the fact that, given current technology options, installing wirelessinfrastructure that meets more general service requirements such as higherspeed interactive data access is rather moretechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how138about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.costly. the perceived costliness of more general wireless infrastructurenaturally suggests that deployment decisions in this sector will tend towardmore targeted solutions. in fact, a major part of the wireless investment over thenext few years will be in real estate and in the construction of antenna towers.these towers probably will permit the installation of several different radiosystems, so that in terms of tower construction, the wireless industry is alsobuilding an infrastructure of potential generality. (note, however, that someoptions for cellular and pcs systems involve relatively small cell sizes andsmall antenna structures that do not need towers.)base stations must provide coverage to a composite area of 150,000square kilometers, or 50 percent of the geographic area, or serve 75percent of the population of the service area, within 10 years of thedate that an initial license is granted.basic trading areas (btas): 487must construct at least one base station and provide service within 1year of the date that an initial license is granted.broadband 230mhz blocksmust provide a signal level sufficient to provide adequate service to atleast onethird of the population in the licensed area within 5 years ofbeing licensed, and twothirds of the population in the licensed areawithin 10 years of being licensed (population may be definedaccording to 1990 or 2000 census).10mhz blocksmust provide a signal level sufficient to provide adequate service to atleast onequarter of the population in the licensed area within 5 yearsof being licensed, or make a showing of substantial service in thelicensed area within 5 years of being licensed (as based on 1990 or2000 census).1narrowband: 901902 mhz; 930931 mhz; 940941 mhz2broadband: 18501890 mhz; 19301970 mhz; 21302150 mhz; 21802200 mhzsource: mtas and btas based on rand mcnally 1992 commercial atlas and marketingguide, 123rd edition, bta/mta map; exceptions as noted in fcc rules (47 cfr 24.102;cfr, 1994).although the options for higherspeed wireless data transmission aretechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how139about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.less fully developed, the possibilities are quite exciting. the cost of radios thatoperate at higher regions of the radio spectrum has declined rapidlyšonly afew years ago, producing an inexpensive radio operating above 1 ghz wasconsidered challenging, whereas now one can purchase, for a few hundreddollars per station, wireless lan technology that operates at 5.8 ghz. thistechnical advance opens up a large range of spectrum for consumer devices.other products are available that offer shortrange lan emulation and pointtopoint data communications over a few miles at data rates of up to lan speeds(a few megabits per second) and at prices of a few thousand dollars or less.these sorts of devices, which are available from five or ten vendors and areentering the market for workstation interconnection, show some of the potentialfor wireless.4most of the current products for interconnecting workstations operate inunlicensed fcc bands at about 900 mhz or 2.4 ghz. both of these bands havepower limits for unlicensed operation that restrict the range and speed ofservice. devices that operate at about a megabit per second have a range of afew hundred feet, and devices that operate at lower speeds, 100 kbps or less,can blanket a region with a radius of perhaps half a mile. these technicallimitations mean that devices currently on the market do not have the capacityto provide full access to the residential market, which would be better served bya device with a data rate of a few megabits per second and a service radius of afew miles. however, if current products indicate the state of the technology, itwould seem possible to build a highercapacity device if the spectrum wereavailable under suitable conditions for transmitter power and informationcoding. the recent proposal to the fcc from apple for an "nii band" aroundthe 5ghz portion of the spectrum, potentially supporting applications over 10km distances at about 24 mbps, had the objective of serving this purpose (seeapple, 1995).noted elsewhere in this report is the possibility that the forces ofcompetition and the motivations of private industry for investment may limitthe interoperability of emerging telecommunications infrastructure. nextgeneration cellular standards in the united states offer a possible example ofsuch an outcome. differences of opinion about the relative merits of twoemerging approaches to pcs, together with the pressures for the rapidintroduction of products into the highdemand market, have resulted in twodigital cellular standards being brought to the u.s. market, one based on timedivision and one based on code division. this outcome, while allowing differentproviders to explore different approaches, suggests that a consumer will not beable to purchase a single digital cellular telephone and use it for roaming to allother digital systems within the united states.5 some consumer dissatisfactionwith this situation has already been expressed.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how140about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in contrast, more active involvement by the government in europe hasessentially led to the selection of a single digital standard for nextgenerationcellular telephony (global system for mobile communications; gsm), whichwill permit the use of a single device almost anywhere within europe and inmany other parts of the world. this stronger participation by government intechnology creation perhaps helps european citizens and european industry, butthe european standard has also been criticized for using spectrum lessefficiently, which may add to longterm costs. the european standard has alsobeen criticized for disrupting the operation of hearing aids.broadcasting 6the terrestrial broadcast system of today was designed for one specificpurpose, the delivery of entertainment video. however, broadcasting representsanother example of the current trend to separate the specifics of theinfrastructure from the set of higherlevel services being offered and to pushinto more general technology. since the major investment of the broadcaster isin the tower and the operation of the transmitter, any use of a television channelthat offers new service has a low incremental cost.the essential first step in providing new types of services to consumers isthe transition to digital standards for video transmission. the development ofstandards for digital television signals can permit four channels at the sameresolution to be transmitted in the space where one was carried before. thesenew digital channels represent an asset that can be used to provide additionaltraditional television channels, or perhaps deflected into some new service. thisdevelopment will give consumers a much larger selection of programs. inparticular, many niche markets may now be served economically, catering toevery consumer taste. the broadcasting industry is clearly assessing its options,taking into account the current regulatory situation.digital terrestrial broadcasting is also necessary to implement highdefinition television (hdtv) and advanced television broadcast and cableservice. standards for these services may be approved by the fcc in thecoming year (andrews, 1995b). broadcasters will be able to profit from the saleand transmission of many types of program and nonprogramrelated digitaldata, in addition to the hdtv and multiprogram stream standard televisionservices. hdtv will start as a primetime service in part because primetimeprogramming is already shot mostly on hdtv 35mm film. in other parts of theday, standard digital 525line television will be broadcast, with four programstreams filling the standard channel in place of one, through the use of digitalcompression.a consequence of the digital conversion is a plethora of standards fortechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how141about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.representing the television picture. at least three important standards arerequired for digital transmission of video: the resolution of the picture on the screen. the hdtv standarddefines a higher resolution and a different ratio of height to width thandoes the standard definition television (sdtv) standard, which yieldsa picture more similar to the ntsc picture of today. the compression technique for encoding the picture. for this purpose,the industry is converging on the mpeg2 standard (named after thestandardsdeveloping motion picture experts group; see plantec,1995), but there are variations within the standard (called the profileand the level) that determine the picture quality, the efficiency of thecompression, and the cost of the decoder. the method of transmitting the compressed digital signal. differenttransmission methods will be used depending on whether or not thereis a limitation to the power of the transmitter, and, in consequence, onhow "noisy" the reception is.the different industries concerned with delivery of videošterrestrialbroadcast, cable, and satellitešhave in some cases settled on different optionsfor these standards. cable systems generally are not limited in transmitterpower, and they have very good noise characteristics. the current proposals fordigital transmission across cable systems thus tend toward schemes that canpack as much digital information as possible into an existing analog videochannel. the scheme currently preferred, called 64qam, can fit 27 mbps ofdata into a 6mhz analog channel. terrestrial broadcast standards, which musttake into account worse noise conditions, are currently using a more robustscheme, called 8vsb, that fits 19 mbps of data into the same channel. incontrast, satellite television broadcast, because of the extreme limits on powerand resultant poor noise conditions, uses a very robust but bandwidthconsuming scheme, called qpsk, that uses four analog video channels to carry27 mbps of data. the different industries have also, at present, tended to adoptdifferent profiles and levels of the mpeg2 standard, again because the optionsrepresent different tradeoffs in bandwidth, quality, and cost.7to deal with this range of formats, the nature of the television will have tochange. it is technically possible to build a television that can decode multiplestandards, but this adds to the cost of the device. the alternative is to providethe consumer with a settop device specific to the method being used to deliverthe signal. the television itself would then become a monitor, with many of theadvanced features in the settop box. such a change in the terrestrial broadcastindustry would represent a major transition, since today the design of alltelevisions (as mandated bytechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how142about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the fcc) permits the reception of overtheair broadcast without a translationbox. however, it seems inevitable that such boxes will exist, if only to permitthe analog ntsc televisions of today to receive the digital signals soon to come.research today is addressing the question of building televisions that can,at least to some extent, decode multiple standards at a reasonable cost. anhdtv decoder for a lowerresolution sdtv television can be built at a costonly slightly above that for an sdtv decoder and will permit reception ofhdtv on an sdtv television. building an mpeg decoder for the morecomplex "main profile" requires additional memory in the device, a requirementthat could add $40 to $50 to the cost of the decoder at today's prices for memory(reed, 1995). receivers capable of dealing with both qam and vsb shouldreasonably be built at a cost only slightly higher than the cost of a singlededicated decoder (see the white paper by jill boyce et al.). but the finalarrangement of modules and components in the digital television of the future isfar from clear.finally, systems are emerging for the wireless transmission of videosignals in a lowpower broadcasting mode. multichannel multipoint distributionservice (mmds), also known as wireless cable, uses lowpower microwavesignals sent from a central tower to customer equipment. depending on the setof licenses available for channels in any particular area, up to 33 analogchannels may be available. use of digital compressed encoding can furtherincrease the number of channels that can be broadcast. pacific telesis recentlyannounced its intention to offer 100 channels of digital video over mmds insouthern california. a more recent technology using a smaller cellular structureat a higher transmission frequency (28 ghz) is local multipoint distributionservice (lmds). this service, still in the experimental stage, might offer twosets of 50 channels each. these wireless approaches may provide an interimway for telephone companies, broadcasters, and other players interested invideo delivery to compete with current cable providers without building acomplete hybrid fiber coaxial cable or fibertothecurb infrastructure.the nii is intended to provide for interactivity between the consumer andthe program provider. currently, the capability for interactive response toterrestrial broadcasts is provided by the telephone. however, because more thanhalf of all television households receive their broadcast signal via cable, thesehouseholds will be able to interact with the program provider using the returnchannel on the digital cable system. the potential of mmds and lmds fortwoway interactivity is less clear and might rely on basic telephone service forlowdatarate upstream communications. in the next 5 years, it is expected thatcellular telephone service and pcs will be widely deployed, providing yetanother means of lowdatarate interactive response to the program provider.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how143about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.satellitesatellites have long played a role in the backbone segment of longdistancecommunications networks. a variety of satellite technologies also exists for enduser access to communications services. in the business communicationsmarket, very small aperture terminal (vsat) systems are used by firms such ashotels, department store chains, and car dealerships to conduct datacommunications between a central office and remote sites, at variable data ratesdepending on the nature of the system; some have sufficient capacity to supportvideo transmission. vsat systems offer twoway communications, althoughdata rates are frequently slower from remote sites toward the center than in theoutbound direction. the remote site receivers use an approximately 1.8meterdish, and signals are carried by satellites in geosynchronous orbit above theearth's equator. hughes communications has announced (and discussed at thejanuary 1995 workshop) plans to build a geosynchronous satellite system,spaceway, which would allow end users access to the internet, onlineinformation services, and other applications at speeds of up to 400 kbps, using a24inch transmitter/receiver dish. the system is expected to be aimed at bothconsumer and business markets.geosynchronous satellites also support oneway broadcast services toconsumers, primarily video entertainment. satellite systems operating in the cand ku8 bands of the frequency spectrum were developed for televisionnetworks to distribute programming to their affiliates for terrestrial broadcast.however, rooftop and backyard satellite receivers, with dishes of up to 10 feetin diameter, are an alternative to terrestrial broadcast and cable television formany users. cband systems can receive approximately 150 unscrambledanalog signals and another 100 scrambled channels. in the past 2 years, twodirect broadcast satellite systems based on digital standards have becomeavailable, primestar and rca's direct satellite system. these services carry apackage of free and pay television channels and support higherquality videoand sound than do analog systems (samuels, 1995).both voice and data systems depending on networks of satellites in lowearth orbit have been announced by several firms in the past few years. one ofthe highercapacity systems envisioned is teledesic, which by the year 2001 isexpected to incorporate 840 satellites and provide full telephone, highspeeddata (up to 2 mbps), and interactive video services, accessible worldwide(ota, 1995; brodsky, 1995).technology options and capabilities: what does what, how144about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.power industry as infrastructure providerelectric utilities invest in replacing wires on a regular basis, since wires arehit by lightning, and thus carry a risk of failure over time. the industry hasobserved that the incremental cost of including a fiberoptic cable inside itsground wires is very low, which naturally suggests that investment in fiberrepresents a good risk as a basis for entering into new business opportunities.because it does not carry an electrical current, fiber is a natural means totransport control signals through a utility's power distribution grid. in addition,deployment of fiber communications networks reaching into customer premiseswould enable utilities to reduce their powergeneration costs by offeringdemand management services such as automated, remote control of airconditioning, lighting, and heating systems. reducing customers' energy usagewould reduce overall power demand and enable utilities to delay investing innew powergeneration facilities.as discussed in the white paper by john cavallini et al., only a very smallfraction of the capacity of a fiber network that reached into customer premiseswould be needed to support energy services. remaining capacity could beresold or used to support the utility's entry into additional lines of business, suchas telephony or entertainment distribution. utilities currently face choices abouthow and where to invest in making these infrastructures generalpurpose.technical, regulatory, and economic factors that are as yet undetermined willinfluence the form a multipurpose utilityowned communications networkmight take, but the prospect appears feasible in principle.the internetto understand the internet, one must distinguish its two aspects. first,there is ''the internet," usually written with a capital "i," which is the actualcollection of links and switches that make up the current public network. this,and the applications that run over it such as the world wide web, are theaspects that have excited the public and press.the other aspect of the internet is the set of documents that define itsprotocols and standards. these standards, which are printed in the documentseries called the internet requests for comment, define how networks that arepart of the internet can interconnect, and they guide the development of thesoftware that is needed for any machine to attach to the internet.but the public internet is not the only use for these protocols andstandards. anyone can purchase the necessary network technology and connecta number of computers into an internet (with a lower case "i").technology options and capabilities: what does what, how145about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and there are probably thousands of such internets, since many businessestoday run private corporate networks that support the internet protocols (as wellas others)9 . over the last 5 years, privately constructed networks have by farexceeded the public internet in driving the demand for packet routers andrelated products.change and growththe continued and rapid growth of the public internet is a wellknownphenomenon. but the growth of the internet is reflected in more than the rate ofnew deployment. the protocols, too, are changing in response to evolvingneeds. the internet standards should not be thought of as frozen for all time.indeed, a major part of the success of the internet has been its ability to changeas new technologies and service requirements emerge. at the present time, theexplosive growth of the public internet has forced a redesign of the centralprotocolšthe internet protocol (ip) itselfšto produce a new version calledipv6. ip defines that very central service that ties the range of applications tothe range of network infrastructures. one example of a change forced by growthis the need to increase the size of the internet addresses used to identify thecomputers attached to the network. if the internet continues to grow aspredicted, there will not be enough addresses available to name all the devicesthat will be attached. a different address format with room for longer addressesis thus a central part of ipv6. other features, too, such as increased security andautomatic configuration (socalled "plugandplay" attachment to the internet)are being added to the next generation of ip. this advance to ipv6 will bedifficult to accomplish, since the ip is now. implemented and installed inmillions of computers worldwide. the success or failure of the migration toipv6 will be a measure of the internet's ability to continue to grow and evolve.other changes relate to new application services. for example, multicast,which is the ability to send a single message and have it reach a number ofrecipients with high efficiency, is now being added to ip. this capability,together with the coming support for realtime services such as audio and video,permits the development of a wide range of new applications, such as multiwayteleconferences, provision of audio and video information on the world wideweb, and broadcast of specialty audio and television sources (bernerslee etal., 1994; eriksson, 1994). for example, live audio feeds from the u.s. houseof representatives and and u.s. senate floor are now available as anexperiment across the internet.one of the ways that the design of the internet allows for change andevolution is that as much as possible, the functions of the internet areimplemented in the end nodes, the attached computers, rather then in thetechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how146about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.core of the network, the routers and the infrastructure. first, as discussed above,having fewer dependencies on the infrastructure permits the use of a broaderrange of infrastructure. but perhaps more importantly, if functions and servicesare implemented on the end node, they can be changed or replaced withouthaving to modify the internals of the network. in particular, creating a newapplication on the internet requires only that appropriate software be distributedto interested users, and does not require making changes to the router code.10 thus, users can experiment with new applications at will.the limitation of pushing function to the edge of the network is that theminimal end node suitable for attachment to the internet must have a certainamount of processing power. the alternative, in which the network containsmore of the functions, permits the end node to be cheaper. indeed, it will be awhile until an internetstyle end node can be manufactured for the cost of acheap telephone (see chapter 2). but for networks such as the internet thatattempt to deliver a general set of services, there is no evidence today thatoverall costs can be reduced by shifting function into the center of the network.with the trend toward increased functionality and programmability, even formore specialized devices such as telephones and televisions, it is reasonable topredict that soon even very simple and inexpensive devices will contain thefunctions necessary to implement access to the internet.the internet phenomenon is tied as much to the increasing power of theprocessing chip as to the advent of highercapacity communications links suchas optical fibers. the ability of the user to purchase inexpensive endnodedevices, of course, is basic to the internet's existence. but it is also the processorthat permits the construction within the network of costeffective routers andother devices that realize the internet, such as name servers or data caches. thepower and flexibility of programmable devices influence the economics, thefunctions, and the future of the internet.of course, to many, the internet phenomenon is not fibers or silicon, butpeople. the internet, by its open architecture, has permitted a great number ofindividuals to conceive and try out innovative ideas, and some of these, like theworld wide web, have taken root and become a basic part of the success of theinternet. the process by which internet standards are set reflects this philosophyof open involvement. the internet engineering task force meets three times ayear to debate and set standards. it is open to any who want to come, andattendance at meetings has topped 1,000. the internet is not constrained by anoverarching vision of what it should become (although such visions arecertainly offered and do serve as guides); it flourishes by the bottomupenhancement that arises when people propose ideas, demonstrate that they work,technology options and capabilities: what does what, how147about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and offer them to the community for debate and standardization. this processhas worked well for the last 20 years. how well it will continue to work, giventhe increasing commercial pressures on the standardssetting process and theincreasing size and visibility of the internet and its design community, remainsto be seen (see box 4.4).11transport infrastructure to information infrastructurefor its first 20 years, the designers of the internet were concerned with thebasic problem of moving data between machines, in the context of computersand network facilities with differing characteristics. at this level, the data beingmoved are viewed as simple strings of bits or bytes. the format of theinformation is viewed as a higherlevel problem. of course, the internetstandards included a description of how those bytes were to be formatted forcritical applications such as electronic mail. but the central problem was thebasic one of getting these bits across the wires to the recipient.at this time, the emphasis of the internet developers has expanded. whileconsiderable efforts are still being made on the lower layers of the standardsšto incorporate new infrastructure elements such as atm, or to add new deliverymodes such as real time, and to deal with critical issues such as scale andmanagementšnew problems now being addressed relate to the format andmeaning of the bits, in other words, the task of turning the bits into realinformation.the world wide web provides a good example of some of the issues.central to the success of the web is a standard that describes the encoding ofinformation so that it can be displayed as a web page. this standard, calledhtml (an abbreviation for hypertext markup language), allows the creatorof information to control the presentation of the material on the page (its sizeand style, for example) and to specify how the text, graphics, images, and othermedia modes will be combined on the screen of the user. in fact, although thebasic html format is very simple (most users who can deal with a wordprocessor can create a web page with an hour or so of training), it enables thecreation of rather complex information objects, such as forms on a web serverthat can be filled out by the user. it is this standard for presentation ofinformation that has made possible the construction of different "webbrowsers"šthe user interface software for interacting with the information onthe web, and has made it possible for so many providers of information toformat that information for use there.but, in fact, there is a need for a variety of information formats on theinternet. even for the simple task of formatting information for display andprinting, a range of standards exist. as the white paper by stephentechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how148about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 4.4 what will happen to the internet?the internet has undone what columbus discovered 500 years ago: it hasmade the earth flat once again. maybe it has even made it a bit like ashallow bowl, where every being can "see" every other with relative ease.broadcast radio and television have made it such that most humans cansense remotely what others are doing; but the internet allows for the twoway communication that spurs evolution.the question is, will the internet collapse of its own disorganized weight,get regulated to death, or shrug off all attempts to control it and simply takeover the earth? in biological terms these alternatives can be likened tocancer, drugs, and green slime.what are the main factors that will determine the outcome of the struggle to"grow" the internet in a reasonable way? i see a handful of such factors:the "media hype" factor. by the time this gets published, i expect thatthe internet will have been the subject of a geraldo or oprah expose.the "buildabetterone" factor. the internet was originally designed toassume very little about the underlying data transport facilities. thisassumption has stood the test of timešthe mail goes through, filesget transferred, and the mosaic browser roams the planet in search ofinteresting information. the number of addresses (potentialsubscribers) has grown so fast that there is a move afoot to add thecapability for many more subscribers. however, the desire to addmore and more functionality to the base service threatens to create adesign that only an airplane designer could love.the "commongood" factor. talk about "data havenots" and socialimperatives pose the prospect of new rules, but legislating universaldata access will kill it before it builds enough of a natural market todrive down prices through volume and competition. when it is a cheapenough, data access will be ubiquitous. the other, more intractableproblem is that on the internet, local is global. anything i do incalifornia can be observed and interacted with by persons in hongkong or sao paolo or toledo. whose rules of censorship, taxes, andprices should apply?the "elephantview" factor. the internet is a vast opportunity space.there are many suppliers of solutions at every layer of the datacommunications infrastructure. and they all work like the devil toenhance their local benefits. this results in a gradual blurring of thenice clean architectural model that we started with and creates shortterm disruption in the marketplace while competitors try to respond tonew approaches.the "trustittoluck" factor. there is a large contingent of internetpioneers who say "leave it alone." don't regulate it, don't tax it, don'timprove it except to allow it to take on more customers. just let itevolve. it is not everything it could be, but it is great for what it is: acheap way of allowing anyone to share digital information with anyoneelse. to those who wish to make it serve particular niche needs, theysay, go build those facilities on the base system, but do not make allthe rest of us have to pay your overhead.šdaniel lynch, interop company and cybercash inc.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how149about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.zilles and richard cohn observes, in some cases an author of informationmay want to specify its format totallyšcontrolling the layout and appearance ofeach page exactly. a document format standard such as portable documentformat can be used for this purpose. the web's html represents a middleground in which the creator and the viewer both have some control over theformat. at the other end of the spectrum, permitting the user maximumflexibility in reformatting and reprocessing information is enabled by databaserepresentations such as sql (structured query language), for example, that areconcerned not with display formats but with capturing the semantics of theinformation so that programs can process them. the current trend, consistentwith the approach taken in the internet to deal with multiple standards, is for allof these to coexist, permitting the creator to impose as much or as little formatcontrol as is warranted for any particular document.looking at the internet today, one sees tremendous innovation in theseareas, just as there was in the past concerning the basic issues of bit transport.examples of current standardization efforts include "namespaces" and formatsof information objects, protocols for electronic commerce, and a framework formanaging multimedia conference sessions.over the next few years, this increased attention to higherlevelinformation architecture issues will have an impact on the "inside" of thenetwork, the routers and internal services. for example, some internet serviceproviders are planning to deploy computers with large disk arrays at centralpoints within the internet to store popular information (e.g., web pages andrelated files such as images) close to the user, so that it can be delivered ondemand without having to be fetched from across the globe. this sort ofenhancement will increase the apparent responsiveness of the network and atthe same time reduce the load on the widearea trunks. it represents anotherexample of how the increasing processing power that becomes available can beused to enhance the performance of the network, independent of advances innetwork infrastructure.open interfaces and open standardsthe internet is perhaps an extreme example of a system that is open; infact it is open in a number of ways. first, all of its standards and specificationsare available for free, and without any restriction on use. the meetings at whichstandards are set are open to all.12 second, one objective of the design of thestandards is to make it as easy as possible for networks within the internetšboth public networks of internet service providers and private networks ofcorporations, institutions, and individualšto connect together. thus theinternet is open to providers as well as users. third, its internal structure isorganized to be as open astechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how150about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.possible to new applications. for example, some of its traditional features, suchas the software that ensures ordered, reliable delivery of data (the protocolcalled tcp), are not mandatory, but can be bypassed if this better suits theneeds of an application.13 this openness has made the internet an environmentconductive to the innovation of new applications.standards and innovation in the marketplaceit is important not to underestimate the total number of standards thatcollectively define the existing personal computer (pc) marketplace, theinternet, the telephone system, or the video delivery infrastructure. standardsdescribe lowlevel electrical and mechanical interfaces (e.g., the video plug onthe back of a television or the ethernet plug on the back of a computer). theydefine how external modules plug into a pc. they define the protocols, oragreements for interaction between computers connected to a common network.they define how functions are partitioned up among different parts of a system,as in the relationship between the television and the decoder now being definedby the fcc.14 they define the representation of information, in circumstancesas diverse as the format of a television signal broadcast over the air and a webpage delivered over the internet.corresponding to the volume of standards is the range of standardssettingactivity. the united states has more than 400 private standardsdevelopingorganizations. most are organized around a given industry, profession, oracademic discipline. they include professional and technical societies, industryassociations, and openmembership organizations. among the most active u.s.information technology standards developers are the institute of electrical andelectronics engineers, a professional society; the information technologyindustry council, which administers information processing standardsdevelopment in committee x3; and the alliance for telecommunicationsindustry solutions (atis), coordinator of committee t1 for telecommunicationstandards. inputs from domestic standards activities by such organizations tointernational standards organizations (discussed below) are coordinated by theamerican national standards institute.standard interfaces allow new products related to informationinfrastructure to interoperate with each other and with existing products. theyare therefore essential for new markets to develop. however, differences in howstandards are set can be found among industries, and the approach to standardssetting may affect progress in the multiindustry, multitechnology world of thenii. consider historic differences between the telecommunications andcomputer industries.the telecommunications industry has depended on a variety of natechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how151about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tional and international standards organizations. the internationaltelecommunications union (itu) is the primary telecommunications standardsorganization at the international level. as a united nations treaty organization,its members are governments. the itu sets thousands of standards fortelecommunications services and equipment and for their interoperability acrossinterfaces, as well as allocating radiofrequency spectrum. u.s. representationat the itu is coordinated by the state department, with participation by otherpublic agencies and private industry. since at&t's divestiture, domestic u.s.telecommunications standards have generally been developed by industryledformal standards organizations, such as atis, mentioned above. all of theseorganizations seek to produce formal "de jure" standards through a process ofconsensus in technical committees. standards for some kinds of equipment andservices must be approved by the fcc, sometimes adding months or years tothe process.to a much greater extent than the telecommunications industry, themodern computer industry has relied on the marketplace for creating "de facto"standards. in such a system, companies' fortunes depend to a significant extenton their ability either to create de facto standards or to supply products rapidlythat conform to emerging de facto standards. in the computer industry, thistrend has been driven by market competition, the rapid pace of computertechnology change, and the "bandwagon" effect that leads consumers to adopttechnologies that appear to be emerging as widespread standards rather thanrisk being left unable to interoperate with other users and systems.15in practice, standards development exists within a continuum.16 manycomputer industry standards are formalized in national and internationalstandards organizations, such as the international organization forstandardizationšalthough these standards frequently lag the de facto processesof the market. there are also a multitude of "hybrid" systems. for example, itwas the combination of market forces and formal standards committees thatcreated many of the lan standards currently in use. the emergence ofstandards consortia in both the computer and telecommunications industriesreflects a compromise between the slower pace of consensus standards settingin formal organizations and the chaos of the market. if different consortiaproduce different standards, however, the fundamental problem of reaching astandard remains.17 no matter what the method, real and meaningful standardsare essential to mass deployment of technology. anything less is immaterial;standards mean volume!neither system of developing standards is perfect. de jure standardscreation, while it may be more orderly, tends to be slow and is not immune topolitical pressures. furthermore, it may not result in a commontechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how152about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.standardšwitness the regional differences in isdn deployment. de factostandards, while they may emerge more rapidly, can result in a period of marketchaos that delays mass deploymentšand the marketplace also sometimes failsto produce a single, dominant standard.18 they may also lead to antitrustpressures, as experienced by both ibm and microsoft.both formal and marketdriven standards setting can favor establishedmajor players, but for different reasons. in the case of de jure standards, thelong delay in settling on standards allows the established major companies toadapt to the new technology capability and provides for formal representationof users as well as producers. de facto standards, on the other hand, requiremarket power, and the established major players have it. thus, they can benefit,but only if they can move rapidly.the process of setting standards for the internet is an interesting andimportant example of the balance of concerns. the internet standards aresomewhat between de jure and de facto. while the internet standards body (theinternet engineering task force; ietf) has not been endorsed by any nationalor international standards body,19 it operates with open membership anddefined processes for setting standards, and it attempts to avoid domination byany industry sector or large market players. it has been praised for producingstandards that work, because it looks for implementation experience as part ofits review process. it has also been criticized for the slowness of its processesand for what some see as a somewhat disorderly approach to consensus building.it is worth noting that some of the important standards in wide use over theinternet, including the standards for the world wide web, were not developedformally through the ietf process. instead, they were proposed by othergroups, discussed informally at ietf meetings, distributed online over theinternet, and then accepted by industry without further ietf action. althoughthis partial bypass of the formal ietf processes worries some observers, therecan be no argument with the success of the world wide web in achieving rapidmarket penetration. it remains to be seen how ietf and informal internetstandardssetting processes will evolve and function in the future. 20there is strong private sector motivation for effective standards setting.many participants at the forum and workshop said in effect that while thegovernment should act to facilitate effective standards setting, it must not createroadblocks to such efforts by imposing governmentdictated standardsprocesses.21 government use of private, voluntary standards in its ownprocurement, however, can be supportive. 22the process of setting standards is only one part of the delay in getting anew idea to market. if the idea requires software that is interoperable on anumber of different computing platforms, the sequence oftechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how153about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steps today to push a new innovation into the marketplace is to propose the newidea, have it discussed and accepted by a standards body, and then have itimplemented by some party on all the relevant computers. a bruteforce way ofbypassing this process is for one single industry player to write the necessarycode for all the relevant computers, as netscape did for its web browser.netscape coded, and gave away in order to create the market, three versions ofits web browseršfor windows, for the macintosh, and for unix. onedrawback to this approach is the large effort required by one industry player. anadditional drawback is that the person responsible for each computer needs toretrieve and install the software package.an idea now being proposed to avoid these drawbacks is to define a highlevel computer language and a means for automatic distribution and executionof programs written in this language. under this scheme, an interpreter for sucha language would be installed on all the relevant computers. once this step wastaken, a new application could be written in this language and immediatelytransferred automatically to any prepared computer. this would permit a newinnovation to be implemented exactly once and then deployed essentiallyinstantly across the network to interested parties. an example of such a schemeis the proposal for the java language from sun microsystems. sun hasimplemented an interpreter for the java language, called hotjava, which can beincorporated into almost any computer. netscape and microsoft haveannounced that they will put an interpreter for java into their web browsers.such developments will permit new applications to be written in java,downloaded over the web, and executed by any computer running most of thepopular browsers.this set of ideas, if successful, could have a substantial impact on theprocess of innovation, by speeding up evolution and reducing implementationcosts in areas where it is relevant. david messerschimtt of the university ofcalifornia at berkeley observed:[o]ne of the key attributes of the nii should be dynamic applicationdeployment; we should be able to deploy new applications on theinfrastructure without the sort of communityofinterest problems andstandardization problems associated, say, with users having to go out to theirlocal software store and buy the appropriate applications. – [it] should bepossible to deploy applications dynamically over the network itself, whichbasically means download the software descriptions of applications over thenetwork.this set of ideas could also permit the construction of new sorts ofapplications. for example, programs could be sent to remote machines toperform searches on information there. thus, remote program executiontechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how154about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.could be a means to implement intelligent agents on the network. morespeculatively, these ideas might change the distribution of function within thenetwork. clearly, remote interpretation of programs exploits the increasedprocessing power of the pc of today. but some have speculated that thisapproach, by downloading on demand only the required software into a pc,could reduce the complexity and cost of that pc by eliminating some of therequirement for disk space and memory. this shift might help ameliorate theeconomic challenge of providing nii access for the less affluent. however,many are skeptical that this shift of processing power back from the end nodeand into the network, which runs counter to the recent history of the computerindustry, will prove effective. specifically, it would require increasedbandwidth in the subscriber access path, which seems difficult to justifyeconomically. there is no clear conclusion to this debate today.management and control of the infrastructurethe aspect of the information infrastructure that is most exciting to theuser is the service interface that defines what the network can provide to the useršhow fast the network will operate, what sorts of services it can support, andso on. perhaps understandably, these issues received the most attention at theworkshop and forum. equally important as networks grow bigger, however, arethe issues of management and control. at the january 1995 workshop, mahalmohan of at&t commented on the ''tremendous number of numbering,switching, overall administration, [and] serviceprovidertoserviceprovidercompensation" details involved in supporting networkbased services, details,he lamented, that "tend to get overlooked in just counting out the bandwidth ofwhat is coming to the home and who owns it."the issues of control and management for the internet are particularlyinstructive. the internet grew with a very decentralized model of control. thereis no central point of oversight or administration. this model was part of theearly success of the internet; it allowed it to grow in a very autonomousmanner. however, as the internet grows larger and, at the same time,expectations for the quality and stability of the service increase, there are thosewho believe that changes are needed in the approach to internet managementand control. in the 1994 to 1995 period, there were a number of reports of errors(usually human errors) in the operation of the internet routing protocols thathave caused routing failures, so that information is misdirected and fails toreach its destination. the protocols and controls in place today may not beadequate to prevent these sorts of failures, which can only grow more commonas the number of networks and humans involved in the internet continues togrow.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how155about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.at the forum, howard frank of the advanced research projects agencyexpressed surprise at having heard "no discussion at all about the managementstructures, information management technologies, help services," and so on. heobserved that progress in these areas is necessary so that "an internet can evolvefrom a rather chaotic, independent, loose collection of things to a managedsystem of the quality of the telephone system, which will allow us to go from afew percent to the 50 percent mark."a white paper by david clark of the massachusetts institute oftechnology argues that the internet and the infrastructure over which it runs,which were totally separated in the early days of the internet, must now cometogether in some ways to facilitate better management and control. talkingabout maturing services such as the internet, clark observes:if the service proves mature, there will be a migration of the service "into" theinfrastructure, so that it becomes more visible to the infrastructure providersand can be better managed and supported.this is what is happening with the internet today. the internet, which startedas an overlay on top of pointtopoint telephone circuits, is now becoming ofcommercial interest to the providers as a supported service. a key question forthe future is how the internet can better integrate itself into the underlyingtechnology, so that it can become better managed and operated, without losingthe fundamental flexibility that has made it succeed. the central change will bein the area of network management, including issues such as accounting, faultdetection and recovery, usage measurement, and so on. these issues have notbeen emphasized in many of the discussions to this point, and they deserveseparate consideration in their own right.milo medin of @home called for approaches such as distributed cachingto "avoid vaporizing the internet" due to excess traffic, yet there is nomechanism to encourage or enforce such prudent practice.any change in the overall approach to internet management and controlwill require the development of an overall architecture or model for the newapproach. this sort of major redesign is very difficult to contemplate in theinternet today, due to the large installed base of equipment and the bottomupapproach of the standards process. whether and how to evolve the managementand control model of the internet thus represents a major point of concern forthe future.at the same time that some are calling for more regimented approaches tointernet management and control, others argue that the internet style of controlis preferable to the model that more closely derives from the traditions of thetelephone company. the current atm standards have been criticized by somefor this reason. the signaling and control systems being developed come from aheritage in the telecommutechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how156about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nications industry that, while a reasonable model when it was first adopted, maybe coming under increasing strain. the internet community has developed adifferent technical approach to signaling and control, which may prove to besimpler while more robust. instead of building complex mechanisms to ensurethat any fault inside the network can be locally detected and corrected, the endnodes attached to the network periodically repeat their service requests. theseperiodic rerequests for service reinstate the needed information at any pointsinside the network that have lost track of this service request due to a transientfailure. it is thus the case that there is still a significant set of technicaldisagreements and uncertainties about the best approach to networkmanagement and operation, both for the maturing internet and for the nextgeneration of technologies for the mature services such as voice and video.an issue that is now receiving considerable attention is pricing and costrecovery in the internet (see chapter 3 for more discussion). in the past, theinternet has been paid for on a subscription or fixedfee basis. there is nowconsiderable debate as to whether some forms of usagebased charging areappropriate or necessary. the white paper by robert powers et al. notes theneed to balance recovery of consumed service with the cost of implementing thebilling mechanism. since billing systems and their use have costs, it is an openquestion whether telephonystyle billing is the right model. the answer nodoubt depends on the type of applications that users will demand. electronicmail places rather small demands on the network, but video conferencing isquite different. pricing is relevant to network technologists not only alsobecause of issues relating to implementing accounting and billing systems, butalso because pricing influences how (and how much) networks are used. theseincentive effects interact with the network architecture to affect the performanceas well as the profitability of networks.23notes1. andrew lippman of the massachusetts institute of technology observed that industry hasnot been good at predicting what applications will prevail and should thus engineer for theunexpected, and not focus on the specific application of today.2. different assumptions about market penetration and traffic load would obviously changethese results.3. time warner has demonstrated the feasibility of such a system in trials in orlando.4. the wireless information networks forum (winforum), an industry association, petitionedthe fcc in may 1995 to set aside additional spectrum for wireless local area networking athigher data rates than current options allow.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how157about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the proposed allocation would support highspeed lans at 20 mbps, sufficient for multimediaapplications. see winforum (1995).5. all digital cellular phones are expected to be able to be used with traditional analog facilities,which will remain in place for the foreseeable future. however, the added complexity of adevice that can support multiple standards may add to its cost, especially in the short run.6. material for this section was taken from henderson (1995) and from reed (1995).7. a further variation is whether fixed or variablerate video encoding is used. a variablerateencoding can permit better representation of complex scenes within a program, at the cost of ahigher peak rate. however, other sorts of digital information can be transmitted in the instantsthat the full channel capacity is not needed for the video. in one recent experiment, a 50secondcommercial provided enough unused capacity to transmit 60 megabytes of data.8. ka band frequencies are also in high demand as companies rush to offer satellite videoconferencing and computer networking. using this band, systems such as hughes' spacewaycould offer "bandwidth on demand" where "today's 24minute download from the internetwould take less than 4 seconds at a cost no higher than today's rates." see cole (1995), ota(1995), and markoff (1995).9. some corporate networks should properly be thought of as being part of the public internet,since they are directly connected and exchange packets. however, many corporate networks, ifconnected at all to the public internet, exchange only specific and limited applications such aselectronic mail.10. this statement is not accurate in every instance; certain enhancements to the internet suchas support for audio and video will require upgrades to the router code itself.11. the cstb (1994b) report realizing the information future includes an expandeddiscussion of the pressures and concerns now arising in the internet standards process.12. internet standards are discussed and set by the internet engineering task force (ietf) andits working groups, which collectively meet three times a year. in addition, much work iscarried out on the internet itself. for information, see the web page of the ietf at http://www.ietf.org.13. this situation prevails with realtime transport of audio and video, where quick delivery ismore important that 100 percent reliable delivery.14. see the 1991 cable act (p.l. 98549), amending 47 usc sec. 544. it required that "[w]ithinone year after october 5, 1992, the commission shall prescribe regulations which establishminimum technical standards relating to cable systems' technical operation and signal quality.the commission shall update such standards periodically to reflect improvements intechnology. a franchising authority may require as part of a franchise (including amodification, renewal, or transfer thereof) provisions for the enforcement of the standardsprescribed under this subsection. a franchising authority may apply to the commission for awaiver to impose standards that are more stringent than the standards prescribed by thecommission under this subsection." these efforts have been codified at the fcc as section15.115 "tv interface devices, including cabletechnology options and capabilities: what does what, how158about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.system terminal devices" and section 68.110 "compatibility of the telephone network andterminal equipment."15. ibm system 360 and microsoft msdos and windows are the classic examples.16. governmentmandated regulations and procurement specifications constitute a thirdcategory of standards. agencies at all levels of government set regulatory standards forproducts and processes in order to protect health, safety, and the environment. they alsoproduce specifications for public procurement of goods and services. the federal register regularly publishes requests for comments on standards proposed by federal agencies. some ofthese are developed by agencies, while others originate as voluntary standards set in the privatesector and are adopted by reference in the text of regulations and specifications.17. a very broad consortium, known as the information infrastructure standards panel (iisp)and spearheaded by the american national standards institute, has attempted since mid1994 tobring together a large number and variety of organizations and entities concerned withstandards relating to the national and global information infrastructure. in late november 1995,the iisp issued a list of 35 "standards needs," ranging across such areas as reliability, quality ofservice, provision of protections (e.g., security), specific types of interfaces, and data formatting(see lefkin, 1995). it is premature to judge the outcome of this effort, although anecdotalreports from some parties familiar with it have noted the difficulty in crossindustry forums ofachieving results with sufficient focus and specificity to constitute an advance from the basis indisparate, separate standardsdeveloping activities.18. an example is am stereo, in which the fcc forbore from picking a standard; none everemerged because no market could develop in the absence of a standard, and no standard coulddevelop in the absence of a market.19. recently, through the auspices of the internet society, the ietf has been establishingliaison with organizations such as the itu. but sanctioning of the ietf and its standards byother formal standards bodies has not been a factor in the success of those standards. marketacceptance has been the key issue.20. in the case of the world wide web, a consortium of industry and academic partners hasbeen organized at the massachusetts institute of technology with the goal of furthering thestandards for the web. it is an attempt to create a neutral body especially organized to deal withthe very rapid advances and strong industrial tensions present in the web architecture. whetherit represents a cooperative complement to the ietf or an explicit rejection of the ietfprocesses remains to be seen.21. a recent national research council (1995) study examined standards development inmultiple industries. it concluded that the relatively decentralized, privatesectorled u.s.standardssetting process, while messy and chaotic, is generally the most effective way to setstandards in a market economy.22. federal selection of standards for the government's own systems is a topic that has beenconsidered by the technology policy working group. its december 1995 draft report calls fora process that "minimizes the number of required standards for the federal government'spurchasing of nii products and services, limiting them to those that relate to crossagencyinteroperability" (tpwg, 1995b,technology options and capabilities: what does what, how159about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.p. i). it notes that "there is already existing government policy which covers the preference andadvantages to government selection of voluntary standards (e.g., consensus standards). thispolicy is contained in omb circular no. a119 revised 10/20/93, `federal participation in thedevelopment and use of voluntary standards'" (p. 14).23. the interaction between pricing and architecture was the focus of a special interdisciplinarypanel at the 1995 telecommunications policy research conference (september 30šoctober 2,solomons, maryland). entitled "architecture and economic policy: lessons from the internet,"the panel featured papers prepared jointly by network technologists and economists, which wererevised for spring 1995 publication in the journal telecommunications policy.technology options and capabilities: what does what, how160about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5technology choices: what are theproviders deploying?introductionpredicting the future of technology deployment is an inexact undertaking,given the many uncertainties in technical developments, market forecasts, andregulatory actions. however, an assessment of current plans and trends is agood starting point for identifying a range of possibilities. this chapter presentsa variety of information about current levels of deployment in the key areas ofnetwork technology and infrastructure. it also reviews the main infrastructureprovider industries' announced plans for new deployment over the next severalyears, as revealed in white papers contributed as part of the nii 2000 project,comments at the workshop and forum, and trade and marketresearchpublications. (announced deployment plans, of course, are not necessarily firmcommitments; they may change, as did those of many firms during the course ofthis project. however, every attempt has been made to present information thatis as up to date as possible.)this chapter represents, in part, a response to the technology policyworking group (tpwg) request for a "road map" of technology deploymentover the next 5 to 7 years. the material included here answers the tpwg's callfor a synthesis of projections; however, there are no available data that reliablysupport precise forecasts of specific deployment events by specific dates. thesteering committee has attempted to identify the boundary conditions of futuredeployment and some potential signals indicating major turning points, or forksin the road, which should betechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?161about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitored as indicators of change in the next several years. table 5.1 presentsthe steering committee's broad conclusions about the technological capabilitiesšwith respect to enduser access to servicesšof infrastructure that is likely tobe deployed and available in the next 5 to 7 years. some aspects of nomadicity,and of hardware and software technologies that enable informationinfrastructure, are implicit in table entries, but these topics are not fullysummarized in the table. the remainder of the chapter provides supportingevidence and analysis.the discussion assumes a very basic familiarity with several importantinformation infrastructure technologies, such as hybrid fiber coaxial cable(hybrid fiber coax; hfc) architectures for residential broadband (highdatarate) communications, integrated services digital network (isdn) and otherdigital telephone services, wireless voice and data services, and broadcasttelevision. chapter 4 introduces these technologies in brief, discussing keyissues underlying technical debates about deployment (for example, thecapabilities of likely architectures for fiberoptic networks in residential areas).this chapter focuses on what is being deployed today, what plans have beenannounced, and what the overall capabilities of anticipated informationinfrastructure components will be. the decision to invest in deployment ofinfrastructure depends, of course, on an expectation of demand for services overthat infrastructure. accordingly, in addition to addressing deploymentšthesupply of infrastructurešthis chapter also presents selected data on both currentand projected demand for information infrastructurerelated services. thesedata are drawn from a range of published government and private sources.other economic and regulatory issues that affect investment prospects andtiming of deployment are considered more fully in chapters 3 and 6.this chapter divides the topic of infrastructure into several broadcategories: (1) infrastructure of wireline telephone carriers, including both thelocal access component and the backbone (longdistance) component; (2) datacommunications services carried over the wireline infrastructure; (3) wirelineinfrastructures for advanced services to the home being deployed by cabletelevision and telephone companies; (4) online information services andinternet access; (5) wireless services, such as cellular telephony, personalcommunication service (pcs), and wireless data; and (6) broadcast services,including terrestrial and satellite television broadcasting and multichannelmultipoint distribution service (mmds, or wireless cable). these distinctionsdo not reflect industry boundaries as clearly as they once did, as restrictions onlines of business erode and mergers and alliances occur among the firmsoffering these services. nevertheless, distinctions in the technologicalcapabilities of these types of infrastructure remain important, and projections oftheirtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?162about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.deployment, however speculative, are necessary for an understanding of thenii's capacity to support current and future applications.more material is provided on telephony than on cable or miscellaneouswireless technologies. consistent with available materials is the expectation thattelephony will continue to be the dominant source of twoway bandwidth forhomes and small businesses in the nearterm period of interest. in a perfectworld, comparable material and analysis would be presented on the full range ofinformation infrastructure applications and services; however, their speculativenature and relative invisibility in the aggregate, as reflected in available datasets, precluded such a presentation.wireline telephonysummary and forecaststhe local access infrastructure in 5 to 7 years (the primary time scale onwhich the steering committee focused) will be based on digital switching. thisinfrastructure will support basic voicegrade, circuitswitched telephone service("plain old" telephone service, or pots), with enhancements such as calleridentification and call forwarding. pots will grow slowly relative to moreadvanced access services. however, because of its current overwhelmingdominance, pots will still be the primary telephone service.the principal role of isdn will be as an access method to data networks,transporting packets to and from the remote business or residence. while isdnwill be available virtually everywhere in the unites states, its deployment rate(actual sales of service to customers) is uncertain. lowcost customer premiseequipment for isdn will become available in the next 1 to 2 years, both for theclient side (adapter cards) and the remote access (points of presence (pop),local area network (lan)) side. however, service installation costs coupledwith very high monthly service costs will limit residential and smallofficedeployment. rapid deployment of isdn can happen, but only if the price ofservice approaches that of pots. it is not clear at this time what factors willdrive telephone companies to lower prices, although competition fromalternative access services (such as cable and wireless data) could lead to suchan outcome.longdistance and interoffice telephone infrastructure will be fiberbasedwith sufficient bandwidth to meet anticipated demands. in the local accessinfrastructure, because of the high cost of deploying new fiber cables, fiberavailability at the customer's premises will continue to be limited to businessusers in highdensity districtsšwhere more users and traffic volume can beserved by each fiber deployed. (telephone comtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?163about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 5.1 infrastructure capabilities for enduser access within 5 to 7 yearscapabilityresidentialtelephony:traditionalanalog voicefacilitiesresidentialtelephony: isdnresidentialadvancedservices, cableand telephony:hfc, fttcdata rates to andfrom the end pointlowšnot farabove currentlyavailable 28.8kbps data ratesmoderateš128kbpsmoderate to highšdownstreamdigital broadcastof 100s of tvchannels; twoway datatransmission viacable modem at100s of kbps to10s of mbpsbidirectionality(downstream andupstreambandwidth)symmetricalsymmetricalasymmetrical,but upstreamcapacity will beadequate formany interactiveservices and isextensible withincrementalinvestmentscontinuousoperation(connection is"always on"še.g., enabling email delivery tothe user at anytime)user must dialin (or becalled) toconnect to thenetwork;circuits aregenerallyavailable whendemandeduser must dial inor be called; callset up is rapidenough thatoperation iseffectivelycontinuous if eitherend can initiate thecalldata and videoservicesšyes;voice telephonyšsee traditionalanalog voicefacilitiesrealtimemultimedia access(fullmotion video)nolimitedšadequatefor teleconferencingyesšbutasymmetrical,pendinginvestment inupstreamcapacity (seeabove)note: for definitions of the abbreviations used in this table, see appendix g, p. 278.technology choices: what are the providers deploying?164about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.business widearea networking:frame relay,smds, atmwireless:terrestrialcellular, pcs,mobile data,wireless lanssatellite voiceand data: vsat,leoterrestrial andsatellitebroadcast: atv,lmds, dbshighš1.5 mbpsto 155 mbps andhighermobilešlow, 10to 20 kbps; lansšmoderate, 100sof kbps to currentwirebased lanspeedsmoderate to highš400 kbps(spaceway) to 2mpbs (teledesicgateway service)moderate to highšdigitalbroadcast of 100sof videochannels; databroadcastcurrently at 100sof kbpssymmetricaldepends onsystemdepends onsystemupstreamchannel isthrough anothermedium, such aswireline orwireless telephonyyessome servicesrequire dialin;others providecontinuousoperationsome servicesrequire dialin;others providecontinuousoperationyes, if televisionreceiver is turnedonyeshighestbandwidthwireless lanscan supportmultimedia; otherwireless servicescannotno (exceptionšhighercapacityleo satellites,such as those inthe teledesicsystem)yes, butdownstream onlytechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?165about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pany deployment of hybrid fiber and copper infrastructures capable ofsupporting broadband services in residential neighborhoods is discussedseparately in this chapter, in the section titled ''cable television and telephony:advanced services to the home.")local access and the larger systemthe public switched telephone network is the most broadly deployed twoway (nonbroadcast) component of the national information infrastructure (nii).it is an evolving infrastructure; however, starting from such a large base,systemwide changes will take time to implement. projections of future niideployment may reasonably start, therefore, with analysis of the presenttelephone infrastructure.the local operating companies, or local exchange carriers (lecs),represent the access portion of the telephone network. more than 1,300companies provide local telephone service in the united states; most are farsmaller than the regional bell operating companies (rbocs). they providelocal service to end users and sell access to their network to interexchangecarriers (ixcs) that offer directdialed longdistance service.1 the sevenrbocs and gte together account for most of the local exchange market.historically, these firms have held a monopoly on end users' access to telephonecommunications within their respective service areas, although competitiveaccess providers (discussed below in this section) have a growing share in manymarkets. the other major part of the telephone network is represented by thelongdistance companies, or ixcs. there are about 450 ixcs, most of whichresell capacity purchased from other, facilitiesowning carriers; the three largestare at&t, mci, and sprint. their networks form backbones carrying trafficbetween separate local areas.the physical infrastructure of the local exchange consists of access lines,switches, and trunks. access lines connect end users at homes, businesses, andother locations to the telephone network; they constitute the portion of thenetwork known as the local loop. switches and interoffice trunk lines direct andcarry communications across the network. communications that leave the localtelephone company's service area must pass over facilities owned by longdistance carriers and terminate on facilities owned by other firms, such as otherlecs and wireless (primarily cellular) carriers. (see chapter 4 discussion oftechnology trends in telephone infrastructure, as well as the white papers byj.c. redmond et al. and stewart personick.)according to the federal communications commission's (fcc's) statisticsof communications common carriers (1994, table 2.5), all u.s. lecscombined (a larger group than in the infrastructure report cited below)technology choices: what are the providers deploying?166about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.serve 147.9 million access lines. about 40 million switched circuits (30percent) and virtually all dedicated, leased circuits are business and institutionalaccess lines; many of these connect to sites with multiple users on a privateexchange, each with a unique telephone number. therefore, the total number oftelephones attached to the network is significantly greater than 147.9 million.the types of services that may be carried over the physical telephoneinfrastructure depend not only on the bandwidth and transmission quality(absence of errors) in the links, but also on the type of encoding and switching.the ongoing transition from analog to digital switching in the telephone systemis important both for improving the quality of basic voice service (pots) andas a prerequisite for many services beyond pots. a 1995 fcc report(kraushaar, 1995b), infrastructure of the local operating companiesaggregated to the holding company level, presents a detailed view of recentdeployment of infrastructurešspecifically, lines and switchesšby the rbocsand gte (see table 5.2). together, these firms account for over 90 percent ofthe nation's total access lines. according to the report, which includes datathrough the end of 1993, digital switching has steadily become predominantwithin the local network: 66 percent of access lines are served by digitalswitches, 33 percent by analog stored program control switches, and 1 percentby electromechanical switches.the north american telecommunications association (nata) projects acontinued increase in the proportion of access lines served by digital switches.by 1996, nata forecasts a total of 201 million access lines. of these, 82percent will be served by digital switches, 18 percent by analog switches, andless than 1 percent by electromechanical switches (nata, 1995, p. 66).integrated services digital networkthe copper portion of the local plant traditionally carries one voice circuitto and from the customer premises per twisted pair of copper wires, usinganalog transmission. however, alldigital transmission technologies such asisdn are extending the capacity of the copper plant. (asymmetric digitalsubscriber line (adsl) technology can increase copper's capacity even further;see chapter 4. development of the technology is continuing, but no largescaledeployments by any carrier have yet been announced.) the fcc's report(kraushaar, 1995b) indicates that the theoretically available, total isdn accessline capacity (basic or primary rate) at central office switches is more than 42million. this capacity represents the maximum number of lines that could beserved by the telephone carriers' current isdncapable switchesšdigitalswitches withtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?167about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the necessary software control to support isdn.2 the current sales of isdnservices, however, are far below the theoretical capacity in the switches, atapproximately 400,000 to 500,000 lines (wildstrom, 1995).table 5.2 infrastructure of the local operating companies, 1991 to 1993199119921993switches (incl. local, tandem, hosts, and remotes)16,40016,70018,529total access lines served (millions)a 123.0125.8131.4percent of access lines served by:digital switches52.658.766.3analog switches44.639.732.5electromechanical switches2.71.61.1isdncapable switches9641,4372,173total isdn access line capacity (millions)21.329.842.1isdn basic rate interfaces equippedb 298,176491,430587,229isdn primary rate interfaces equippedb 1,7303,1475,814local loop copper terminations in central office(thousands)b 208,381209,059215,578local loop fiber terminations in central office(thousands)b 277.7576.7620.2a includes both residential and business access lines.b interfaces equipped at the central office, whether or not circuit is in use.source: kraushaar (1995b).to serve new isdn customers, the telephone carrier must have isdncapable switches, which must in turn be equipped with perline terminatingequipment. the latter is an investment that can be made incrementally, inresponse to (or anticipation of) customer demand; it is not necessary for thecarrier to equip the entire network for isdn at once. typically, more interfacesare equipped at the central office than are actually in use; the fcc estimatesthat installation of interfaces at the central office leads sale of services andactual subscriber use by 12 to 18 months. the number of isdn basic rateinterfaces equipped with the necessary line connections in the central offices atthe end of 1993 (the year for which the most recent fcc data are available) was587,229. (the fcc's estimated 18month margin is therefore consistent with theestimated 1995 isdn subscribership of 400,000 to 500,000.) the number ofhighercapacity, primary rate interfaces equipped in the central offices was5,814 in 1993. the majority of basic rate interfaces and all primary rateinterfaces in use are currently serving business or other institutional customtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?168about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ers, rather than home users (kraushaar, 1995b, p. 26; fcc, 1994, table 2.10).according to the white paper by stewart personick, isdn availability willcontinue to expand. through 1996, availability will range from 53 percent ofthe nynex service area to 86 percent of the pacific telesis area. nata citesforecasts by dataquest that the number of basic rate interface isdn lines inservice will increase to 1.1 million in 1998, at an average annual growth rate of47.1 percent. the level of investment needed to achieve this growth isuncertain; however, personick's white paper estimates that deploying theswitching capacity, linetermination equipment, and related systems in thecentral offices to meet demand for isdn (and other, highercapacity services)will represent a total investment on the part of lecs in the billions of dollars.as noted above, the sales of isdn services to date are far smaller thanwhat could be supported by the theoretical availability of isdn in the telephonesystem. growth in demand will be stimulated by several factors. one importantsource of demand for isdn is as an access technology for connecting remoteusers (such as workers in homes and small offices) to routerbased networks,such as workplace lans or online services; for lowvolume users, this will becheaper than leasing a dedicated circuit. for example, deployment of isdnconnections by online service providers is beginning to take place, inanticipation of subscribers using isdn to access their services. compuserverecently announced plans for local isdn access in 10 cities, supplementingcurrent isdn access via an 800 number. prodigy and america online officialsindicate that they are focusing on bringing their subscribers up to 28.8kbpsmodem access (hayes, 1995).another factor in the growth of demand for isdn is the lower costs forcustomerpremise equipment needed to take advantage of isdn. investment incustomer equipment, such as adapters for connecting personal computers (pcs)to isdn lines, is the responsibility of the end user; increases in volumeproduction, standardization, and improvements in the priceperformance ratio ofcomputer equipment will continue to bring this cost down rapidly in the nextseveral years. (isdn line adapter prices fell from $2,000 in 1994 to less than$500 in 1995; see wildstrom, 1995.) however, the prices that telephone carrierscharge for isdn service are not declining nearly as rapidly as customerequipment prices, and isdn remains significantly more expensive than pots.until this gap is narrowed, it appears unlikely that the market for isdn willgrow rapidly. substantial competition from alternative access providers, such ascable television systems and wireless networks, is one factor that couldaccelerate isdn price decreases.access lines with higher capacity than pots and isdn are availabletechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?169about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to customers from telephone companies and capacity resellers, in the form ofleased, dedicated lines to customers. these customers are primarily atbusinesses and other institutional locations where volume of use justifies theexpense of the connection. the circuits, which may be copper or fiber (althoughnew deployments today are usually fiber), generally carry digitized voice and/ordata. common increments of capacity are 56 kbps, 1.5 mbps (t1 or ds1), and45 mbps (ds3), at successively higher prices per connection but successivelylower prices per unit of capacity. deployment of the data services that can becarried over these circuits, such as frame relay and asynchronous transfer mode(atm), are discussed in the section "data communications" below in thischapter.telephone industry fiber deploymentfiber deployment is a significant indicator of advancingtelecommunication technology. fiber represents both the capacity to carry new,higherbandwidth applications (such as digitized video) and the reengineeringof the infrastructure to carry basic telephone service with lower costs and higherquality and reliability. longdistance carriers told the steering committee thatfor the next 5 to 7 years, they will continue to have sufficient bandwidth to meetthe nation's demand for voice telephony, data, and video communications. thebackbones of their networks will be optoelectronically switched, over fiberlines; alloptical switching, however, will still be under development and willbe far from substantial deployment. the white paper by robert powers et al.notes that the bit rates achievable through a given fiber have grown from 405mbps in 1983 to 2.4 gbps today, with an anticipated leap to 40 gpbs by 2000,using wavedivision multiplexing. the authors calculate that by 1996 or 1997 itshould be possible for a fiber pair to carry over 600,000 voice circuits,eliminating concerns about bottlenecks in the longdistance portion of thetelephone network "for the foreseeable future."in the local exchange, fiber is widely deployed between central offices;however, only a small fraction of total localloop plant is fiberbased (see, forexample, the white paper by mahal mohan). the fcc's annual fiberdeployment update: end of year 1994 (the most recent edition available; seekraushaar, 1995a) presents detailed data on current fiber deployment by majorixcs and the bell, gte, contel, and united local operating companies. theixcs have deployed 101,861 miles of fiber cable, while local operatingcompanies have deployed 257,734 miles of fiber cable. there is an average of25 to 35 separate strands of fiber per cable. the capacity of this infrastructure,as noted by powers et al., may be subject to approximately 16fold increaseswith higherspeed optoelectronics by the end of the decade. even with presenttechnology, thetechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?170about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.capacity of the ixcs' fiber could be increased substantially by activatingdeployed fiber that is currently unutilized ("dark" fiber).3 dark fiber iscurrently about 50 percent of the total for at&t and about 44 percent forsprint. the percentage of lit or activated fiber for local operating companiesranges from 26 percent for sbc (formerly southwestern bell) to 60 percent forgte.the fcc reports that 94 percent of channels in the lecs' local loop plantterminate at the central office on copper and 6 percent on fiber (kraushaar,1995b). four of the seven bell operating companies reported datadistinguishing the number of fiber miles in the subscriber plant (local loop)from total plant. for nynex, pacific telesis, sbc, and us west, subscriberplant fiber miles are 52 percent of total fiber miles (kraushaar, 1995a). mostfiber deployment in the local loop is in the portion closest to the central office;most lines change over to copper before reaching the end user (crossing the"last mile" to customer premises). however, the number of fiber lines reachingthe customer (mainly in the form of dedicated circuits leased to businesses) isgrowing rapidly. the number of subscriber services terminated on fiber at thecustomer premises at the 1.5mbps (ds1) rate at the end of 1993 was 148,286,up from 37,029 in 1989 (an average annual growth rate of 140 percent).4 thewhite paper by j.c. redmond et al. cites forecasts of the number of dedicatedaccess lines as reaching more than 3 million ds1 lines and about 1 millionhigherrate, ds3 lines by 2002. of these lines, virtually all new deploymentswill be on fiber to the customer premises (possibly excluding a final, shortsegment close to the customer, depending on the architecture used).digital access lines are used for both voice and data applications.however, data communications are the primary source of the rapid growth inthe demand for these lines. a yankee group survey of fortune 500 firms'telecommunications managers reports, for example, that 8 percent of these firmsare now using dedicated 1.5mbps lines for data communications. by 1999, 24percent expect to do so, and 5 percent will be using 45mbps lines for data(yankee group, 1995b).kraushaar (1995a) also discusses fiber deployment by competitive localexchange carriers (complecs), also known as competitive access providers.5 the report considers only facilitiesbased carriers, not capacity resellers. thereport includes firms such as metropolitan fiber systems, teleportcommunications group, and competitive access systems owned by timewarner communications, which is also one of the largest u.s. cable televisionfirms. fiber owned by the complecs listed in the report (not an exhaustivelist, but including the major firms) comprises 9,304 miles of cables. (each cablecontains, on average, from 20 to 200 individual fibers.) this total mileagereflects a 63 percent average annual growth rate from 1990 to 1994. the twolargest systems, metropolitantechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?171about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fiber and teleport, serve 2,670 and 1,560 buildings, respectively. most of thecomplecs' business today is in one of two categories: access for business andother institutional customers to an ixc (bypassing the dominant local carrier) orlinking an ixc's local points of presence. (data are unavailable to suggest howlong it might be before complecs reach significant penetration in residentialareas; currently, this penetration is virtually zero.) according to the white paperby gail garfield schwartz and paul cain, complecs are deploying fiberfaster than incumbent carriers in the 50 to 60 metropolitan markets where theyare active. these deployments are principally in synchronous optical network(sonet) rings, supporting advanced, broadband data, voice, and videoservices. 6fiber deployment will continue to grow from the base described in thissection. (fiber in the residential access networks will be an additional driver ofthis deployment, as this chapter's section on advanced services to the homediscusses.) one forecast of the speed of overall fiber deployment is given in arecent frost & sullivan report (1995) on fiberoptic equipment and relatedproducts. (costs for fiber cable and equipment are only a fraction of the totalinvestment cost of deploying fiber networks; the majority is labor andinstallation. however, equipment expenditures are a reasonable indicator ofrates of overall deployment.) the report projects that the u.s. market for fiberoptic products (such as fiber cable, optical couplers, and optoelectronicsequipment) in local telecommunications systems will more than triple, from$761 million in 1994 to nearly $2.5 billion by 2000, a 21 percent compoundannual growth rate. this market was only $74 million in 1990. in 1994, localtelephone systems accounted for threefourths of the u.s. fiberoptics market;cable television companies were 17 percent of the market, and complecswere 6 percent.demand for telephone servicestelephone carriers finance a large proportion of their investments ininfrastructure out of the revenues they receive for services. the fcc reportsthat toll service revenues of longdistance carriers totaled $61.5 billion in 1993.(at&t longdistance revenues were $35.7 billion; mci, $10.9 billion; sprint,$6.1 billion; and ldds communications, $1.1 billion.) local exchange carriers(rbocs and others) totaled an additional $13.8 billion in tollcalling (longdistance) revenues within their service areas (fcc, 1994, table 1.4).more detailed information is available for carriers that are required tomake annual reports to the fccšthe major local exchange carriers andat&t's longdistance unit, at&t communications. at&t communications'total operating revenues, consisting almost entirely of longdistechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?172about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tance network services revenues, were $35.7 billion in 1993; this included $3.6billion in longdistance private network revenues, of which $2.4 billion wasfrom digital private networks (fcc, 1994, table 2.9). (the next sectiondiscusses the breakdown between voice and data services across the telephonecarriers' networks.) at&t communications' largest expense item was $13.4billion for local network access (necessary to connect to end users), paid almostentirely to lecs. lecs that report data to the fcc, including the seven rbocsand gte, had $90.2 billion in total revenues: $41.7 billion in basic local servicerevenues; $27.3 billion in network access revenues; $13.0 billion in longdistance revenues (including $1.1 billion from private networks, of which $0.3billion was from digital private networks); and $9.3 billion in miscellaneousrevenues, including directory and billing revenues. using slightly differentdefinitions, the yankee group reported rboc revenues for 1993 as follows(1995a): $35.7 billion from local service, $9.8 billion from longdistanceservice, $20.3 billion from network access, and $17.9 billion from otherservices (equipment, publishing, cellular, others).international calling is growing at a much faster rate than is any other areaof voice telecommunications (or other mature nii services, such asbroadcasting). two significant demand factors are (1) calling by recentimmigrants to the united states to relatives in their country of origin and (2) theincreasing usefulness of the network due to the wiring up of the rest of theworld (reflecting an economic factor known as the network externality). thefcc reported total net revenue from international services for all longdistancecarriers as having grown from $1.8 billion in 1984 to $2.9 billion in 1988, andaccelerating to reach $7.8 billion in 1993 (fcc, 1994, table 4.6).data communicationssummary and forecaststhe business sector is making major investments in data communications.within the decade, most employees who work in offices will have a pcattached to a corporate network, which will in turn be connected to the publicswitched network (e.g., through an internet connection). high levels of networkpenetration will extend beyond the large corporation to the small business andthe remote office. total corporate investment in networking is difficult toestimate, since it includes capital expenses (for such items as interface cards,lans, routers, and modems) and salaries for staff, as well as payments totelephone carriers and other firms for network services. however, businesses'annual investment for basic infrastructure and support is probably more than$10 billion. with a protechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?173about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.jected 75 million networked corporate pcs by the turn of the century, businessnetworking is a very important part of the national information infrastructure.despite this high level of investment, payments explicitly for datacommunication services account for only a small share of telephone carriers'revenues. however, such payments underrepresent actual revenues for carryingdata, because data frequently move over circuits that mix voice and data andcount as voice circuits in telephone industry statistics. more broadly, thesetelephone carrier revenues underrepresent the total economic and societalimportance of data communication as a component of the nation's informationinfrastructure.there are two important, current trends in corporate data networking. thefirst is a shift away from networks built on dedicated circuits and towardswitched services provided by carriers, such as frame relay. this trend is drivenby the inherent cost efficiency of bandwidthsharing packetswitched servicesand is not likely to reverse. the second is the trend toward attachment to theinternet. while many corporations have private corporate networks, they alsosee a need to attach to the internet as a means of access to a public datanetwork. the increasing use of the internet protocol (ip) technical standardwithin private corporate networks increases the potential for interconnectingthese networks to the internet.the applications supported by the very large business infrastructure willgenerate significant demand for network access. however, much of this accesswill be realized, at least for the next few years, over low to mediumspeed linkssuch as dialup via modem, isdn, and lowerspeed frame relay. the extent towhich this demand for access will eventually require investment in substantiallyhigher capacity within the public network infrastructure than is necessary tomeet demands for voice and lowercapacity data communications depends onthe advent of new, higherbandwidth applications such as video.several technologies are being deployed within the public switchednetwork to support highercapacity data services and mixed services (voice,data, and video). some providers believe that atm will be the dominanttechnology in the public switched network by the turn of the century, whileothers believe that framebased services such as frame relay and internet willprovide an effective data communications infrastructure. the spread ofapplications that demand more bandwidth and the deployment of increasedcapacity in the network to support them are, of course, mutually dependent. asignificant indicator to monitor in the next few years is whether new bandwidthintensive applications such as video succeed in penetrating the market.technology choices: what are the providers deploying?174about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data services provided by telephone carriersaccording to a recent yankee group report (1995a), explicit data services(those for data only, not voice and data combined) represent less than 1 percentof total rboc revenues. most data communications, however, travel over thetelephone network by means of services that are also used for voice and cannottechnically be distinguished as either voice or data from the carrier's point ofview. for example, fax and modem data are encoded and transmitted as analogsignals over analog voice circuits; digital circuits, such as isdn and dedicatedhighspeed lines, frequently carry both voice and data. estimates varyconcerning the percentage of telephone network traffic actually accounted forby data. pacific bell president david dorman recently estimated that at sometime in 1995, data (including fax and modem) would pass voice to representmore than 50 percent of the traffic the telephone industry carries. 7 dormannoted that voice traffic is growing at 2 percent annually from a large base,whereas data traffic has been growing at 30 percent annually.the yankee group survey of large businesses found a lower percentage ofdata services relative to voice services than that given in the above estimate(yankee group, 1995a). however, the survey found that the need for dataservices is growing. in 1994, outside network services expenses for 200managers of large corporate networks were 61 percent for voice and 36 percentfor data. the group estimated that by 1996 the proportion will be 54 percent forvoice and 40 percent for data. it also estimated that levels of data traffic willincrease by 39 percent, which suggests that most users expect price decreasesfor a given usage level. in addition, the survey responses indicated that anoverall shift is in progress from dedicated circuits to switched services,implying greater reliance on telephonecarrierprovided network managementand related services. between 1994 and 1996, the type of service relied on isprojected to change as shown in table 5.3 .the explicit data services listed in table 5.3 are growing rapidly, but froma small current base, and will therefore continue to represent a small share oftelephone industry revenues. the yankee group (1995a) reported that the 1994framerelay services market was $356 million and that the market for switchedmultimegabit data service (smds; another public packetswitched service) was$22 million. another yankee group survey (1995b) found that 22 percent offortune 500 companies will be using frame relay for access to remote corporatelocations by 1996. a study by the vertical systems group estimated that thecurrent base of u.s. framerelay customers (mainly businesses) is under 1,000but will grow to approximately 8,000 by 1997.8 the study estimated that eachcustomer links together an average of about 20 separate sites, leading totechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?175about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.significant demand for framerelay equipmentšan estimated 1997 market ofnearly $500 million for service provider equipment, $200 million for privatenetwork switches, and over $300 million for access equipment. (this equaldistribution between service provider and customer equipment expensesillustrates the importance of capital investment by customers, as opposed toproviders, as the next section elaborates.)table 5.3 reliance on various kinds of data services, 1994 and projected for 1996percentagedata service19941996 (projected)private line7651frame relay220x.25 packet networks106switched services (isdn and others)1211atmš9source: yankee group (1995a).as discussed in chapter 4, atm is an emerging technology intended forlocal and widearea networking (including both privately deployed networksand networks purchased from telephone carriers) and eventually for voice, data,and multimedia services throughout the public telephone system. atm is onepossible avenue for meeting business networking needs. consulting firm cimicorp. projects atm switch deployment for wide area networks (wans) asgrowing from an installed base of 1,136 atm ports in 1995 to 64,815 ports in1999, a 175 percent annual growth rate (wallace, 1995). as projected in thewhite paper by redmond et al., atm switches will be dominant in thetelephone network after 2000, possibly reaching 100 percent deployment byabout 2015.the internet is also meeting business networking needs, and the twotechnologies will in fact coexist as internet service providers (isps) build theirnetworks atop the telephone infrastructure, which may include atm and otherdata services. internet service providers constitute a small but rapidly growingsegment of the marketplace. a recent assessment of the market by securitiesfirm cowen & company concluded that the total revenues for isps were $288million in 1995 (cowen & company, 1995). this figure includes revenues forthe firms dedicated to internet access, such as psi, netcom, and uunet, as wellas for the internet services provided by lecs, ixcs and others. they areestimated to serve 1.2 million customers. these data make clear that the onlineservice providers such as america online, prodigy, and compuserve arecurrently muchtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?176about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.larger than the other isps, since they serve an estimated 11.3 million customers(arlen, 1996, p. 1). (see also the section ''online services and internet accessfor consumers.") however, cowen & company predicted that the relativeimportance of internet service providers will increase for individual access, andby 1998, they will approach online services in size, with 8 million to 11 millionusers and revenues of $2.7 billion.cowen & company (1995) further noted that the current pattern for isps israpid growth and investment, leading to limited current profits. cowen &company estimated that the combined isps are installing 1,000 points ofpresence in the public switched network in 1995, which will require a hardwareinvestment of $150 million. this level of investment should lead to full marketpenetration by 2000, after which levels of investment will be driven only byincreases in demand. the total investment that these players will make suggeststhat casual entry into wide area internet service is not to be expected. however,at least one other company, @home, is planning to construct a new, wide areainternet infrastructure in the next few years (see the section "cable televisionand telephony: advanced services to the home").cowen & company estimated that by the year 2000, there will be 200million users on the internet worldwide, with 100 million connected throughcorporate or institutional links and up to half connected by individual accesslinks. they estimated that as many as 1 million corporations will be connectedto the internet. this projection is consistent with another conclusion from acowen/datamation survey cited in the above report (cowen & company,1995), in which telecommunications managers indicated that 62 percent ofcorporate networks are connected to the internet in some manner and that thereare plans for an additional 21 percent to attach.business networkingbusiness networking includes interconnection of lans across wide areas(in wans), as well as remote access (connection of remote sites, small offices,mobile workers, and telecommuters to corporate networks). businessnetworking is leading not only to increased sales by carriers and thirdpartyproviders of data services such as frame relay and internet access, but also to arapidly growing investment in data communications infrastructure by businesscustomers themselves. in contrast to residential networking, in which the capitalinvestment by the consumer is minimal and the facilities provider makes themajor upfront investment, the networking of a corporation involvesconsiderable customer investment in equipment. this includes networkinterface cards for computers, sitetechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?177about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wiring, packet switches and routers, and software, as well as other elements.these investments may, in fact, greatly exceed corporations' expenditures tolecs and other outside parties for network services.table 5.4 projected growth in workplace pc connections to lans in the unitedstates, 1995 to 1999users (millions)installed base19951996199719981999lan interfaces4858677275pcs5968757880source: data from idc (1995d,f).most networked pcs in corporations today are connected to lans that arein turn interconnected across the public network infrastructure. thus, thenumber of pcs connected to the public network is much greater than thenumber of discrete connections to the network. most of the corporate networkcosts are capital investment and internal staffing; the amount of revenuesflowing into the lec and similar providers is therefore not a direct measure ofthe level of corporate investment. international data corporation predicts thatthe lan market will be saturated by 1998 in the united states and europe, withover 90 percent of pcs connected to lans (idc, 1995d,f). (this study factorsout pcs in the consumer market.) idc projects growth in workplace pcsconnected to lans in the united states as shown in table 5.4 and investmentin lan hardware as shown in table 5.5.the data in table 5.5 indicate an investment rate in hardware for corporatedata networks of slightly more than $5 billion per year in each of the next fewyears. this number is the estimate only for specific key technologies and iscertain to be an underestimate of total hardware expense. it also does notaddress the issues of staffing and charges for metropolitan area networks andwans. it seems reasonable to estimate that total corporate investment in datanetworking will exceed $10 billion per year. telephone companies wouldreceive only a small part of this spending and thus will continue to perceiveexplicit data services as having a smaller impact on their business than theeconomywide magnitude of investments in networking would seem to indicate.another perspective on network penetration in the installed computer basecomes from idc interviews with 15,000 information systems executives and8,000 consumers worldwide (idc, 1995b). in the united states today, only 19percent of small businesses (those with under 99technology choices: what are the providers deploying?178about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.employees) have a lan, whereas 80 percent of large businesses do. thesenumbers vary strongly by sector, as table 5.6 shows. over onethird of siteswith more than 10 employees had a lan (table 5.7).table 5.5 annual business investment in lan hardware in the united states,1995 to 1999dollars (millions)19951996199719981999ethernet10551086971794602token ring532446351304236high speedšn/an/an/a1,000lan hubs2,1352,2392,0641,8971,725routers1,5461,7431,8301,8141,756total5,2685,319note: š, negligible; n/a, not availablesource: idc (1995f).table 5.6percentage of business sites with a lansectorsmall firms (under 99employees)large firms (100 ormore employees)banking4898other finance2784discrete manufacturing3083process manufacturing2681health care3077transportation/communications/utilities3894retail/wholesale1575business services4091education6093federal governmentš95other3485source: idc (1995b).most of the pcs at sites with a lan are connected to it. the percentageranges from 80 percent of pcs connected for small sites to 71.5 percent forlarger sites. (because small businesses have a lower lan penetration, the totalpercentage of pcs on a lan for small sites is only 30 percent, whereas overallfor large business it is 70 percent.)technology choices: what are the providers deploying?179about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 5.7 percentage of business sites with a lan in relation to size of sitenumber of employees at sitepercentage of sites with lan1914.3101937.1204937.150994610019975.420049977.150099985.91,000+89source: idc (1995b).idc data indicate a tremendous penetration of lans into businesses by1999, with even small companies having aggressive network plans projected tobe operational by that time (idc, 1995d,f). by 2000, it is reasonable toconclude that almost all corporate users will have easy access to a pc, and avery high percentage of these will not only be on a lan, but will also beattached via a router to some form of wanšsuch as a private network, theinternet, or both. the year 2000 may be too soon to predict saturation ofexternal network access, but it is clearly predicted as the time for saturation ofthe lan interface market.small office, home office, and mobile workers connect to their mainworkplace lan through remote access. most such workers do not have enoughdata traffic demand to justify a dedicated circuit for connection and thus willchoose to connect via one of three options: analog modems over pots, isdn,or frame relay. according to a report from infonetics research, based on asurvey of 144 companies, there are about 300,000 remote offices in the unitedstates (infonetics research, 1994). among these, 67 percent have some form ofremote access, a number that infonetics predicts will climb to 96 percent by1998. expenditures in the remoteaccess market (including software, remoteaccess servers, communications boards for dialup access, hubs, modems, androuters) were $490 million in 1994 and are forecast to reach $2.2 billion by1997. over 90 percent of the users achieve their network connection using adialup modem; however, 90 percent said that they would prefer to attach via arouter (thus serving a cluster of networked machines) rather than a singleworkstation. in 1994, 50 percent of remote offices had a lan. by 1998, 20percent of users may move from a dialup modem to isdn or frame relay. inthe surveyed companies, the internet protocol suite was used in 90technology choices: what are the providers deploying?180about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.percent of the cases, with ipx (novell) being used in 70 percent. this suggestsboth the current commercial importance of the internet protocols and the needfor multiprotocol support.the computer modem market has accelerated rapidly in the past few years,in part because many personal computers now are shipped with modemsinstalled. idc estimates that in 1994, shipments of modems rose dramatically,from 5.9 million to 10.1 million units.9 the majority of new modem sales aredevices conforming to the v.32 bis and v.34 standards, the fastest currentlyavailable; according to dataquest, sales of these modems reached almost $1billion in 1994, a 78 percent increase from the previous year (hertz, 1995). idcprojects that the market for v.34 modems will grow very rapidly, from 255,000units in 1994 to 7,650,000 units in 1998 (hertz, 1995). the development of thepc card (formerly known as pcmcia) standard has facilitated modem salesfor portable computers (as well as some pc cardsupporting desktopcomputers); 528,000 pc card modems were sold in 1993, the first full year ofproduction. because many portable computers are used by mobile workers, theyare particularly relevant to the issue of remote access to corporate networks.in the context of the current 147.9 million total telephone access lines, it islikely that the number of data access circuits for lan interconnection andremote access will continue to be dwarfed by voice circuits in 1999. however,behind these data connections will be 75 million networked workplace pcs andtheir users, as well as homeoffice and mobile pcs. in terms of end points (theinformation appliance), and taking into account the amount of time a typicaluser spends in front of a computer as opposed to a telephone, the two are likelysimilar in terms of economic and social importance, if not in revenues to theservice providers. should highly bandwidthintensive applications, such asdesktop video conferencing and various forms of multimedia, becomewidespread in the business environment, business networking may become highenough in volume to stimulate accelerated investment by telephone companiesand thirdparty network service providers (such as internet access providers) inatm, internet (tcp/ip), and other switching technologies.cable television and telephony: advancedservices to the homesummary and forecastsaccess architectures providing substantial broadband services toresidences (including homebased businesses) are being deployed. however, thecable and telephone companies find themselves in different circumstances atpresent, which substantially influences the rate and naturetechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?181about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of deployment. cable firms have a clear technology path to follow, upgradingtheir existing coaxial cable (coax) networks to a hybrid fiber coax (hfc) mode.this approach offers a shortterm cost advantage over telephone companies andothers, and cable firms will substantially complete this process in the next fewyears. the use of this infrastructure for advanced entertainment services,telephony, and data services will increase incrementally, as regulation andbusiness viability dictate.future deployment of broadband networks by telephone local exchangecarriers (lecs), by contrast, appears more variable and uncertain, becausewithout existing coax networks, lecs face higher installation costs in providinga broadband infrastructure. at the same time, because they are not constrainedby an existing coax deployment, lecs have more technical options, such ashfc versus the more advanced fibertothecurb architecture, either of whichcan be supplemented with isdn and adsl at the network's margins to supportreuse of existing copper plant for data and possibly video services. lecs alsohave several wireless options for competition for video delivery, as discussed inthe subsection "wireless cable."the twoway communication capacity available to users in the home withhfc is likely to be sufficient within the next 5 to 7 years not only for deliveryof interactive entertainment with limited, upstream, pointandclick commands,but also for relatively more bandwidthintensive purposes such as provision ofonline services, internet access, file transfer, and remote access to workplacelans. whether the upstream capacity will be deployed to support even higherbandwidth services such as video conferencing or uploading of multimedia filesto public file servers (e.g., acting as multimedia publishers from the home) willdepend on many factors, including demand for these services, outcomes ofmarket trials in progress, emergence of a viable business model for providercost recovery, software and hardware standards, massmarket economicsleading to lowerpriced access devices (settop boxes, pc interfaces), andcrucial regulatory concerns discussed in chapter 6.ultimately, ubiquitous deployment of fiber to businesses and homes wouldsolve most access and bandwidth issues. the massive investment requiredimplies that this level of deployment will not be reached for at least 20 years.however, the ability of cable, telephone, and other providers to deployinfrastructure for advanced services incrementally will enable the business casefor deployment to be explored and refined over time.advanced cable and telephone services to the homecable television (analog video broadcast over terrestrial cables) andtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?182about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic voice telephony are both almost universally accessible from u.s. homes.in march 1994, 94 percent of households had telephone service (fcc, 1994,table 8.1). the television penetration rate was higher, at 97 percent. most u.s.homes are now passed by, and thus have the choice of accessing, a cabletelevision service; about 62 percent of houses with a television subscribe tocable (veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 313; mcconville, 1995).cable and telephone companies are in various stages of experimentationand deployment of new infrastructure to support highbandwidthcommunications to and from the home. the common element in thesearchitectures is the deployment of fiber optics in much of the network. cablecompanies are upgrading their existing coaxial cable networks to hybridnetworks with fiber in the center of the network and coax at the periphery.besides deploying fiber, cable firms are beginning to invest in new electronicsand switching capacity that can support twoway services. telephonecompanies already have networks in place that are highly optimized for twoway communications. however, their networks reach individual homes withcopper wires, which have much less capacity than the cable systems' coax.some telephone companies are deploying hfc systems in parts of their serviceareas, while others are evaluating architectures that bring fiber closer to thehome and rely on twisted pairs and advanced digital transmission schemes tobridge the last gap to the home. (see chapter 4 for a more detailed examinationof hfc technology trends.)most rbocs have announced plans for substantial investment to upgradetheir networks. as of early 1995, these included, for example, pacific telesis,$16 billion over 7 years; bell atlantic, $11 billion; us west, $10 billion; andsouthern new england telephone, $4.4 billion (arnst et al., 1995, p. 96). muchof this investment will go toward deployment of fiber access networks withfiber reaching from the central office toward, but not entirely to, the home.analysts with the investment firm of bear stearns predict that lec investmentsin fiber deployment within the local loop will ultimately surpass cable companyinvestments (friedman, 1994, p. 137).there have been, however, several setbacks in telephone companybroadband deployment in the past year. box 5.1 presents several majortelephone and cable companies' reported plans for deploying hybrid fibernetworks.delays and rollbacks in video trials by several telephone companies maybe motivated by factors such as uncertainty over consumer demand forinteractive video; anticipated changes in telecommunications regulation thatcould alter the terms under which telephone companies might compete in videodelivery; pursuit of alternative opportunities for offertechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?183about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ing video entertainment services, such as wireless cable; and recent advances intechnology, such as improvements in adsl and digital video switching, whichcould render obsolete their initial plans for hfc networks and lead toalternative approaches combining fiber and twisted pairs, such as fiber to thecurb (fttc).box 5.1 major companies' plans for deploymentof hybrid fiber networkstelephone carriersameritech has applied to deliver video via hybrid fiber coaxial cable(hfc) to 1.2 million customers in several cities within its region(discussed in detail in the white paper by joel engel). the systemswould be separate from ameritech's telephone network, would beregulated under cable television rules (as opposed to the video dialtone rules under which other telephone companies have applied tocarry video services), and at least initially would not carry telephonetraffic.bell atlantic applied to provide video services in specifiedcommunities over architectures combining fiber (in a fibertothecurbarchitecture) and twisted pair (using asymmetric digital subscriber linein the latter segment). bell atlantic plannedto pass up to 8 millionhomes in its region by 2000 with video dialtone. however, somefilings were withdrawn in the spring of 1995, implying at least delay.bellsouth applied for an hfc trial in atlanta, with telephony andinteractive services.gte plans to pass 7 million homes by 2003 with hfc, starting withanalog video broadcasting to 1 million customers by 1996; laterupgrades would add digital broadcast and interactive services.nynex has in progress in new york city an hfc video trial offeringinteractive services to 50 customers.pacific bell planned to pass 5 million homes by 2000 and has hfcnetworks under construction in four major cities. however, inseptember 1995 it announced that deployments would be scaled backto encompass only some parts of the san francisco bay area, whilein southern california it would invest instead in multichannelmultipoint distribution service (wireless cable).early trials with interactive video entertainment appear to be leading to adecreased emphasis on these services as the main source of demand motivatinginvestment in residential infrastructures.10 information services, internetaccess, telecommuting, and financial services are some other areas of demandthat could motivate investment in residential artechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?184about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chitectures with twoway (upstream as well as downstream) capabilities. cablemodems, which can carry data services to and from the home over a cabletelevision system, are already available from a range of manufacturers,including lancity, general instrument, motorola, scientificatlanta, intel, andzenith (lindstrom, 1995b; communications daily, 1995c). these modems offerdata rates of up to 40 mbps in the downstream direction and 100 kbps to 10mbps upstream; lancity, for example, offers symmetrical 10mbpscommunications. current plans are for modems to be sold to cable operators,which will rent them to subscribers.sbc communications (formerly southwestern bell) has applied toconduct a trial using fibertothecurb architecture in richardson, texas.southern new england telephone plans to conduct an allanalogvideo dialtone trial in connecticut over a network passing 150,000homes. it canceled original plans to use digital technology in this trial,in response to slowerthananticipated availability of mature digitaltechnologies.u s west is using hfc for a video trial in omaha, nebraska, with50,000 subscribers. it applied to deploy hfcbased video dialtoneservices in several other cities but withdrew this application in thespring of 1995.cable operatorstelecommunications inc. plans to convert 90 percent of its 11 millioncable subscribers to hfc by 1996. it has a videoondemand trial inprogress in littleton, colorado, and planned to conduct an hfctelephony trial with teleport in arlington heights, illinois in 1995. itplans to market mobile telephone service nationwide through itsalliance with sprint, cox cable, and comcast.time warner cable plans to pass 15 million homes with hfc by 1998(the white paper by wendell bailey and james chiddix givesadditional details). time warner has a broad interactiveservices trialunder way in orlando, florida, and has become a competitive localexchange carrier in rochester, new york, providing a number ofapartment buildings with telephone service over its hfc cable plant.all system upgrades include deployment of amplifiers in the upstreamdirection, enabling twoway data and other services.source: this information is drawn from white papers contributed to thenii 2000 project by joel engel; wendell bailey and james chiddix; andj.c. redmond et al. information is also drawn from trade and otherpublications; see brightman (1994), p. 42; cauley (1995a,c);communications daily (1995b); lindstrom (1995a,c); mccarthy (1995); andwall street journal (1995d).at the may forum, milo medin discussed @home's plans in the nexttechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?185about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.several years to connect residential customers to online services and theinternet through cable systems, including telecommunications inc., at datarates much higher than those of pots or isdn. use of these modems dependson twoway capacity in the cable network, which is enabled by amplifiers in theupstream direction on the coax portion of the cable plant. cable industryrepresentatives told the steering committee that this capacity will becomeavailable in most cable systems as part of their upgrades to hfc over the nextfew years (see the white paper by wendell bailey and james chiddix). inaddition, according to equipment manufacturer scientificatlanta, current salesof cablesystem devices designed to provide returnpath signals areapproximately equal to sales of forwardpath units, indicating that operators areinstalling full twoway plant.11online services and internet access forconsumerssummary and forecastsonline services include consumer services such as news, entertainment,social interaction, education, and online banking, as well as businessinformation services such as market research, technical information, and patentand trademark data, among others. in addition, online and internet accessservices represent an intermediate level of infrastructure, built upon (andstimulating demand for) lowerlevel infrastructure such as telephony. theyserve in turn as bases on which specialized consumer, business, educational,government, and other types of services can be offered. online services andinternet access for consumers represent significant sources of demand for arange of commercial, education, entertainment, and other services. their growthmay also stimulate deployment by telephone carriers, cable operators, and otherinfrastructure providers in the next 5 to 7 years. (internet access for businessnetworking purposes is discussed separately, in the section above on datacommunications.)online services and internet accessbusiness information services are a significant u.s. industry. theinvestment firm of veronis, suhler & associates forecasts growth from $29billion (1994) to $39 billion (1999) in business spending for marketing,financial, credit, payroll, product and price, legal, technical, and other businessinformation (veronis, suhler, 1995, p. 296). half of these business services arecurrently delivered in electronic form (onefourth on linetechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?186about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and onefourth electronic or cdrom databases) and half in print form(directories, newsletters, and so on; see veronis, suhler, 1994, p. 253). aforecast of the relative sizes of the print and electronic segments of the businessinformation market is not available from this source; however, even assumingthat electronic, interactive media remain no more than half of the total businessinformation services market, business users would appear to be a significantmarket for interactive information services in the next several years. in fact, thegrowing penetration of lans in the workplace, combined with improvedinformation search and retrieval software, has the potential to put businessinformation access in the hands of workers in their offices, as opposed toinformation retrieval specialists in corporate libraries. this will stimulate anexpansion of the electronic share of the business information services market.according to a market review by simba information inc., consumeroriented online services receive lower revenues per subscriber, on average,than do businessoriented services (such as lexis/nexis, dow jones news/retrieval, and reuters); however, consumer online services have moresubscribers than do business information services and are growing much morerapidly (simba, 1995). as of the end of 1995, online services reached 11.3million subscribers, a 15 percent increase over the preceding 3 months (arlen,1996, p. 1). america online is the largest, with 4.5 million subscribers. theother leading services are compuserve, with 4.0 million subscribers; prodigy,1.6 million; microsoft network, 600,000; eworld, 126,000; and delphiinternet, 125,000. these six services account for 97 percent of subscribers, asestimated by arlen (1996).veronis, suhler & associates estimated 1994 revenues for online servicesand consumer internet access (distinct from business internetworking acrossthe internet, discussed in the data communications section above) at $1.4billion, with a customer base of 4.7 million households (veronis, suhler, 1995,pp. 310 and 313). this represents about half of all households with both a pcand a modem. the report projects compounded growth in this market of 33percent per year, to $6.1 billion by 1999. the projected growth is in response toimprovements in services, content, and software tools for navigating theinternet; increasing penetration of pcs and modems; and the assumption that by1999, 90 percent of households with a pc and a modem will subscribe tointernet access and/or online services.veronis, suhler & associates predict that access to online informationand other services will increasingly take place over the internet. many contentproviders will establish their own presence on the world wide web, bypassingtraditional online services such as america online, compuserve, and prodigy,which will in turn expand their businesses of providing internet access toindividuals. (they will thus compete withtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?187about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some internet service providers, such as netcom, that serve both corporate andindividual customers, as discussed in the section above on datacommunications.) both online services and content sources available on theweb will stimulate new demand for internet access among consumers, smalloffice and home office users, and business users (within the last group, mainlythose who do not already have internet access as a consequence of theirbusiness networking requirements).the relative success of consumer services offered through third parties,such as online services, compared to the success of services offered directlyover the internet will be an indicator of change in this market. one early signmay be evident in the fact that in october 1995, pacific telesis and timesmirror dissolved a partnership aimed at creating an online information andhome shopping service. the firms cited as the main reason for changing theirplans the internet's rapid growth and their expectation that businesses willpursue direct relationships with home customers over the internet (lippman,1995).wireless and broadcast infrastructureover the course of the nii 2000 project, including the january 1995workshop and may 1995 forum, the steering committee received a range ofinputs concerning projected capabilities of wireless and broadcast technologiesto support emerging voice, data, and other nii services. the potential for manyof these services appears significant, as the discussion of technology trends inchapter 4 makes clear. however, very little input was received supportingspecific forecasts of deployment of these technologies. the following materialprimarily reflects a variety of information drawn from market research literatureand from trade and other publications.summary and forecaststhe role of wireless will evolve over the next 5 to 7 years, with numerouschanges in the technological and regulatory contexts. this section considers anumber of very different technologies, including cellular telephony, wirelessdata networking, and terrestrial and satellite broadcasting. most of the businesssectors represented here, other than terrestrial television broadcasting, are rathernew and have a less concrete perspective on their business model than do themore mature industries of wireline video and telephony. these new businessestherefore face a higher degree of experimentation and redefinition in the nextseveral years.decreasing costs and new availability of spectrum suggest that theretechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?188about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.may be a major expansion of wireless telephony. in addition to terrestrialcellular and personal communication service (pcs) offerings, there have beenapplications for satellitebased telephone services that would add further to thecompetitive offerings. additionally, demand for wireless telephony could bestimulated if it could be used for costeffective data access at reasonablebandwidth; the largescale viability of this application remains to be proven.there are many proposed plans and visions about the use of wireless insupport of data communications. wireless lans have been on the market forseveral years, and even though demand for these products has not accelerateddramatically, they suggest what the cost and potential of wireless data might be.wireless as a component of nomadic computing is an application that stimulatesmuch speculation but that has not yet entered the market to a significant degree.these services might emerge over the next 5 to 7 years, subject to regulatorydecisions, emergence of technical standards, and a viable business model.wireless has also been proposed as an alternative to wireline for residential,educational, and small business data access. this application also seems viablefrom a technical perspective but depends on the allocation of spectrum and thesetting of standards. prices for early offerings for wireless data seemcompetitive with wireline offerings under some circumstances. these areas mayemerge, but are not likely to mature, in the next 5 to 7 years.a number of new video delivery offerings have begun to emerge, andsome will mature over the next 5 to 7 years. direct broadcast satellitedistribution of digital video signals has entered the market more quickly thananticipated and is viewed by some as potentially growing to represent a realsource of competition to terrestrial broadcasting and cable video delivery.provision of terrestrial wireless cable services is viewed with increasing interestby telephone carriers and others as a way to compete with existing cablesystems without making large investments in a new, broadband wirelineinfrastructure. traditional television broadcasters will begin converting todigital broadcasting within the next several years, although uncertainty aboutmarket demand and the need for products to support both analog and digitalstandards during the transition suggest that a fast transition is unlikely.wireless telephonydemand for wireless voice telephony services, almost entirely for mobileusers, is projected to grow significantly. decreasing costs of service, due in partto advances in the performance of hardware available at a given cost and newdigital standards, are increasing demand for existing cellular services. inaddition, the rollout of pcs over the next severaltechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?189about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.years will create up to six new choices for mobile users throughout the unitedstates, beyond the two now available in most places. the resulting competitionis expected to stimulate demand for wireless voice communications. nata'sannual market review for 1995 projects growth in the number of mobilecommunications subscribers through 1998 as shown in table 5.8 (nata, 1995,pp. 133 and 136).table 5.8 mobile communications subscribers, 1993 and projected for 1998users (in millions)19931998 (projected)cellularanalog1622digital013paging1626mobile data17personal communication service (pcs)02personal digital assistants (pdas)02total3372source: nata (1995).the personal communications industry association (pcia) produced arather different forecast in its 1995 survey of members (see the white paper bymary madigan). pcia members anticipate, by the year 2000, combineddemand for new pcs, cellular, paging, and narrowband pcs of almost 118million subscriptions. this forecast for 2000 includes 15 million digitalbroadband pcs customers, with revenues of $8.8 billion (mainly voice services,7 percent from data services); 50 million cellular subscribers (up from 23.2million in 1994), of which 30 percent will be business users, with total revenuesof $26 billion; and over 50 million narrowband pcs subscriptions (mainlybusiness users), including advanced voice paging, twoway acknowledgmentpaging, and oneway and twoway messaging.the white paper by robert roche of the cellular telecommunicationsindustry association (ctia) cites projections for demand that are somewhatmore modest than pcia's. ctia anticipates cellular subscribership in 2006 inthe range of 38.2 million to 55.1 million.one factor that could stimulate demand for wireless telephony is increasedwireline localaccess prices that lecs could be forced to change, if thesubstantial network access revenues they receive from ixcs (quantified in the''demand for telephone services" section above in this chaptechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?190about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ter) should decrease. regulatory changes could drive down these networkaccess charges, as could a shift of ixcs toward other, competing ways ofaccessing their customersšincluding wireless local access networks. at&t'spurchase of the largest cellular telephone service, mccaw communications,represents such a shift.however, deployment of infrastructure to meet growing demand forwireless may prove challenging. the white paper by roche projects anenormous increase in the number of cellular and pcs antennas and basestations. for example, pcs will have six licensees per area, as opposed to justtwo for cellular. although new digital technologies will enable switches to carrymore callers, the higher frequencies of pcs mandate smaller cell sizes and thusmore cells to achieve geographic coverage. both roche and madigan note inseparate white papers that delays and uncertainty in antenna siting, which issubject to regulation by local governments, will complicate this deployment.ctia has analyzed the anticipated costs of deploying nationwide pcsnetworks. assuming $500,000 per switch, with one switch per basic tradingarea (of which there are 493 nationwide) and two per major trading area (102nationwide); another $100,000 for the electronics in each cell site within eachtrading area, not counting the costs for real estate and for local permits; and fourto six separate pcs networks, it can be anticipated that a $20 billion to $40billion investment will be needed to deploy pcs voice networks nationwide. 12however, some vendors such as qualcomm are developing digitalmicrocell technologies that may make new wireless networks much cheaperthan ctia's estimates indicate. microcells enable greater use of frequenciesthan do larger cells, raising the system capacity. as a result, microcell systemscould eventually lower capital costs for wireless pcs, per circuit available inthe total system, far below those for current cellular systems.13a standards issue remains for digital cellular communications. wirelesscarriers have chosen competing standards for digital cellular service in theiroperating areas. timedivision multiple access (tdma) systems have the leadin the market, with more than 500,000 customers in the united states; but somecarriers have chosen codedivision multiple access (cdma) because of its moreefficient use of spectrum. cdma is supported by alltel, ameritech, bellatlantic/nynex, sprint, and airtouch/u s west; tdma is supported byat&t/mccaw, bellsouth, rogers cantel, and sbc communications (poppeland marino, 1995, p. 34). global system for mobile communications (gsm)has been chosen as the digital standard in europe and many other parts of theworld. although it is technically feasible for handsets to incorporate more thantechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?191about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.one standard, thus enabling them to operate in different locations as the usertravels, the additional hardware adds significant expense. 14wireless data networkingbis strategic decisions inc. forecasts that the number of users of data onwireless networks will grow from 500,000 in 1994 to 9.9 million by 2000(wireless messaging report, 1995b). the distribution of users of data servicesavailable on these networks is shown in table 5.9.as noted in the section above on data communications, one source ofdemand for wireless data services is the portable computer with a wireless datamodem installed. a perspective on nomadic computing is given by idc'sestimates of the market for portable pcs (idc, 1995e). sales of portables areprojected to grow at twice the rate of sales in the overall desktop pc market,from an installed base of 27 million in 1995 to 50 million in 1999. wireless isseen, however, as a small component of these networked pcs. idc does notestimate the installed base in this case, but it does estimate that the annualshipments of wirelessequipped portable pcs will grow from about 100,000units in 1995 to 2.7 million in 1999.idc predicts only a modest market for wireless lan adaptersšdevicesused to connect computers to wireless lansšfrom 422,000 units in 1995 to1.2 million by 1999, with an installed base of 4.2 million in 1999. revenues of$204 million in 1995 are projected to grow to $385 million in 1999. idcconcludes that when wireless standards emerge, lower prices and increasedshipments will follow (idc, 1995e).the first nationwide mobile data services were packet radio networksšardis (advanced radio data information service) and ram mobile data.these services provide lowspeed communications at ratestable 5.9 distribution of users of various wireless data services, 1994 and 2000percentage of user poolservice19942000 (projected)narrowband pcs (paging, etc.)026cellular and broadband pcs7054dedicated data1410specialized mobile radio24satellite146source: wireless messaging report (1995b).technology choices: what are the providers deploying?192about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of approximately 2.4 to 9.6 kbps (brodsky, 1995). somewhat highercapacitydata networks are under development by the startup ventures metricom andtetherless access ltd. metricom's product is a rapidly deployable network,operating in a portion of the spectrum allocated by the fcc for unlicensedwireless data networking; it consists of a mesh of poletop radios configured in aselfrouting (not centrally switched) network, resulting in relatively low cost.data throughput for end users is modest, up to 35 kbps, with flatrate, unlimitedusage pricing. tetherless access offers the wireless equivalent of a 56kbpsprivate digital line; its advantage is the ability to deploy rapidly, without theneed for stringing new cables. although these services may not mature in thenext 5 to 7 years, they offer opportunities for individuals to use advancedapplications through wireless networking in locations where broadband serviceis either unavailable or prohibitively priced.cellular telephone services are primarily circuitswitched, althoughcellular digital packet data (cdpd) standards are gaining acceptance and cdpdservice was available in 19 markets as of february 1995 (brodsky, 1995).cdpd is based on the internet protocol suite (tcp/ip) and is thus well suitedfor internet connection.none of the above systems offers the data communication rates availableover wired systems with services such as isdn. in the longer term, however,satellite systems may make higher capacities available for mobile users of bothvoice and data communications. for example, teledesic (founded by bill gatesand craig mccaw) plans to offer globally available, highbandwidth digitalcommunications starting in 2001, with access at data rates of up to 2 mbps(ota, 1995; brodsky, 1995). the investment cost for the network of 840 lowearthorbit (leo) satellites is estimated at $9 billion. teledesic and similar leosatellitebased communications networks represent a somewhat longertermcomponent of the nation's information infrastructure than do others outlined inthis chapter; their potential to reach maturity is difficult to predict, given theirhigh upfront investment requirements for an unproven service.15 however,one federal study predicted that in the next 10 years, at least two of the variousproposed leo systems are likely to be deployed and operational (asker, 1995).thus, while leo systems are unlikely to reach significant levels of deploymentin the next 5 to 7 years, they could have significant impact further in the future.spectrum availability is clearly a limiting factor for data and other wirelesscommunications, and so fcc spectrum policies are a central determinant ofwireless infrastructure deployment. two proposals to the fcc, both filed inmay 1995, illustrate what could be done with additional spectrum. applecomputer filed a petition for an "nii band": 300 mhz of spectrum in the 5ghz range for the purpose of unlicensedtechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?193about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wireless data communications. apple claims this would support data rates up to24 mbps over 10 to 15km distances (apple, 1995). the wireless informationnetworks forum (winforum) petitioned for 250 mhz of spectrum inapproximately the same frequency range, also for wireless data communicationsat about 20 mbps (winforum, 1995). both technologies could supportapplications such as wireless local area networking and wireless access towireline networks. if approved by the fcc, and if standards were settled andhardware manufacturers could produce equipment at reasonable cost, wirelesscould be a highly capable form of data communication infrastructure. inaddition, because physical wire does not have to be laid, any wireless networkhas the potential to be deployed much more quickly and cheaply thancompeting wireline broadband services. on november 2, 1995, the director ofthe national telecommunications and information administration (ntia)recommended to the fcc that it initiate proceedings for these services; itremains to be seen what result proposals such as these may have. 16terrestrial and satellite broadcast televisionlegislation to reform telecommunications regulation has been underconsideration by both houses of the u.s. congress. one of the changesproposed would allow television broadcasters to use part of their licensedspectrum, including that which was originally set aside for highdefinitiontelevision, to provide supplemental digital services. according to investmentanalysts with bear stearns, digital television broadcasters could use this excesscapacity to enter digital wireless businesses such as fax transmission, twowaypaging, and dispatching. however, large investments would be required werethey to offer highercapacity interactive products and services (friedman, 1994,p. 125).wireless cablemultichannel multipoint distribution service (mmds), also known aswireless cable, is a competitor for wireline cable television distribution. thecapacity of mmds is less than that of traditional cable, with only about 25 to40 channels. (however, digital technologies may increase this capacity manytimes.) where wired infrastructure is lacking, deploying a new mmds systemis competitive with new cable plant, at about $1.5 million to $3 million per headend and $450 to $550 per subscriber. as a result, the primary market for currentanalog mmds is valueconscious customers. bear stearns analysts project 5.5million subscribers by 2000. mmds operators currently offer limitedinteractive services using the telephone network as the return channel (thesubscriber calls the centraltechnology choices: what are the providers deploying?194about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.office). one provider, american telecasting, demonstrated a completelywireless interactive technology in 1993 (friedman, 1994, pp. 148149).as several telephone companies have delayed deployment of hfc andfttc infrastructures, some, such as pacific telesis, have shown an increasinginterest in entering the wireless cable market through deployment of newsystems or purchase and upgrade of existing systems. wireless cable representsa means for entering the video distribution market more quickly andinexpensively than by deploying allnew cable infrastructures. the recentcontract for thomson consumer electronics to provide 1 million wireless settop boxes to teletv, a consortium of lecs, indicates the substantial volumeof likely telephone company entry into this market (cable regulation digest,1995).direct broadcast satellitewith the advent of new digital direct broadcast satellite (dbs) systems(see chapter 4), sales to consumers of satellite products have accelerated morerapidly than expected. dbs subscriptions are growing at a rate of 25,000 perweek (communications daily, 1995a). sales of receivers for the newest dbsservice, primestar and rca's digital satellite system, topped firstyear sales ofcolor televisions and video cassette recorders; according to the electronicindustries association (eia), they represent the most successful new product inthe history of consumer electronics (communications daily, 1995d). an eiasurvey found that more than 590,000 digital satellite system receivers weresold in the first year of availability, with 1995 sales forecast in the range from1.2 million to 1.5 million units.notes1. see fcc (1994), p. vi. the federal communications commission maintains detailedinformation about the current infrastructure; however, it does not make forecasts in this area.2. this total includes lines that are routed to the switches from other central offices throughforeign exchange services.3. because most of the cost to deploy fiber is labor and installation (e.g., digging trenches),most firms lay more fiber than they need to meet current demand, in anticipation of activating,or "lighting," the dark fiber in the future.4. note that these totals exclude trials, as well as all fiber deployment by competitive localexchange carriers (complecs). see kraushaar (1995b).5. complecs typically serve business customers, for at least two reasons: (1) businessesrepresent highvolume, highvalue customers; and (2) deployment of new infrastructure inconcentrated business areas of communities is much less costly than deployment in lowerdensity areas.technology choices: what are the providers deploying?195about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6. the fcc reports that a typical deployment consists of a fiber ring containing from 20 to 200strands, with ends connected at a hub station. each customer is therefore served by tworedundant routes to the hub.7. see edge (1995). note also that data traffic on the internet has been growing far morerapidly, as noted in chapter 4; however, it begins from a small base compared to data traffic onpublic and private networks overall.8. see pc week, oct. 17, 1994, p. a10.9. demand for modems is driven not only by the need for remote access to corporate networksby workers in the home and on the road, but also by applications such as online services andinternet access (idc, 1995c).10. this theme was raised by several participants in the forum. for discussion of early results oftrials, see schwartz (1995).11. robert luff, chief technical officer of scientificatlanta, quoted in communications daily (1995e).12. preliminary data provided to nrc staff by ctia, june 1995.13. by one estimate, the cost could be $14 per circuit, as opposed to $5,555 per circuit usingcurrent, analog cellular technology. assumptions in this estimate include cell site spacing of20,000 feet versus pcs base station (port) spacing of 1,000 feet and 180 channels per cell or apcs port. the cost per pcs base station is estimated to be far less than that for a cellular basestation, at approximately $2,500 instead of $1 million; the pcs system would use many morestations, and the cost per available circuit in the total system would be much lower. see cox(1995), p. 31.14. research and development related to incorporating multiple cellular standards in software,which would reduce the cost of handsets, are in progress and may help alleviate this burdenwithin several years. see ota (1995), pp. 8486.15. see ota (1995), pp. 7879. for example, the bond rating for the iridium project, a plannedleo satellitebased voice telephony service, was recently downgraded, leading the company torevise its efforts to raise through external debt the $4.7 billion expected to be needed to deployits 66satellite system. the firm now plans to raise funds internally. see communications daily, september 21, 1995, p. 5.16. the ntia, part of the u.s. department of commerce, is the executive branch agency withresponsibility for telecommunications policy and management of radio spectrum forgovernment uses. see telecommunications reports (1995j).technology choices: what are the providers deploying?196about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6public policy and private actionintroductionthe evolution of the national information infrastructure (nii) poses anumber of problems, alternative solutions, and opportunities for private andpublic parties. with an emphasis on gathering private sector perspectives, thisproject did not set out to define appropriate roles for government. contributorsto the forum made clear that there is hardly a consensus among representativesof various industries about the role of government. across the range of issuesrelating to information infrastructure there is evidence of imperfect performanceboth in markets and by government. therefore, the serious debate andcommentary center on what imperfect government actions to remedy imperfectmarkets are justified. the workshop, forum, and set of white papers developedfor the nii 2000 project, like the steering committee, mirror society inpresenting divergent perspectives.regardless of political sentiments about its role in general, government atall levels will inevitably be a major player. government agenciesšat state andfederal levelsšparticipate in almost every informationrelated role pursued bythe private sectoršpublisher, user, network manager, innovator. governmentshave additional responsibilities by virtue of their constitutional obligationsšasarbiter, regulator, convener, and even leader in the interest of equity and anefficient, productive society. the federal government has unique responsibilitieswith respect to the transnational issues arising in the global informationinfrastructurepublic policy and private action197about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(gii) and advancing the national technology base through support for researchand development.1 support for research and development (r&d) can help toincrease the options,2 lower the costs, and enhance the capabilities oftechnologies that can be brought to the nii marketplace.given the preponderance of private investment and the uncertaintysurrounding information infrastructure markets, many people point to theimportance of reducing government constraints on private decisions andinvestment. the big task for government, they would note, is careful butdetermined deregulation of telecommunications services. a second task is thestudied avoidance of new regulations in response to problems arising in the newuses of technology. the concern is not only to avoid constraining competition,but also to minimize the kinds of actions to manipulate the system thattelecommunications regulation has unintentionally fostered. as robert crandallof the brookings institution observed, "once regulation becomes a system forpolitically redistributing income, and crosssubsidizing one service out ofanother, it becomes very difficult to allow competition and the entry of newtechnologies."3 participants in this project pointed to both telecommunicationsregulation, per se, and the modified final judgment decree arising from theat&t corporation antitrust suit as forces constraining entry.4 although thoseinputs centered on existing telephone and cable businesses, other commentsrelated to the challenge of how to foster entrepreneurialism, development ofnew information infrastructure industries, and market entry by smaller andnontraditional players. as quincy rodgers of general instrument observed,smaller players have fewer resources, limiting their ability to enter certainmarkets successfully. technological innovation and competition should beencouraged together, he and others argued, leaving to the marketplace thedetermination of which technologies deliver value to customers.5many others ask, how can so many industries and so many users expect toacquire enough shared knowledge to create consensus unless some legitimatepublic body, not competing in commercial markets, is willing to take aleadership role aimed at orderly evolution of the nii? governments, perhapsuniquely, can try to encourage all parties (their own agencies included) toaddress crosscutting issues cooperatively and constructively. the challenge isto effect government leadership that keeps options open, encourages innovation,and allows markets to work.whether the government role is seen as something to be minimized orsomething to be leveraged, it will reflect two realities. first, the intertwining ofpublic and private investments and activities shaping the nii implies thatconsultation between government and private sector institutions will have to beeffective at the operational as well as the strategic or policy level. thisinteraction will have to reflect the fact that public andpublic policy and private action198about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.private investment and activity together are dominated by private sectorelements. second, the niišand the gii of which it is a partšis an incrediblycomplex economic and technological system. simply understanding itsbehavior is a major task; finding appropriate tools for addressing gaps andbottlenecks requires a level of knowledge of system behavior that no oneindustrial sector (or governmental unit) is likely to have. examination of thesetwo realities in turn is furthered by understanding how the internet has gained insignificance in both contexts.publicprivate engagementthe high level of collaboration among its suppliers and usersšand theassociated roles of public and private institutionsšmakes informationinfrastructure a hybrid of the principles guiding other (and not unrelated) formsof public infrastructure, including traditional public utilities and education,which present contrasting mixtures of public and private roles.6 the internetprovides a powerful illustration. it developed out of the mission responsibilitiesof several federal agencies plus state and regional interests in both feeder andbackbone networks. the internet has demonstrated that some commonality ofvision can make a decentralized process more efficient and effective. 7 however, there was no grand plan; the "bottomup" character of thedevelopment, typical of most technologydriven changes that occur in acompetitive environment, engendered vitality and legitimacy.the internet developed largely as a result of research conducted in manyinstitutions across the country and regional needs to interconnect state andprivate institutions and sources of information. the nsfnet, a principalinternet backbone commissioned by the national science foundation (nsf)and operated under cooperative agreement by a joint venture among ibm, mci,and the nonprofit merit inc., was a proving ground for cooperation amonggovernment, industry, and academia in the planning, development, andoperation of information infrastructure. 8 public and private research andinvestment have supported the creation of collections of valuable information aswell as services to make them available. thus the internet illustratesgovernment investment as a catalyst to private investment in both the demandand the supply sides of information infrastructure. for a discussion of emergingprospects, see "government as user and service provider" below.unresolved is the appropriate role of government in assuring operationalintegrity of an nii that is increasingly diverse in its components, serviceofferings, and management. see observations from david messerschmitt of theuniversity of california at berkeley in box 6.1. in an internet that is not acritical system for its users, anecdotal evidence of operationalpublic policy and private action199about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.failures may not be a cause for alarm and may even be a transient phenomenon,although it is also a cautionary indicator for the nation's informationinfrastructure in general, since mature infrastructure must be reliable. theseoperational failures also raise questions about whether some minimal commoninstitutional structure or mechanisms for governance are needed to preservesystem integrity, availability, and so on.box 6.1 network control and managementif we really have a goal of a national information infrastructure thatincorporates some existing networks, such as the internet, telephone networks, etcetera, [it will combine] existing networks [having] existing control structures (e.g.,signaling system 7 in the telephone network). the internet does not have such astructure. but it is developing it for the purposes of providing qualityofserviceguarantees. the question i have is, how are we going to develop some kind ofstandards or some way to ensure that all of these different pieces of this overallinfrastructure interoperate at the control or signaling level? we tend to talk aboutstandards in terms of [examples such as] mpeg, which involves the actual signalsgoing through at one time. but how are these networks going to control each other?when i have to access a mosaic server across the internet from a tcirun cabletv system, how does the addressing and quality of service information gettransferred from the cable system to the internet in some organized fashion?šdavid messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyfinally, the internet also provides a vehicle for exploring the costs,benefits, and alternatives for equitable access to information infrastructure andassociated services.9 see box 6.2. attorney allan arlow, tora bikson of therand corporation, richard friedman of the university of wisconsin medicalschool, allen hammond of new york law school, and other contributorsexpressed concern about the prospect of ''information have nots,"acknowledging that some segments of the population are not sharingšas afunction of market forces alonešin the widening deployment of advancedservices and sophisticated information appliances. 10 the internet, and morelimited government service programs (e.g., social security) and commercialprograms using dedicated or specialized systems, offer the opportunity for someexperience through libraryand schoolbased access and kiosks (with publicterminals) that provide access in various public spaces (jackson, 1995). theyshow both the potential for and limitations of public access arrangements, withlimitations including the level of access achieved, the public naturešandtherefore limited personal privacy affordedšof the access, and the limited easeof use and thus the training requirements.public policy and private action200about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.2 universal serviceyesterday the term universal service did not differentiate between access andthe service itself, because for a phone call the phone and the service wereessentially the same thing. now, or in the future, we are talking about two differentthings. one is equitable, if not universal, access to the network so that everybodycan touch the network, even if that means walking to a library. a separate issue iswhatever subsidy is appropriate to make sure that the people that "we the public"want to have certain services, have those services.šrobert powers, mci telecommunications inc.you cannot have an nii if you do not hook most of the people in the unitedstates into it. at least you cannot have an affordable nii. – nothing is moreuniversal in the united states than television: 98 percent of all homes havetelevision; 96 percent of all homes have telephones; 63 percent of all homes havecable. good access to the american home depends on television.šjames mckinney, advanced television systems committeepaying customers should be the largest contributor at first; educated middleand upperincome individuals who are driving the use of technology today. second,there should be free access to schools, libraries, and other public facilities providingbasic access and exposure to the network infrastructure, which will build demandfor the future. and finally, universality, the end goal, is not possible without arevenue stream to attract and hold investment.šmichael greenbaum, bell atlantic corporationover the nearterm (5 to 7year) horizon of this project, public andinstitutional access may be the only access available to some segments of thepopulation, given the constraints on expanding the quantity and quality ofbandwidth capacity serving residences and small businesses. because for manypublic access remains a secondbest option compared to personal systems (e.g.,telephones, televisions, and computers in residences),11 it is an area thatwarrants explicit monitoring and assessment, on behalf of those who cannotafford their own personal computers. public access should be the focus of atestbed or other type of experimental program to explore technical, costsharing,and other dimensions of the issue.nii systems issuesthe central nii systems issue relates to promotion of an overall archipublic policy and private action201about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tectural concept (see box 6.3), something that many participants endorse inprinciple but find difficult to attain in practice. the steering committee endorsesthe ideal of architectural convergence while noting the pragmatic and notinconsistent expectation for multiple approaches. it distinguishes the question ofobjectives from that of process.the process of developing nii architecture is not a neat one. at the forumhoward frank of the advanced research projects agency (arpa) askedexplicitly, "do you see any kind of process that could bring a convergence ofarchitectural concepts?" the confounding of technological and businessstrategies makes a clean answer to that question elusive. one element of such aprocess that emerged from the nii 2000 project is visionsetting discussions andforums, in which a central challenge is to remain apolitical. realizing theinformation future (cstb, 1994b) argued for the benefit of a commonarchitectural framework, and the many briefings and presentations associatedwith that report's dissemination furthered discussion within individual industryand technical communities. complementary public discussions have taken placeover the past 2 years under a number of different auspices. 12 the nii 2000project built on that stream and emphasized crosssectoral and crossindustryinteraction. it also carried forward a leadershipviaconvening approach that canfoster development of common understanding and provide for interactionamong disparate parties (multiple provider industries or providers and users).such discussions can have an impact on the development of architecturewithout interfering with particular deployment activities, becauseinteroperability can be achieved at a higher level in the architecture than thatrepresented by the facilities that dominate investment decisions.a more active process revolves around the surging interest inexperimentation with internet applications, which have provided practical,handson exposure to open architecture and internetworking. they may also bemore broadly visible than the market trials of more closed systems ongoingamong cable, telephone, and other companies. accordingly, attention to theinternet grew over the course of the project, raising questions about what, ifanything, the government should do to help the internet evolve in the context ofcommercial operation, other than to transfer its management institutionscarefully from government support to user (or investor) funding. any furtherprocess, presumably, should tip the business case toward a commonarchitectural framework. the message of the nii 2000 project is that such abusiness case may emerge over time. how quickly and whether it can or shouldbe accelerated remain subject to debate, with the notable exception of r&d (see"technology development through r&d"), on the importance of which therewere affirmation and consensus despite the project's emphasis on downstreamdeployment.public policy and private action202about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.3 architecturewhere does the nii fall on the continuum ranging from the decentralized modelwith all intelligence residing in the terminal, spanning the internet model and theability to develop and deploy new applications very quickly, – to the centralizedmodel, which includes the old telephone system? – is it possible to have a singlemodel for the nii on this sort of continuum? – is there one network, or is thereinstead an internetwork of at least several types of networks that are organizedaccording to quite different paradigms?i think that in some respects we are talking past each other, because somevery different types of applications are being discussed. the two fundamental typesof applications are (1) those that depend on database access, including informationretrieval and many of the entertainment applications that involve accessing acentral reserve of information (entertainment video, for example) and (2)communicationsšbetween two computers, two people, or between the computersof people. for applications based on database access, full connectivity is lesscritical, as can be seen in the case of companies like america online andcompuserve that have made a business out of users subscribing to only one ofthese services. on the other hand, an application like mosaic running on theinternet illustrates the value of full connectivity of users to a database. –is full, logical connectivity required within a national information infrastructure?if so, then interoperability, standards, and other associated issues become muchmore difficult to deal with. a related question is, are we going to have a commoninfrastructure for both types of generic applications, database access, andcommunications, or are we going to have a proliferation of separate infrastructuresfor these two kinds of applications? if we have communications infrastructure thatprovides for full connectivity between users, then we inherently havesimultaneously infrastructure that also serves for database access applications. –it is not necessary that all nearterm deployment provide all the capabilitiesrepresented in a strategic vision. indeed, one critical aspect of such a vision is thatit should be easy and costeffective to add new technologies and capabilities to thenii as unanticipated applications and user needs emerge. if this flexibility isachieved, it is only necessary that nearterm investments be compatible with a longterm strategic vision, and hence not preclude future possibilities or force laterdisinvestment and widespread replacement of infrastructure.if people can access the internet over their cable system and it is providingwhat they want, then over time the bandwidth of that internet pipeline will grow, andthe bandwidth of everything else will shrink, and gradually people will move towardthe solution they like. that is a market force. perhaps the internet or its extensioncould serve [the necessary] functionšwhich is not the task of bringing togethermany different things, but rather the process of starting with what we have andextending it in the direction we want to go.šdavid messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleypublic policy and private action203about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussion among contributors from a range of telecommunications andcontent industries illustrated how many factors intertwine to complicatemovement toward a more open architecture, as examined in chapters 3 and 4.for example, edward horowitz, whose company, viacom inc., has left thecable business to focus on content generation and marketing, commented on theimportance to content providers of unconstrained access by customers andcomplained about service providers as bottlenecks. bell communicationresearch's padmanabhan srinagesh, who has been studying the economics ofinternetworking, suggested that "there might be a tradeoff betweenencouraging competition at the lower levels, at the level of bits in the networks,versus having an open architecture where the people who provide the bits alsoprovide a standardized open interface that other people can use to compete withthem for end users." but the national cable television association's wendellbailey observed that the cable industry was built on control of content, albeit inan environment of local monopoly franchises: "we relish, as an industry, ourright to be an editor."content publishers and customers may prefer the convenience of maximalopenness, but conduit owners express concern that an obligation to carry anykind of content reduces them to common carriers and may therefore constraintheir potential to generate profits through selection and differentiation. at thesame time, if they are not common carriers they assume a heavy legal obligationwith respect to the content they provide, even it they did not originate it.perceptions of how common carriage has fared in conventionaltelecommunications contribute to reservations (relating to profitability, potentialregulation, and business development prospects) expressed by some about thebusiness implications of open architectures. another source of concern isuncertainty about how the market will evolve to support competition based onownership of facilities and/or service supplyšwhat forms of industry structurewill be sustainable?as noted in chapter 3, there were those at the forum who expressedconcern about what might happen in telecommunications and informationservice markets if prices became chaotic. others worry that open competition inan industry so bound to its fixed costs will produce effects akin to thoseexperienced in the airline industry following deregulation. the low consumerprices that "price wars" might bring would be welcomed by many, but anindustry shakeout and reconcentration might follow, which could either sustainor slow investment in deployment. one telephone company representative saidthat "there would be many starters but few finishers." see box 6.4.while the steering committee heard a number of concerns about thepossibility of closed systems hindering the development of the nii, itpublic policy and private action204about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finds little reason for concern that closed systems will represent an issue thatwill require policy intervention, beyond traditional tools of competition policysuch as antitrust. the position of most developers is that new applications willcome into existence over the internet, an open system, and that an application, ifinitially created in an open form, has a natural resistance to being bundled. insupport of this tendency, the steering committee notes the success of theinternet itself, the evolutionary path by which the online service providers havebecome internet access providbox 6.4 competition's darker side?in the long run, [technological and associated cost trends may give rise to] anindustry with chronic excess capacity. an industry like that is very susceptible toprice wars. if there are two or more broadband wires to the house providingessentially the same service, both economic theory and practical experiencesuggest that price is going to get competed down to marginal cost, leaving theproducers with no way to cover their fixed investments in infrastructure. the resultis bankruptcy, financial distress, et cetera. so here are a few scenarios.one is to just let it happen. the problem is cutthroat competition and financialdistress. after two or three repetitions, firms start losing interest in investing in themarket, because there is no way to recover their infrastructure investment. theydrop out, only a few major players remain, and local or maybe even nationalmonopolies result.well, what about monopolies? monopoly provision is better than no provisionat all. local monopolies, such as the local telephone service, the cable tv service,and so on can provide broadband service on a citybycity basis. the problem isthat you get the usual monopoly distortions in terms of excessive pricing, lack ofinnovation, and maybe even worse, the dreaded "r" word: the cause for regulation.the third scenario is the "killer app" scenario, in which a very high bandwidthapplication becomes very popular and the revenues from selling the transport forsuch a "killer app" are sufficient to cover the infrastructure investment. but what isthat application? as we have heard today [at the forum], nobody knows what the"killer app" isštwoway video, interactive virtual reality. – there is not going to bea market there if people aren't willing to go for the applications. so it is the usualchickenandegg problem.finally, the last scenario is vertical integration with the content providers. thatseems to be the most popular solution. – but if the market for transport becomesvery competitive in the futurešif transport is a commodity businessšthen themoney is going to have to flow the other way. the content will have to crosssubsidize the transport. then the content is what is paid for, and the transport isthrown in for free; it is just a cost of delivering the content. a question is, will thecontent providers really stick to their joint ventures once they have competingtransport providers clamoring for their business? that remains to be seen.šhal varian, university of california at berkeleypublic policy and private action205about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ers, and the trends toward open systems and open protocols in general. if theopen form is robust in terms of functions and institutions, it will survive. if it isnot, that form should not be sustained by policy unless there is a compellingnational need. research, however, can produce results that may make opensystems more attractive (e.g., by lowering perceived costs), potentiallyaccelerating their implementation.thus, the steering committee concluded that the government in particularneed not and should not make any presumption that it must protect the opennature of mature products, but that it should move to foster an open, innovativeenvironment in which new services and applications can occur. this approachincludes encouraging the deployment of communications infrastructure that isgeneral and flexible, removing regulatory barriers to innovation (for example,making spectrum for experiments easily and predictably available)13 andcompetition, and continuing to foster the success of the internet through r&dand use in the delivery of public services.defining roles for governmentthe large volume of descriptive material and statements of opinion elicitedat the workshop and the forum and in the white papers provide some insightsinto current and potential roles of government (at all levels) in policy making.they fall primarily into the following categories:1. regulation and other rulesetting influences on market entry andconduct;2. direct government use of and experimentation with informationinfrastructure in the delivery of public services; and3. exploration of systems issues and fostering of technologydevelopment through research and development to create options,standards to choose among the options, and systemslevelconsensus to guide the choice of standards.three other government roles that cut across or influence the above threepolicy areas include attention to international aspects (trade, regulation, andinterconnection and interoperation), data and analysis relating to infrastructuretrends, and convening of different parties and sectors.these areas are discussed in turn in the following sections.regulation, rules, and normscomplete examination of issues related to regulation was beyond the scopeof this project, but the body of inputs (see box 6.5) underscored thepublic policy and private action206about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.5 regulation and market rolesdo the conditions exist in the regulatory environment that make it possible forevery player sitting at this table to risk its capital on relatively equivalent terms?šgail garfield schwartz, teleport communications groupmonopolies [established by regulation] become powerful forces for creatinghostages in government and lead to the retardation of technological development.those monopolies have led to a slowdown in television's introduction and spread inthe 1950s, a substantial slowdown in cable television's introduction and spread inthe 1960s and 1970s, and a substantial slowdown through regulation of thedevelopment of wireless communication systems in the 1970s, 1980s, and eveninto the 1990s.šrobert crandall, brookings institutionif a phone company today attempts to upgrade to adsl [asymmetric digitalsubscriber line], it cannot do so until somebody on m street has said that is a goodidea. if a uhf station in los angeles says, look, we are tired of sending i lovelucy to the masses, we want to take our 6 megahertz and use it for twoway digitalpaging, they may not do so at all. if they wish to take their 6 megahertz 24 hours aday and slice it into fragments of 5 minutes and sell it to all comers, that is illegal aswell. – nextel created a cellular network largely by understanding process, buyingup radio dispatch licenses, and then getting them dezoned.špeter huber, manhattan institute for policy researchin some states, cable operators are common carriers. so it is not a model that iwould reject out of hand. – because, in the 500channel world, it is hard to seehow you really are a lot different from a common carrier.šwendell bailey, national cable television associationthe federal government should not go in and try to preempt the localgovernments. it could and should establish some overarching guidelines foracquiring sites so that it will at least facilitate the process. for pcs [personalcommunication service], we have buildout requirements. we cannot afford to sitaround too long and try to get sites. we spent a lot of money to get the licenses. sothere needs to be some help. there is certainly a sensitivity, however, at the locallevel that you cannot just have the federal government saying that the wirelessentity can put up a tower or a base station anywhere it wants.šmary madigan, personal communications industry association[t]he problems can include – the actual absence of a process for handling thepermitting. in some locations there are actual prohibitions where people say, "notwithin the jurisdiction here," but at the same time they want the service. some,unfortunately, are viewing this as an opportunity to make a bonanza: "we wantseven percent of your gross revenues, plus we want some fee per site." some haveeven actually gone so far as to say, "if you want to locate it in certain areas, youcan deploy as many as you like, but you have to pay this fee, and no more than twopeople per antenna," which is absurd.šrobert roche, cellular telecommunications industry associationpublic policy and private action207about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.negative influence of regulation on innovation and markets and thereforedeployment. see table 6.1 for an overview of regulation as a source of businessrisk. state and local regulation stimulated considerable commentary fromcontributors, reflecting its influence on residential broadband service choices(including cabletelephone competition) and its disproportionate impact onemerging wireless servicesšfor which basic facilities are being builtšand onstate and local infrastructure initiatives.14table 6.1 regulation and shareholder value: an organizing frameworkearningsgrowthriskfederalcommunicationscommissionprice caps/rate ofreturn; earningsceiling/sharing;productivitytarget; consumerdividends;investment targetsraterestructuring;"streamlined"regulation; newservice approvalrate structures;depreciationcharges; newentry; newservice approvalstate publicutilitycommissionsincentiveregulation; intralata entry;regulatory lag;earningsattributionusagesensitiverates; newserviceofferingsservice;"restructuring"rate"rebalancing";universal service;carrier of lastresort; rateaveraging; intralata entry/pricingu.s. congresstax policies;nationalinformationinfrastructure;noncompensatedservicerequirementslineofbusinessrestraints;mergers andacquisitionsnoncompensatedservicerequirementsdepartment ofjustice/judiciarylineofbusinessrestraintslineofbusinessrestraintslineofbusinessrestraintssource: darby associates (1995) as published in communications business & finance.in brief, many deployment decisions and activities are proceedingindependently of regulatory decision making or are based on best guesses as tolikely developments in telecommunications reform.15 the proliferation ofinternetrelated activitiesšweb servers and applications, security services thatsupport commercial transactions over the web, the formation and growth ofinternet access providers, and so onšillustrates an unregulated venue forgrowth. by contrast, contentious disagreementpublic policy and private action208about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.among the federal communications commission, telephone and cablecompanies, and the courts on the regulatory treatment of video delivery servicesunderscores the way complex interactions among technology, business, andregulatory conditions shape investments. the recent moratorium on filingsrelating to video delivery services under 47 usc sec. 214, which requires plansto be articulated months or years in advance of deployment, reflects thosedisagreements. so, too, does litigation relating to the cable communicationspolicy act of 1984 (p.l. 98549), which prevented telephone carriers fromproviding video programming within their region; a u.s. circuit court ofappeals ruled this ban unconstitutional, and the supreme court will decide theissue in 1996.16 17 the wireless phenomenon drives some18 to call for actionranging from greater reduction to total elimination of spectrum regulation.speaking more generally, only one participant, viacom's edward horowitz,suggested that there was an intermediate position between regulating orderegulating, achievable by "sunset" provisions.protecting the nii: ethics and mechanismscontributors to the nii 2000 project articulated concerns about privacy,intellectual property, free speech, ethical conduct, and, in particular, security,but given the scope of the project these issues did not receive a great deal ofattention.19 the discussions of plans for and progress toward deployment,especially in the context of the relatively insecure internet, suggest that theseconcerns have not been showstoppersšalthough they may have altered theform or emphasis of decisions about deployment or use. thus, robert crandallcautioned that some of the rhetoric on these issues may be a red herring. seebox 6.6.ethical and behavioral norms provide the context in which various servicesand mechanisms will evolve. despite little experience to date, many commentedon the uncertain implications of linking up a very large and very diverse set ofpeople with access to a wide and powerful set of information resources andcomputing tools. the positive aspect of this trend is the possibility of bringingtogether and meeting the needs of various communities of interest. the negativeaspect was acknowledged by some, such as milo medin of @home, whoremarked that "the network itself is bringing people far closer than they used tobe. and that level of interaction between people is going to cause friction inaddition to these communities of interest." the changing environment,possibilities, and scope of interactions led lois mccoy of the national institutefor urban search and rescue to propose a need for a "bill of rights,"20 alogical extension of the articulation of privacy principles and security tenetsundertaken by the iitf and codes of ethics generated by a varietypublic policy and private action209about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.,the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of business and professional organizations. michael greenbaum, apparentlywary of government intervention, maintained that "informal standards serve theindustry well by defining public expectations and setting clear objectives" andargued for "guidelines and selfregulating bodies that comprise the principalconstituents."box 6.6 intellectual property protection inperspectiverobert crandall of the brookings institution expressed skepticism during theforum concerning the point ''that perhaps it is exposures to civil suits and the failureto resolve all the difficult questions involved in intellectual property protection thatmay be slowing down the development of the nii. i don't know that we have anyevidence of that at this point. we just went through an attempt to revise tort liabilitylaws and federalize it in the u.s. congress. one of the reasons that it didn'tproceed any farther than it did was that we don't have systematic evidence that civilliability, tort liability has had a severe effect upon a variety of goods and serviceproducing industries already in the united states." among other things, crandall'scomments suggest that private action may be sufficient to handle many issuesraised by this set of concerns, although others continue to voice a need for policymonitoring if not intervention.security, reliability, and architectureconcerns about security lead to considerations of mechanisms that mayalso provide protections for the privacy of personal information, intellectualproperty, freedom from theft of service, integrity of information and systems,availability of service, and other vulnerable elements. effective design andimplementation of those mechanisms, plus associated policies and practices,have implications for the architecture of the information infrastructure. seebox 6.7.comments by ed hammond of duke university medical center andothers underscored the importance of engaging people with largevolume,specialized needs in areas of national importance, such as health care, bothbecause of the wideranging consequences of decisions and because the issuesmay be nonobvious, counterintuitive, or contentious. 21 quincy rodgers arguedthat determinations of level of security and methods of implementation shouldbe seen as business decisions, which in turn has implications forstandardization, service provider decisions about whether specialized accessdevices (e.g., settop boxes) may be available retail or leased, and the role ofgovernments.in many instances a common framework or architecture is preferable,public policy and private action210about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.both to achieve economies in developing and implementing a crosscuttingservice and because to achieve interoperability some degree of standardizationmay be needed. contributors raised a range of concerns, including issuesassociated with electronic signatures and cryptographic key and certificatemanagement, which require supporting "infrastructures" (see the white paper byrobert aiken and john cavallini); the absence of corresponding crosscommunity or crosssectoral processes, some of which require internationalinteraction, on mechanisms for security and other protections;22 and the needfor yet other processes to ensure that a complex and multifaceted informationinfrastructure can, like the relatively simpler telephone network, meet nationalsecurity and emergency preparedness needs (see the white paper by lois clarkmccoy et al.). the rallying cry in the national security and emergencypreparedness area is for an "emergency lane on the information superhighway,"addressing inherent security and reliability issues plus support for the securityneeds of those managing public crises that require rapid recovery, disasterrecovery, and mobilization.box 6.7 the challenge of meeting different needssimultaneouslywith respect to a uniform security mechanism in an nii, whose interests arebeing protected? i suggest that there will have to be a range of mechanismsprovided by many different parties to protect network providers from one anotherand from their computer operators, content providers from theft of intellectualproperty, and consumers from detriment to their privacy interests. and so weshouldn't expect to have a secure network by simply getting some sort ofoligopolistic control as we can say that our broadcast networks are secure becauseit's very rare that an outsider is able to broadcast an illicit television program.šallan schiffman, terisa systems/commercenetthe ideal system permits us to have a system in which all who need data canhave exactly what they need. it's complicated by the fact that there are 40 differenttypes of people that probably have a legitimate need for access to health careinformation.šed hammond, duke university medical centeralthough forum discussions and white papers affirmed the value of asecurity architecture, progress toward implementing it seems hampered by thesame factors that hamper progress toward implementing common architecturegenerally. for example, john mcdonald of mbx inc. listed in a white paper anumber of trends that have led to a "concentration ofpublic policy and private action211about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network assets" that increases vulnerability to a single switch failure, line cut, orsoftware system crash, notwithstanding the application of a variety oftechniques that enhance network integrity. he noted that some of the trends areunintended side effects of strategies to ensure compliance with federalregulations and argued that integrity and robustness must be "considered fromthe ground up" and, presumably, in a coordinated manner.23 software is a hugeexpense for telecommunications equipment vendors because the fundamentaltechnical approach they are taking to network control leads to systems that areinherently rigid and subject to failures, requiring heroic efforts to make themrobust enough to operate in the real world. newer and more flexible and robustapproaches have been emerging; an issue for the technical and vendorcommunities is where, when, and how to advance and implement them.this project does suggest that addressing security, reliability,recoverability, and associated protections may present one of the mostconstructive vehicles available for the government to influence overallarchitectural development in the evolving information infrastructure. doing sowill inevitably require resolving issues associated with cryptography policy, atopic well beyond the scope of this project but under consideration in anotherby cstb.24government as user and service providergovernment public services will touch most citizens and manyorganizations in residences, places of business, and public spaces. examplesinclude law enforcement, health care information sharing and service delivery,research and education, environmental monitoring, national security, and more.some will involve multiple levels of government, and some may blendgovernment and commercial elements. for example, the relativelyheterogeneous intelligent transportation system (its) fostered by thedepartment of transportation reflects multilevel government interests in safety,efficiency, and capacity plus commercial applications. jim keller and lewisbranscomb of harvard university suggested that the its offers a modelcombining generalpurpose information infrastructure with specific systemsimplemented in more closed fashion over or connected to the nii. providinganother example, the white paper by john ziebarth et al. proposes a testbed fornetworkaccessible information storage, access, and system management tobetter handle huge collections of regulatory information from multiplegovernment institutions.25national institute of standards and technology director arati prabhakarcast the opportunities for government use as part of the larger context of publicprivate interaction: "one of the great opportunities here is to abandon thetraditional way that government agencies and departpublic policy and private action212about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ments often come at new capabilities. agencies say, 'let's go create this uniquesolution which will then be immune to all technological changes in the future.'today we really have a chance to try to couple agencies and departments asthey are doing their jobs, using these new technologies. we have a chance tolink them to where the technology is going by linking them to the private sectoractivities." emphasizing the crosscutting nature of government applications,aiken and cavallini explain that the "[government services informationinfrastructure; gsii] is that portion of the nii used to link government and itsservices, enables 'virtual agency' concepts, protects privacy, and supportsemergency preparedness needs."government databases provide a natural focus for government applicationsof information infrastructure, given the federal government's unique collectionsof data and information that are of broad interest and might be more broadlyused in the future if made more accessible. the government informationlocator service is a crosscutting information access initiative that could beused to explore various approaches and implementation issues; the nationalspatial data clearinghouse is one of several more specialized informationaccess programs that could also yield broader insights. aiken and cavallini notethat government applications need not be viewed as "one size fits all," any morethan private sector applications are. diversity of service offings can still becompatible with interoperability. "[start] with what the gsii will be used for –and with those people who share common interests in both using and providingthe gsii. the applications should determine what standards and technologiesare required and will provide interoperability among their own constituency aswell as with other groups, if properly coordinated." they cite governmentsupported scientific research as a domain in which the affinity group concepthas been and should continue to be explored in terms of essential processesšrequirements, coordination, interoperability, crosssector exchange. as markabbott of oregon state university observed, experiences in the area of oceanand earth sciences research suggest that the record may be mixed: advances ininformation infrastructure prompt changes in the conduct of science, somecarrying with them new distractions and costs. but this is the value ofexperiments: they show what works well, what does not, and where to directfuture effort.the above observations suggest that the federal government, in particular,may come full circle, from instigator of computer technology applications in the1940s and 1950s to, on average, repository of obsolete technologies in the1970s and 1980s, to a spearhead in the 1990s for innovative applications thatmay facilitate private sector activities and associated social and economicbenefits. this vision, expressed primarilypublic policy and private action213about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.through white papers, does not imply monolithic construction projects. but itdoes imply farsighted procurement of commercial technology (goods andservices) and equally farsighted applicationsdevelopment decisions.26 thehistory of the internet shows that applications and experiments in certain userdomainsšand, increasingly important today, applications that are crossdomainin naturešmay provide one of the most constructive vehicles available to thegovernment for stimulating private action. as suggested by aiken andcavallini, information infrastructure can be part of a system for facilitatinggovernmentindustry interactions.technology development through r&dthe present internet provides evidence of the constructive role thatgovernment expenditures on r&d can often play. however, much research anddevelopment work remains to be done to develop the information infrastructuretechnology base, and as that base evolves it will reveal a stream of newchallenges. that conclusion was apparent from many sources of evidence: deployment plans for proven technologies, reflecting lack of readinessof the next generation of technology; delay or moderation of deployment plans subject to various tests andtrials, difficulties using today's technologies that announced plans appear toignore; and expectations for greater if unspecified internetworking, andrecognition that something more than conventional communications orpassive entertainment would be required to drive significant advances.like regulation, r&d was not a focus of this project. yet ideas for r&dwork that emerged from the discussion suggest opportunities for constructiveand (in contrast to regulation) relatively noncontroversial governmentinvolvement. as allan schiffman of terisa systems/commercenet summed itup,i'm not one who thinks that the technology issues are completely settled yet.certainly not in distributed computing, platforms, or common interfaces.maybe the guys who are rolling the fiber optics out understand what's goingon, but i'm not sure that the rest of the technology is in place. there is stillroom for a good deal more experimentation. the government has played apretty useful role in that process up until now.many of those who suggested that issues are settled focused on the lowerpublic policy and private action214about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.parts of the infrastructure. activities are far less clear when it comes to theevolution of higherlevel services. accordingly, randy katz et al. assert in awhite paper that "direct research and development is the most effective way tostimulate new service capabilities and associated commonalities."one context for r&d that received considerable mention and support isthe testbedšbuilding on the history presented by the internet and the moregeneral recognition that understanding complex systems depends on buildingand testing themšand associated opportunities for collaborative exploration.testbeds for r&d that supports applications (including interdisciplinaryconsideration of technical and nontechnical elements underlying successfulapplications in different domains) would be valuable. under the testbed rubric,government can continue to promote the deployment of advanced informationtechnologies in universities to stimulate the creation of applications that willmake the core technology useful to society at large. through these and othertestbed efforts, government can foster greater transfer of ideas betweenuniversities and industry. real partnerships between universities and industriesare difficult to develop and maintain in a fastmoving industry and technicalarena; this is a specific instance of the larger problem of facilitating largesystems research and industryuniversity collaboration (cstb, 1994a).several areas of research were cited, directly or implicitly, in the course ofthe project. four principal subject themes were architecture, for integrating awidening range of components and systems in a dynamic context; technologyfor information management; technology for greater security, privacy, andreliability; and technology for greater ease of use (both through better userinterfaces27 and better design generally). 28 see box 6.8. these last twocategories suggest a related need for research that addresses social processesrelating to the adoption and use of information infrastructure. katz et al. deriveseveral topics for research by relating nii needs to directions established underthe high performance computing and communications initiative, including thecategories of information infrastructure services, system development andsupport environments, intelligent interfaces, and national challenge (majordomain) problems. see box 6.9 for elaboration on some of these topics.architecture and networkingin the networking area, and associated with architecture, davidmesserschmitt pointed to areas where little work is being donešquality ofservice, communications delay, and allocation of impairments across connectednetworks. security complements these topics and also receives less attentionthan many believe is needed. overall, as messerschmittpublic policy and private action215about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.noted, network signaling and control systems constitute an area in whichconsiderable work is needed. leonard kleinrock of the university of californiaat los angeles and others outlined technology needs associated with extendingthe performance of wireless, untethered, and nomadic computing andcommunications systems, which translates into support for "ad hoc access toservices." for example, kleinrock enumerated several systems requirementsand components (see box 6.10), calling for a "reference model" for nomadicityto facilitate analysis and progress. he related support for nomadic access tobasic network parametersšbandwidth, latency, reliability, error rate, delay,storage, processing power, interference, interoperabilityšin the context of verylarge scale, identified needs for middleware services, and noted that portablesystems also require advances in size, weight, and battery power.another set of issues associated with networking and architecture andimplicit in the discussions of deployment involves technology to lower the costsof achieving openness and symmetry. the lack of clarity regarding costs andbenefits makes existing businesses reluctant to change dramatically, especiallyexisting players that are starting from technology bases that have already beenengineered to reduce costs as much as possible. this problem was statedelegantly and directly by stewart personick of bell communications research:history has shown that lack of interoperability and openness can be a selffulfilling prophecy – because without research on how to make networkarchitectures and constructs that are conducive to interoperability, then whatappears is not conducive to interoperability. it is not in the best interests of thelargest participants in the industry to open anything up. it is politically correctto say that interoperability is good, but very few view it as the right thing to dofrom a business perspective. so how do you work out this conundrum? thelargest participants are in the best position to fund r&d, but it is not in theirinterest to open up networks. little guys can do certain things, but solving theinteroperability problem is really tough. that is just one example, but a veryimportant one in an area where somehow it is in the public's interest topromote interoperability and openness but the research has to be funded almostagainst the wishes of the biggest participants. that is an area where i believegovernment funding is absolutely essential.as realizing the information future (cstb, 1994b) observed, moregeneral and flexible technology looks more expensive than do the morespecialized alternatives, and yet there may be little actual knowledge of relativecosts or investigation of approaches that may add only modestly to costs.public policy and private action216about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.8 interfacerelated research needshumancomputer interface needs1humancomputer dialogue. natural language, voice, and othermodalities (pen, gestures, touch, and others) can be combined toproduce the means for humancomputer dialogue and interfacingdialogue techniques. relevant research topics include speechrecognition and synthesis; natural language processing andunderstanding (cole and garcia et al., 1995); semantics and prosody;lipreading technologies in noisy environments (garcia et al., 1994);and search, navigation (shank, 1993), and retrieval from cyberspaceusing multimedia (vin et al., 1991). speaker identification techniquescan be combined with secure passwords for use in control ofcomputer access, and language identification may support improvedmultilingual interfaces (wilpon et al., 1990).machine sensors for humancomputer interface and general input/output to facilitate telepresence and teleoperation. such sensors asmicrophones in single and arrayed configurations, infrared and othermeans of scanning and computing distances, optical sensors atlightwave range including ccd [charge coupled device] cameras ofsmall size, haptic interfaces, and other alternatives to clickandpointdevices should be studied. fusing sensor inputs to the computer withintelligent or learned actionresponse behavior would create a morerealistic approach to machine learning and complex inferencingtechniques, involving symbolic, fuzzy, and probabilistic approaches. achallenge is to fuse multiple sensor inputs to the computer in acohesive and wellcoordinated manner.largevolume storage (archival and nonarchival), database, andindexing technologies, including multiresolution and compression fordifferent modalities. video and audio technologies (also indirectlyrelated to speech and video synthesis) will require large compressionfactors and mechanisms for rapid encoding and decoding; they aredifficult to index and access for retrieval and even then, mass storagedatabase techniques will be required. similarly, research on virtualenvironments requires efficient storage and compression technologiesfor input and output. research on encoding should include bothgeneration and perceptual factors (flanagan, 1994). additionally,multimedia databases require techniques for providing temporalmodeling and delivery capabilities.virtual environments and their use in networking and wirelesscommunication (tethered and untethered) networked environments,including applications in education (kobb, 1993), telepresence, andtelecommuting. wireless communication technology also includesrequirements for geopositioning measures; local indoor infraredsensors for location; communications technologies at low, medium,and high bandwidth; and others. the technical challenges of wirelessmessaging are well known (rattay, 1994). durlach and mavor (1995)make specific recommendations for federal investments in nationalresearch and development.applications of software engineering and case to the r&d ofcomplex software systems and browsers to be used in humancomputer interface (andreessen, 1993). many modules of thesoftware and interfaces for different modalities might be developed ina compact and reusable manner, taking advantage of existing andnewly developed software techniques.public policy and private action217about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public policy and private action218about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.intelligent interfaces2łhumancomputer interface. developments needed in this area includetechnologies for speech recognition and generation; graphical userinterfaces that allow rapid browsing of large quantities of data; usersensitive interfaces that customize and present information forparticular levels of understanding; language corpora for experimentalresearch; and humanmachine interaction via touch, facial expression,gesture, and so on.heterogeneous database interfaces. a capability is needed to enablea user to issue a query that is broadcast to the appropriate databasesand to receive a timely response that is translated into the context ofthe user's query. multiformatted data may range from ascii text tonumerical time series, to multidimensional measurements, to timeseries of digital imagery, and so on. also of critical importance are theintegration of metadata with the data and its accessibility acrossheterogeneous databases.image processing and computer vision. research areas include allaspects of theory, models, algorithms, architectures, and experimentalsystems from lowlevel image processing to highlevel computervision. methodologies of pattern recognition should be furtherdeveloped to allow automated extraction of digital image and otherinformation from large databases.usercentered design tools and systems. userfriendly tools thatcombine datadriven and knowledgebased capabilities constitute oneof the areas for new research.1adapted from "statement on national information infrastructure issues," a white papercontributed to the nii 2000 project by oscar garcia for the ieee.2adapted from "the national information infrastructure: a high performance computingand communications perspective," a white paper contributed to the nii 2000 project byrandy h. katz, william l. scherlis, and stephen l. squires.information management and ease of useend users, especially those professionals in specialized domains ofapplication, are usually concerned with problems of collecting, storing, finding,and manipulating information. they see communications as a means to an end.but until those domainspecific markets appear, communications providersfocus on their communications facilities and basic services. this disjunctureappears to be slowing an important source of demand. commented loismccoy, "what the user wants is the answer to his question. it doesn't make anydifference what that question is."the information management problem calls for r&d in many areas. oneis how the user can find what is needed. ross glatzer, retired from prodigyservices, remarked on how limited the state of the art is in today's onlineservices arena: "getting around online services today is likethe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.9 r&d needs for informationinfrastructure services and systemsdevelopmentinformation infrastructure servicesuniversal network services. techniques for improved ease of use,plugandplay network interoperation, remote maintenance,exploitation of new "lastmile" technologies, management of hybridand asymmetric network bandwidth, guaranteed quality of service forcontinuous media streams, and scaleup of network capabilities todramatically larger numbers of users.integration and translation services. services for data formattranslation and interchange as well as tools to translate the accessportions of existing programs. techniques include wrappers thatsurround existing elements with new interfaces, integrationframeworks that define applicationspecific common interfaces anddata formats, and mediators that extend generic translationcapabilities with domain knowledgebased computations, permittingabstraction and fusion of data.system software services. operating system services to support thedistribution of processing across processing nodes within the network,the partitioning of the application logic among heterogeneous nodes(based on specialized capabilities or asymmetric or limitedbandwidth), guaranteed realtime response to applications forcontinuous media streams, and storage, retrieval, and input/outputcapabilities suitable for delivering large volumes of data to very largenumbers of users. techniques needed include persistent storage,programming language support, and file systems.data and knowledge management services. methods for trackinginformation transformation. techniques include distributed databases,mechanisms for search, discovery, dissemination, and interchange,aggregating base data and programmed methods into objects, andsupport for persistent object stores incorporating data, rules,multimedia, and computation.information security services. techniques for privacyenhanced mail,methods of encryption and keyescrow, and digital signatures. alsoincluded are means for protecting the infrastructure, such asauthorization mechanisms and firewalls, against intrusion and attackby worms, viruses, and trojan horses.reliable computing and communications services. techniques andmechanisms for restarting systems quickly, such as processshadowing, reliable distributed transaction commit protocols, andevent and dataredologging to keep data consistent and up to date inthe face of system failures.system development and support environmentsrapid system prototyping. technologies for tools and languages thatfacilitate enduser specification, architecture design and analysis,component reuse, and prototyping; testing and online configurationmanagement tools; and tools to support the integration andinteroperation of heterogeneous software systems.distributed simulation and synthetic environments. methods fordeveloping distributed simulation algorithms; geometric models anddata structures; tools for scene description, creation, and animation;and integration of geometric and computational models of behaviorinto an integrated system description.public policy and private action219about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public policy and private action220about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.[trying to find] the guy who explains where he is [by] calling from – aphone booth at the corner of 'walk and don't walk.' the leaders in onlineservices will be those who can best integrate communications, information, andtransactions." andrew lippman of the massachusetts institute of technologyexpanded on the wishlist:problem solving and system design environments. examples of areasrequiring research include efficient algorithms for searching hugeplanning spaces; more powerful and expressive representations ofplans, operators, goals, and constraints; and the incorporation ofefficient methods to facilitate scheduling and allocation of resources.the effects of uncertainty must be taken into account as well as theeffects of goal interactions.software libraries and composition support. development of theunderlying methodology, data structures, data distribution concepts,operating system interfaces, synchronization features, languageextensions, and other technology to enable the construction ofscalable library frameworks.collaboration and group software. methods for developing sharedwriting surfaces and live bulletin boards, version and configurationmanagement, support for process and task management, capture ofdesign history and rationale, electronic multimedia design notebooks,networkbased video conferencing support, document exchange, andagents serving as intermediaries to repositories of relevant multimediainformation.source: adapted from ''the national information infrastructure: a highperformance computing and communications perspective," a white papercontributed to the nii 2000 project by randy h. katz, william l. scherlis, andstephen l. squires.you have to invent indices. you have to invent mechanisms and techniques bywhich you can accumulate, process, and reprocess the information. if you lookat the internet these days, you will find a tremendous amount of contentfreeinformation out on it that is purely in the form of index. there are musicindices that do not play a note, but guide you through the world of music. thatis the technical and architectural challenge that remains. because the pc willpredominate, it will foster symmetric industries. probably entertainment willfall into line and at least merge inside of the computer, as will the signalprocessing. but the challenge that we have to face is how to build flexibledatabases.part of what is needed are advances in decision support systems, accordingto gio wiederhold of stanford university, who derived inferences from hisstudy of medical information needs. wiederhold observed that "[m]akingchoices is best supported by systems which provide a limited number ofrelevant choices (summaries, searching, selecting)." similarly, reagan mooreof the san diego supercomputer center wrote of the need for techniques fordata assimilationšmining and modelingšthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.especially for scientific research, while richard sharpe of the hartfordfoundation spoke of the technical and procedural challenges associated withcollecting and aggregating data needed for innovative medical applications.wiederhold also noted that otherwise reluctant people could be motivated to usethe information infrastructure if it is seen as providing access to quality data(relevance, completeness, legitimacy). related issues in standardizing dataformats are discussed below.box 6.10 nomadicity requirements and componentsrequirementsinteroperation among many kinds of infrastructures (e.g., wireline andwireless)ability to deal with unpredictability of user behavior, networkcapability, and computing platformprovision for graceful degradationscale with respect to heterogeneity, address space, quality of service,bandwidth, geographical dimensions, number of users, and so onintegrated access to servicesad hoc access to servicesmaximum independence between the network and the applicationsfrom the user's viewpoint as well as from the development viewpointability to match the nature of what is transmitted to the networkbandwidth availability (i.e., compression, approximation, partialinformation, and so on)cooperation among system elements such as sensors, actuators,devices, network, operating system, file system, middleware, services,and applicationsability to locate users, devices, services, and so oncomponents that can help in providing the requirementsan integrated software framework that presents a common virtualnetwork layerappropriate replication services at various levelsfile synchronizationpredictive cachingconsistency servicesadaptive database managementlocation services (to find people and devices via tracking, forwarding,searching, and so on; an example of an emerging standard is mobileip)discovery of resourcesdiscovery of profilesource: adapted from "nomadic computing and communications," a whitepaper contributed to the nii 2000 project by leonard kleinrock, university ofcalifornia at los angeles.public policy and private action221about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.one approach that attracted multiple comments was development of virtualenvironments, which were described as an approach to making cyberspace moreintuitive and useful to a wider range of people, facilitating realtime, interactivehumancomputer communications. in the january workshop, marty tenenbaumof enterprise integration technologies corporation/commercenet observedthat there was progresstowards a more active collaboration where instead of clicking on somethingand getting a document, you are clicking on something and getting a threedimensional environment, a space on the web where people can hang out andif other people are there at the same time, you are able to interact with them.this concept was specifically advanced in the proposal for regnet (see thewhite paper by ziebarth et al.), which would involve threedimensionalvolumetric regulatory information management (with crossreferenceddatabases). donald brutzman et al. go as far as to suggest in a white paper thatvirtual environments could be considered a superset of informationinfrastructure issues, in view of the concerns with scale, interactive threedimensional graphics coordinating input devices with a singlescreen display,and so on, with illustrations including a live threedimensional sports stadiumwith instrumented players, a 100,000player problem for a military war game,and virtual worlds as laboratories for robots and people in scientific research.standardsif consensus on system engineering and architecture issues for most of thenii network environment is to be implemented, that implementation will takethe form of standards. the concepts of broad internetworking and openarchitecture presuppose standards. these standards may have the force of lawwhen they are incorporated in regulatory processes. they may be formal,created through an approved consensus process, as has always been the case forthe lower layers of telecommunications infrastructure. they may be informal orde facto industry standards created through a variety of institutions, includingconsortia of selfselected industry participants. finally, they may be de factostandards made effective by the market power of the products embodying them.the basic questions about what to standardize, where, when, and how arenot new; the technology policy working group and others have consideredthem for some time.29 among participants in the nii 2000 project, there wasgeneral unease about a more active or direct government role supportingstandards setting, except among those involved in broadcasting. as quincyrodgers summed it up,public policy and private action222about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what do you do? do you standardize some? do you standardize all? do youstandardize them through government action? do you endure the delays thatthat approach can sometimes occasion? have you dramatically improved theproblem of bureaucratic standard setting by moving to some large privatesector body? how does all of that fit at this stage of the development of theseproducts?rodgers argued for de facto standards. those familiar with telephony havenoted that while centralized governmental decision making on standards canlead to unfortunate technology choices, the private sector process canperpetuate incompatibilities, as evidenced by divergent implementation of socalled "standard" integrated services digital network technology andtechnologies for video delivery.even in discussing government's internal needs, aiken and cavalliniargued that "a modular, seamless integration and evolution of the multicomponent gsii into the evolving nii will need to be based primarily onvoluntary processes and proven interoperability solutions rather than onmandated standards." on the other hand, building on experience at arpa,randy katz et al. suggest in their white paper that the "research [community]and government can take a leading role in establishing new commonalities thatforeshadow industry standards." also, although receiving little discussion, agovernment role for standardsrelated validation and dissemination could bevaluable.thus the internet standards are both de facto and consensus standards atone and the same time. one factor making that possible has been the importantrole that scientists and engineers, especially in universities, have played both asbuilders and users. this closeknit relationship between the "vendors" and"customers" is quite unique in standards making and is a powerful asset inobtaining both good standards and user acceptance of them.the government's role in the development of the internet standards wasquite indirect. nevertheless, government people, including experts in agenciessuch as arpa, nsf, the department of energy, and the national aeronauticsand space administration, have made important personal intellectualcontributions and, more importantly, have directed their research support to themost talented technical people in the national community. this use of r&dinvestment has constituted indirect support for standards making and is anexcellent way to avoid the heavy hand that so many in industry fear, whilecreating options from which industry can choose.public policy and private action223about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international issuesthere was surprisingly little discussion of transnational issues from theindustry experts. although international issues were not a focus of this project,contributors generally assumed that international connectivity is a requirement,and experimentation with new services was reported to be taking place globally.the lack of concern expressed about incompatibilities in law and regulation,uncertainties about venues for legal accountability, and access to foreignmarkets perhaps reflected both the relative immaturity of informationinfrastructure developments overseas and the pragmatic, countrybycountryapproach of the international firms.as a practical matter many of the most important commercial networks,such as the swift system that supports international banking, have been inplace internationally for some years. among the more experimentaldevelopments, the internet and the world wide web (web) it supports arealmost "the only game in town." increasingly, commercial and recreational useof the gii can, technically, ignore national borders altogether, and thatphenomenon warrants at least revisiting existing policies in such areas as exportcontrol, taxation, and enforcement of a wide range of rights and responsibilities.as maria farnon of tufts university notes in her white paper, "bodies likethe itu [international telecommunications union] have grown increasinglyirrelevant with the introduction of new services such as the internet and haveseen their turf eroded by new organizations that do not necessarily have officialgovernment sanction." these new services and organizations have beenembraced or at least tolerated in almost every nation on earth, setting animportant precedent for the value to each nation of reasonably unrestrictedinternational access. see box 6.11 for farnon's observations on the internet asan international phenomenon. inputs to the nii 2000 project from satellite andsmaller wireless system providers acknowledged the appeal of such technologyfor expanding global access in regions where wireline infrastructure is limitedand the costs of building it are extremely high. within individual countries,issues of open architecture, competition in telecommunications, and localequivalents of universal service are being debated; the g7 ministerialconference on the information society of february 199530 fostered crossnational discussion and experimentation; and the issue of international trafficsettlements is one of many. attorney jonathan band commented on theinternational attention now being devoted to system openness andharmonization of expectations for provisions in areas ranging from intellectualproperty protection to interoperability.public policy and private action224about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 6.11 politicoeconomic implications of theinternetdespite the clear intention of the industrialized world to foster the building ofnational backbones, and the gradual diffusion of connectivity in many developingcountries, the traditional to [stateowned telecommunications operator] structure,and the resulting legal and commercial models this fosters, remain seriousobstacles to a truly international internet. while technical difficulties can beovercome with resources from institutions such as the world bank, ngos [nongovernmental organizations], and governments themselves, the traditional mindsetof control over the communications infrastructure and services is more difficult todisplace. – [g]overnments have long justified their ownership of thetelecommunications operator on the basis of national security reasons, and alsoderive significant political and revenue benefits from this ownership. although thisstructure has been seriously undermined in the united states, the european union,and parts of asia, it remains strong elsewhere.ideally, an international network like the internet should provide a protocol thatis easily adapted to a wide variety of infrastructure development stages and shouldoffer services that can be tailored to reflect the cultural, legal, and regulatory normsof every country. however, the model that the internet has provided demonstratesthat an international network will, by definition, still act to undermine manytraditional structures that have evolved around the old to system. rather thanseeking to impose old standards of behavior and control on the internet,governments can best encourage the development of national informationinfrastructures by eliminating the inherent conflicts that exist between the newservices and the domestic organization of telecommunications. this meansintroducing competition into all levels of service and allowing the market to drivepricing and standards.source: extracted from "how do traditional legal, commercial, social, andpolitical structures, when confronted with a new service, react and interact?," awhite paper contributed to the nii 2000 project by maria farnon.systems data and analysis for nii assessmentdata issues are prosaic, mundane, and easily overlooked, but addressingthem could be a simple and powerful way of improving private and publicdecision making. how can public or private entities aim to influence somethingwithout knowing the extent of an issue or the impact of a contemplated action?again, the private sector has used market research data more or less effectively,but much of that information comes from proprietary and unpublished studies(yet another argument for public testbeds). periodic assessments, using amixture of public and private sector inputs as in the case of this project, may bea useful way for the government to gain information to be shared with allinterested parties.the at&t divestiture has already detrimentally affected the availpublic policy and private action225about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ability of telephony statistics.31 cable and wireless statistics are tracked largelyby trade associations and market researchers (raising various concerns about thequality and completeness of data), and the decentralization andcommercialization of the internet are among the factors that make measuring itsdimensions difficult. the white papers by reagan moore and by hanswernerbraun and kimberly claffy of the san diego supercomputer center argue that"[t]he nii continues to drive funding into hardware, pipes, and multimediacapable tools, with very little attention to any kind of underlying infrastructuralsanity checks." the authors go on to relate deployment of new technology tomeasurement problems: "with the transition to atm [asynchronous transfermode] and high speed switches, it will no longer even be technically feasible toaccess ip [internet protocol] layer data in order to do traffic flow profiling,certainly not at switches within commercial atm clouds." meanwhile, thedifficulty of gaining fresh insight into application domains suggests that therewould be a benefit to more systematic study of how technology is selected andused in different settings.government as convenorcomplementing and informing other government roles, conveningšbeyond that already provided by professional, trade, and private standardssetting organizationsšappears to be helpful in encouraging better assimilationof information infrastructure by all users and providers. the good offices ofstate and federal government can break down some of the barriers to use of theinformation infrastructure for better health services, more effective education,distribution of government information and benefits, and so on. private actionsmay not be sufficient for rapid progress and resolution in some critical arenas(e.g., education and health care) characterized by imperfect markets. in casessuch as the interstate delivery of health care services, where legal barriersimpede changes in professional practice, policy changes are needed to createefficient domainspecific information services. the issues, needs, opportunities,and handicaps in such areas have been surveyed many times over the past fewyears by the information infrastructure task force (iitf), congress, trade andprofessional organizations, and independent analysts.32 the experience of thisproject, including a workshop and forum in which domain representativesexpressed both frustration about difficulties in communicating withinfrastructure providers and gratitude for the opportunity for learning andexchange, suggests that continued government support for convening differentparties, bridging user and supplier communities, would have value.whatever the federal government does to foster convening shouldpublic policy and private action226about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.take into account the role of nii itself as an implicit, informal conveningmechanism. as various contributors pointed out indirectly and directly,enhancements to the information infrastructure will allow people to coalesceboth openly and privately, thereby changing the processes of government.mixed expectations were voiced by one participant in connection with the useof information infrastructure to support electronic democracy. as michaelgreenbaum of bell atlantic corporation speculated:at its best it will give voice and cohesion to the underrepresented. at its worstit will enable terrorists and hate groups to act under the cover of anonymity.this medium is better suited than most to building constituency, rather thanjust mass communications. it should be approached with caution as a meansfor formal and informal referendum, through which activist groups mightunduly influence representatives and undermine the deliberative aspect of arepresentative democracy.although not everyone will use the technology, the deeper informationinfrastructure becomes embedded in u.s. society, the more some degree ofaccess will become a part of what it means to be an informed voter.conclusionsthe nii 2000 project suggests that most in industries that supplyinformation infrastructure would support a variety of roles for government,roles that are complex, often subtle, sometimes active. but these roles are, likethe work of private firms, intertwined with private roles and subject to a broadrange of uncertainties about future possibilities and problems. the steeringcommittee heard broad support for the government contributing as anenlightened customer and participant in building the nii. in particular, it heardan expression of the need for continued government support of innovation in theform of support for universitybased research and development, both basic andapplied. but there was also general (albeit not unanimous) enthusiasm foraccelerated deregulationšnot only to speed market entry but also to allowlicensed carriers the freedom to use their assigned spectrum innovativelyšimplying a reduction in governmental authority to direct nii evolutionunilaterally.the concerns expressed about the lagging of many domainspecific areasof application, despite the prospect for important economic drivers from theapplication industries, suggest that this enabling role for governments reachesinto many areas of government responsibility and is important at the state aswell as the federal level. thus responsibility for constructive governmentparticipation will be decentralized, raising quespublic policy and private action227about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tions about whether an overall systems view can or should be sustained in somecontinuing activity or organization.the steering committee concluded that a consensus visionšhoweverindistinct and subject to evolutionary modificationšof the nii in the firstdecades of the 21st century should form its core but should not represent aconstraint on all nii developments. articulating and evolving national goals,and driving toward a national consensus, are important elements of thegovernment role. it is a difficult role in which leadershipšas opposed tounilaterial action or definitionsšcan help to overcome the confusion andmisunderstanding that typically accompany technically complex phenomena.there is general agreement that government can play a role in bringing diverseinterests together to seek out consensus on values and objectives for the nationalcapability and on architectural principles supportive of those values. if it is doneright, that consensus will govern many of the public and private sector actions.leadership and articulation stand in contrast to regulation or judicial action: noteverything can be defined by rules. people in organized societies do thingsbecause there are corresponding norms and understandings. but we havealready seen in many industries, including telecommunications, that ifgovernment defines too many rules, eventually all people do is try to workaround them.reconciling divergent positions and priorities within the government maybe a critical first step, since the government itself is as diverse as other sectorsof society. for example, it may be the case that entirely different prioritieswould emerge from the department of defense (dod) and the social securityadministration; within the dod, the different services have had a hard timeachieving interoperability. the iitf has been an experiment in crossagencycoordination. while it has helped to articulate and explore many key issues, thequestion remains as to which part of the decentralized government willarticulate the goals and guide the architecture (cstb, 1994b).this project itself represents a step by the federal government, actingthrough the iitf, to explore the extent of the consensus on which federal policymaking and leadership can rest. what is the proper mechanism for pursuing thisexploration? the project did not discuss specific institutional structures.however, it seems evident that something more long range and more centeredin private sector participation is needed than the iitf and the former niiadvisory council. the essential requirement is that both the informationservice providers and the information creators and users in the privatecommercial and notforprofit sectors must be fully involved, along withrelevant government bodies.second, the primary economic drivers of the nii will be found, the steeringcommittee believes, within the most important domains of thepublic policy and private action228about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national lifešhealth services, education, electronic commerce (including goodsdistribution, marketing, and retailing), and public safety and the like. (while animportant factor, entertainment appears to be less of a driver than anticipated atthis project's outset.) because the ability of these domains to take full advantageof the nii is more limited by factors inherent within those domains than byshortcomings in the information network support, progress in creating theseservices will lie primarily in the hands of the professional groups and firmsconcerned. these responsibilities clearly fall primarily to public and privateinstitutions outside the realm of telecommunications and highperformancecomputing, and they must be taken up by the relevant bodies in their own selfinterest. however, the federal government and the states can, within their ownoperational missions, act to reduce the barriers to the creation of needbaseddemand for information infrastructure.the nii 2000 project did not conclude (although it was hypothesized at theproject's outset) that all information networks must be open and interoperable.some mature and specialized applications can justify their unique applicationspecific architectures by the cost reduction they afford. but the powerful lessonto be learned from the internet is the value of an open interface on which allkinds of new and mature services can be built, one that allows an experimentalnew service to look for users among the entire population with access to adigital network. government should adopt policies intended to retain the powerof a service like the internet to be a testbed for innovations and a link amongmany resources for both information and its processing and distribution.both federal and state governments have the opportunity to increase theirown efficiency and improve their services to the public through thedevelopment and use of the nii. a current initiative toward that end focuses on"reinventing government." these efforts should be undertaken under policyguidelines supporting the future evolution of the nii, as well as the best use ofcurrently available facilities. in other words, the government should further thedevelopment of the core functions of the nii, using a "learnandchangebydoing" approach. this will place the government's purchasing power squarelybehind the goal of national, consensusbased progress. in this endeavor, thefederal and state governments must seek a concerted strategy, since each has thepotential for strong influence in the evolution of the nii.perhaps the most important role government can play, especially at thefederal level, is the continued vigorous support of advanced research into digitalnetworking, with the objective of creating opportunities for the private sector tosustain the maximum amount of generality and flexibility at minimum cost.much of this work can be carried out in support of government applications,and much can be carried out in collaborationpublic policy and private action229about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.with private industry; much is appropriate to the university environment. itshould be noted that different parts of the information industry are structuredquite differently with respect to available r&d resources. historically, theregulated telephony industry has been quite researchintensive. the cable tvindustry and, more importantly, the domainspecific application industries donot have this tradition of research, depending instead on the vendors thatsupport them; they would benefit, in particular, from partnership projects withgovernment agencies.finally, as noted above, there is much political debate about the effectderegulation, plus a blizzard of anticipated technological and marketinnovations, will have on the structure, profitability, and competitiveness of themany segments of the information industry. there is a continuous role to beplayed in evaluating and then acting (or not acting). at times, these actions aretaken to remove impediments, and at other times, to encourage changes indirection. this is no different from what any corporate manager faces: the needto continuously evaluate and to correct the course accordingly.but the government should not try to manage the evolution of industrystructure, barring evidence of serious inequities or economic problems. itshould keep its tools, such as the federal communications commission and thenational telecommunications and information administration, available to dealwith any situation that might arise in the future. particularly important will bebetter data collection and analysis to reduce some of the guesswork andimprove the bases for decision making in industry, government, and elsewhereon infrastructure development, selection, and use. in any case, the slower paceof deregulation and privatization in most other nations will require activeengagement with those policies in the interest of achieving a vigorous andeffective gii in which u.s. suppliers are not competitively disadvantaged.notes1. see cstb (1994b,d). also, the federal government has pursued a variety of initiatives thatsupport the evolution of information infrastructure technology, including those relating to highspeed and optical networks, digital libraries, mobile computing, and so on.2. governmentfunded networking research and development can explore architecturalalternatives that cut across existing implementations, creating options for new configurations ofthe great range of available technologies.3. see cstb (1995b) for additional discussion.4. antitrust law and regulation, frequently misunderstood in any event, received little directattention from project participants. although, if anything, antitrust policy seeks to promoteentry where a competitive market is sustainable, its effects may be most evident in this contextas a factor affecting the compositionpublic policy and private action230about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and conduct of consortia and alliances (such as those for joint personal communication servicelicenses), or in government investigations of major players such as microsoft to look into thepossibility of monopolization.5. one possible form of government involvement that was not suggested or discussed wastargeted investment downstream in production, as through investment incentives. forcommentary on the difficulties and ramifications of attempts to direct the allocation of privatecapital, see beltz (1991):[t]he hdtv debate has amply illustrated the hazards of hightechnologypolitics and industryled targeting. rather than one industry voice to guidepolicy makers, there are many. just as multiple technologies are involved inhdtv and the related final product markets, so also are there multiple interestgroups, each with its own policy agenda and report documenting its criticalimportance. the range of interested parties includes tv programmers, tvequipment suppliers, cable companies, satellite companies, overtheairbroadcasters, domestic and foreign tv manufacturers, u.s. semiconductormanufacturers, telecommunications companies, and computer manufacturersšthe list seems endless. which industry voice should be followed? whoseagenda for the development of highresolution systems, standards, andcomponents should be chosen? who should decide?6. publicprivate interaction in the context of railroad development is discussed in cnri(1995a, p. 5), which observes, ''public sponsorship and joint public/private enterprise hadcharacterized public works projects since construction started on the erie canal in 1817.moreover, leaving aside the questions of the federal land grants for the moment, the rise of therailroads was accompanied by a relative decline in the value of federal investment."7. this point is discussed at length in realizing the information future: the internet andbeyond (cstb, 1994b).8. see cstb (1994b).9. note that with respect to the issue of equitable access there is confusion over bothmechanisms and objectives. freer market entry and competition are mechanisms that can lowerprices, which can in turn support a broader set of customers. however, they are generally notsufficient to address the needs of either the truly disenfranchised (whose means are too limitedto support even low competitive prices) or those living in (e.g., rural) areas that are costly toserve. the white paper by the organization for the protection and advancement of smalltelephone companies notes, for example, that some areas are characterized by longersubscriber loops and other impediments to digital service.perhaps some cause for optimism can be read into recent analyses of at&t, which, as noted incnri (1995b), suggest that consumer demand motivated the expansion of the scope of at&t'sservice in conjunction with the technological and management factors addressed in moreconventional analyses.10. for example, forum participant allan arlow noted that the market success of differentadvanced network access interfaces will create a de facto definition of an "info have" that lawor regulation could make de jure.public policy and private action231about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.according to an editorial in the new york times of september 5, 1995, entitled "theinformation 'have nots'":the basic promise of the information agešthat books, facts and figures will bewidely disseminated over the telephone linesšwill come to nothing unlesspublic access to computers and telecommunications technology is broadlyexpanded. the public libraries should be one source of easy access. they arestruggling to offer the services but are faltering because of hightelecommunication costs.a recent survey of what the department of commerce describes as the"information have nots" revealed that about 20 percent of america's pooresthouseholds do not have telephones. only a fraction of those who do will beable to afford the computers and related equipment that grant access to theinformation society. the children of those households start out at an obviousdisadvantage, as do adults who could benefit from online training or availthemselves of online jobs search materials and so on. states that house adisproportionate number of the country's poor will need to take special care tosecure broad access to avoid an information underclass.11. although inherently attractive to policy makers, the concept of making the nationalinformation infrastructure available via libraries and public access kiosks was roundly criticizedin research conducted by u s west about a year ago. the research sampled hundreds ofconsumers in urban as well as rural settingsšessentially all of them said they would bedissatisfied with public access. while public access seems workable for books (wherebyconsumers can buy their own favorites at a reasonable price) and database research (which fewconsumers do), respondents appeared to put access to the nii on a par with having televisionand telephonesšthey are not about to go to the local library to have it.12. these include the federal interagency information infrastructure task force and the formerassociated national information infrastructure advisory council, the american nationalstandards institute and the associated information infrastructure standards panel, the crossindustry working team organized under the auspices of the corporation for national researchinitiatives, the council on competitiveness, educom, the coalition for networkedinformation and its member organizations, and others.13. for example, david messerschmitt commended the framework provided by the treatment ofthe industrial, scientific, and medical bands of spectrum, a zone where relatively littleregulatory control is imposed on use as long as interference is minimized. during the januaryworkshop, the federal communications commission's mike marcus asked about thedesirability of expedited approvals for testbeds and experiments analogous to those for fasttrack title iii radio experiments, noting that the absence of such a process has been associatedwith delays for certain service trials.14. or sometimes sharing in the cost of nodes and transport; see the white paper by theorganization for the protection and advancement of small telephone companies.public policy and private action232about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.15. telecommunications reform legislation could substantially alter the framework for federalregulation (changing the enabling statute(s)) and also affect state regulation to the extent that itprovides for federal preemption. the process of deregulation is clearly in motion; theuncertainties prior to and during the nii 2000 project have related to timing and application oremphasis.one issue contemplated in legislative discussions is some kind of requirement to increaseconnectivity from schools. thus, at&t received considerable attention for announcing its ownplans to offer "free internet access and voicemessaging services to 110,000 public and privateschools" at a cost of about $150 million over 5 years. beginning in fall 1996, the packagewould include "free dialup internet access, browser software, and 100 free hours of use, with a30 percent discount on service thereafter"; the voice messaging service would be free for thefirst 3 months. see naik (1995b).16. for example, a month before the spring forum, bell atlantic announced it was suspendingtwo of its video dialtone applications (also known as "214s") then pending before the federalcommunications commission. the regional bell holding company (rboc), which hadproposed using hybrid fiber coaxial cable and asymmetric digital subscriber line systems indifferent areas, stated that changes in technology necessitated changes in its applications. onmay 25th, the day after the forum and nearly a year after bell atlantic had originally filed itsapplications, the rboc withdrew its 214s altogether.17. these actions suggest questions about the desirability of and business case for thetechnology paths outlined in the filings and about whether the process itself will continue to bea requirement, now that telecommunications reform legislation has been passed. in these andother cases, the presence, absence, or degree of regulation may be cited as justification for oragainst action, but other factors clearly affect the desirability of a particular course of action.18. such as project contributors peter huber of the manhattan institute, david messerschmitt ofthe university of california at berkeley, and james mckinney of the advanced televisionsystems committee.19. for fuller consideration see such other cstb reports as realizing the information future (1994b), the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructure (1995b), andrights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities (1994d).20. the aspen institute has recently published a report on such a concept (see firestone andschement, 1995).21. the information infrastructure task force, through its committee on applications andtechnology, has put considerable emphasis on convening people in major application areas,such as health care and education.22. this point was argued by ken klingenstein of the university of colorado at boulder duringthe forum.23. similarly, david messerschmitt noted that "transcoders already introduced in cellulartelephony preclude privacy by endtoend encryption," pointing to insufficient attentionhistorically to privacy in the development of cellular networks.24. the report of cstb's project on national cryptography policy, requestedpublic policy and private action233about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.by the defense authorization act of 1994, is scheduled to be published in mid1996.25. they relate their testbed to four modes of regulatory interaction: a onetoone exchangebetween entities (e.g., a private entity requesting information from an agency); a onetotworelationship (e.g., for dispute resolution); a onetomany relationship; and a manytomanyconfiguration (e.g., negotiated rulemaking).26. the broad applicability of some government applications is consistent with a variety ofongoing initiativesšcongressionally driven procurement reforms, the national performancereview, and the government information technology systems working group, a sister to thetechnology policy working group (tpwg), under the information infrastructure task force,and efforts to harmonize technology development and exploration efforts, such as those led bythe tpwg, with efforts focused on applying information infrastructure.27. see the white paper by oscar garcia on behalf of the ieee.28. the concern with design was noted at the forum by walter wiebe of the national sciencefoundation.29. see kahin and abbate (1995) for an overview. see also besen and farrell (1994) andfarrell and shapiro (1992).30. more information is available online at http://www.ispo.cec.be (ec information societyproject office webserver) under g7 information society conference.31. the basic problem is that activity devolved to multiple entities, only some of which wererequired to report key statistics to the government. another problem is the broadening of thescope of concern from telephony to a larger mix of services within the nii. the need to resort tosubjective or speculative market research estimates for a variety of communications andinformation services in the department of commerce's industrial outlook volumes is but oneindicator.32. several such efforts are referenced in the bibliography.public policy and private action234about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliographyalex. brown & sons inc. 1995. planet web: browsing for dollars, investment  opportunities in theinternet and online world . alex. brown & sons inc., baltimore, md., september .anderson, robert h., tora k. bikson, sally ann law, and bridger m. mitchell. 1995. universalaccess to email: feasibility and societal  implications . center for informationrevolution analyses, rand corporation, santa monica, calif.andreessen, m. 1993. "ncsa mosaic technical summary," national center for supercomputingapplications, software development group, university of illinois, urbana, ill.andrews, edmund l. 1995a. "f.c.c. will not force rate increase for digital phone lines," newyork times , may 31, p. d4 .andrews, edmund l. 1995b. "new tv system endorsed amid doubt on future," new yorktimes , november 29, pp. d1 and d4 .anthes, gary h. 1995a. "companies usher in internet security products," computerworld , june26, p. 56 .anthes, gary h. 1995b. "small firms get lowcost online access," computerworld , april 3, p.28 .apple computer corporation. 1995. "petition for rulemaking: 'nii band,'" in  the matter ofallocation of spectrum in the 5 ghz band  to establish a wireless component of thenational information infrastructure . presented before the federal communicationscommission, washington, d.c., may 24 .areeda, phillip. 1990. "essential facilities: an epithet in need of limiting principles," antitrustlaw journal , vol. 58, pp. 841894 .arlen, gary h. 1995a. "as ivds deadline looms, licenses plan limited service," information &interactive services report , february 15, pp. 811 .arlen, gary h. 1995b. "online audience at 9.8 million users in wake of msn, aol marketing,"information & interactive services report , october 20, pp. 12 and 1516 .arlen, gary h. 1995c. "online audience tops 8.5 million, with 95% served by 'big six':marketing binge accelerates as operators await microsoft network arrival," information& interactive services report , july 14 , pp. 12, 1419 .bibliography235about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.arlen, gary h. 1996. "consumer online audience tops 11.3 million users, up 79% during1995," information & interactive services report , january 12, p. 1 .arnst, catherine, with kevin kelly, and peter burrows. 1995. "phone frenzy: is there anyonewho doesn't want to be a telecom player?," business week , february 20, pp. 9297 .asker, james r. (ed.) 1995. "in orbit," aviation week & space technology , may 29, p. 74 .associated press. 1995. "at&t school offer: free internet access," new york times , november1, p. d5 .bangemann, martin (chair) and the highlevel group on the information society. 1994. europeand the global information society: recommendations  to the european council .european council, brussels, belgium, may 26 .barboza, david. 1995. "the media business: advertising," new york  times , august 22, p. d6 .baumol, william j., and j. gregory sidak. 1994a. "the pricing on inputs sold to competitors,"yale journal on regulation , vol. 11, pp. 171202 .baumol, william j., and j. gregory sidak. 1994b. toward competition  in local telephony .massachusetts institute of technology and the american enterprise institute for publicpolicy research, cambridge, mass.beltz, cynthia a. 1991. hightech maneuvers: industrial policy lessons  of hdtv . aei press(publisher of the american enterprise institute), washington, d.c.bernerslee, tim, robert cailliau, ari luotonen, henrik frystyk nielsen, and arthur secret. 1994."the worldwide web," communications of  the acm 37(8):7682 .besen, stanley m., and joseph farrell. 1994. "choosing how to compete: strategies and tactics instandardization," journal of economic perspectives 8(2):117131 .betts, mitch. 1995. "internet renews tax battles," computerworld , june 19, p. 64 .betts, mitch, and gary h. anthes. 1995. "online boundaries unclear," computerworld , june 5,pp. 1 and 16 .blodgett, mindy. 1995. "middleware spurs growth in wireless data market," computerworld ,june 26, pp. 55, 57 .bloomberg business news. 1995. "a video phone for the wrist," new  york times , august 3, p.d8 .booker, ellis. 1995a. "agentless travel planning surges online," computerworld , may 15, p. 20 .booker, ellis. 1995b. "netscape offers onestop internet signup," computerworld , june 5, p. 14 .booker, ellis. 1995c. "the web vs. notes vs. microsoft exchange," computerworld , may 29, p. 26 .bray, nicholas, and paul b. carroll. 1995. "banks go to the source to cut phone bills," wall streetjournal , october 6, p. a10 .brightman, joan. 1994. "hybrid fiber/coax: front runner in the broadband transmission race,"telephony , november 28, pp. 4250 .brock, gerald w. 1995. the economics of interconnection . teleport communications group,staten island, new york, april .brodsky, ira. 1995. "wireless world," internet world , july . available on line from http://pubs.iworld.com.burgess, john. 1995. "apple's $500 answer to simplicity," washington  post , september 11, pp.17 and 20 of the business weekly insert.business week . 1995. september 25, p. 110 .cable regulation digest . 1995. "thompson (sic) lands $1 billion teletv contract," september25 , available online from http://www.vortex.com/pn/cable1.html .bibliography236about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cauley, leslie. 1995a. "bell atlantic asks the fcc to suspend two applications for videonetworks," wall street journal , april 26, p. b6 .cauley, leslie. 1995b. "bell curves: phone giants find interactive path full of obstacles," wallstreet journal , july 24, p. a1 .cauley, leslie. 1995c. "pactel puts off interactive video plans, concentrating instead on wirelesscable," wall street journal , september 28, p. a3 .chandrasekaran, rajiv. 1994. "online highway a costly toll road for rural users," washingtonpost , november 7, pp. a1 and a14 .chrisman, nicholas. 1994. "a vision of digital libraries for geographic information or how istopped trying to find the onramps to the information superhighway,"geoinfosystems , april, pp. 2124 .clark, don. 1995a. "microsoft says it has new partners lined up for its planned onlineservice," wall street journal , may 11, p. b4 .clark, don. 1995b. "netscape's balloon could be popped by developments at microsoft," wallstreet journal , august 10, p. b3 .clark, don. 1995c. "signups for microsoft network show strength but trail some expectations,"wall street journal , november 21, p. b10 .clark, don, and joan e. rigdon. 1995. "strippeddown pcs will be talk of comdex," wall streetjournal , november 10, pp. b1 and b7 .clay whitehead associates. 1994. business opportunities and risks  for electric utilities in thenational information infrastructure: executive summary . epri tr104539. prepared forthe electric power research institute by clay whitehead associates, mclean, va.,october .code of federal regulations (cfr). 1994. telecommunication: 47, parts 20 to 39, a codification ofdocuments published as a special edition of the federal register , office of the federalregister, national archives and records administration, u.s. government printingoffice, washington, d.c., revised as of october 1 .cole, jeff. 1995. "in new space race, companies are seeking dollars from heaven," wall streetjournal , october 10, pp. a1 and a8 .cole, r., o.n. garcia, et al. 1995. "the challenge of spoken language systems: researchdirections for the nineties," ieee transactions  on speech and audio processing ,january .committee on applications and technology (cat), information infrastructure task forcecommittee. 1994a. putting the information infrastructure  to work . informationinfrastructure task force, u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.committee on applications and technology (cat), information infrastructure task force. 1994b.the information infrastructure: reaching society's  goals . u.s. government printingoffice, washington, d.c., september .committee on information and communications (cic) . 1995 . high performance  computing andcommunications: foundation for america's information future . national science andtechnology council, washington, d.c.communications daily . 1995a. "bright future seen for broadcast, telcos and cable by 10 ceos,"september 29, p. 5 .communications daily . 1995b. "comm. daily notebook," september 1, p. 5 .communications daily . 1995c. "manufacturers unveil cable modems; cablelabs to work onprotocols," december 1, pp. 23 .communications daily . 1995d. "sales of digital satellite receivers," august 2, p. 11 .communications daily . 1995e. "telecom reform delay causing 'smart procrastination' by buyers,cable says," november 2, p. 3 .computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993a.information technology in the service society: a  twentyfirst century lever . nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.bibliography237about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993b.national collaboratories: applying information technology  for scientific research .national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994a . academic careers for experimental computer scientists  and engineers . nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994b.realizing the information future: the internet and  beyond . national academy press,washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994c.research recommendations to facilitate distributed  work . national academy press,washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994d.rights and responsibilities of participants in networked  communities . nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995a.information technology for manufacturing: a research  agenda . national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995b. thechanging nature of telecommunications/information  infrastructure . national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995c.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry  competitive: convergence ofcomputing, communications, and entertainment . national academy press, washington,d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995d.evolving the high performance computing and communications  initiative to support thenation's information infrastructure . national academy press, washington, d.c.computer systems policy project (cspp). 1993. perspectives on the  national informationinfrastructure: cspp's vision and recommendations for action . computer systemspolicy project, washington, d.c.computer systems policy project (cspp). 1994. perspectives on the  national informationinfrastructure: ensuring interoperability . computer systems policy project, washington,d.c., february .computerworld . 1995. "video nets stall; data nets rev up," june 12, p. 12 .corcoran, elizabeth. 1995a. "banks gear up to offer host of online services: competition mayprovide wealth of choices," washington  post , july 18, pp. d1 and d5 .corcoran, elizabeth. 1995b. "room with a different view: computer makers find a way to scaleback fears of the microsoft network," washington post , august 5, p. d1 .corporation for national research initiatives (cnri), amy frielander. 1995a. emerginginfrastructure: the growth of railroads . corporation for national research initiatives,reston, va.corporation for national research initiatives (cnri), amy frielander. 1995b. natural monopolyand universal service: telephones and telegraphs  in the u.s. communicationsinfrastructure, 18371940 . corporation for national research initiatives, reston, va.council on competitiveness (coc). 1993a. competition policy: unlocking  the nationalinformation infrastructure . council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., december .council on competitiveness (coc). 1993b. vision for a 21st century  information infrastructure .council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., may .council on competitiveness (coc). 1994. breaking the barriers to  the national informationinfrastructure . council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., december .bibliography238about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cowen & company. 1995. industry strategies, data networking industry:  internet mania . cowen& company, september 5 .cox, donald c. 1995. "wireless personal communications: what is it?," ieee personalcommunications , april, pp. 2035 .crossindustry working team. 1994a. an architectural framework for  the national informationinfrastructure . crossindustry working team, corporation for national researchinitiatives, reston, va., september .crossindustry working team. 1994b. electronic cash, tokens and payments  in the nationalinformation infrastructure . crossindustry working team, corporation for nationalresearch initiatives, september .csenger, michael. 1995. "fore leads atm monitoring charge," network  world , june 12, p. 6 .darby associates. 1995. "regulation and shareholder value: an organizing framework,"communications business & finance , may 12, p. 14 .durlach, n.i., and a.s. mavor, eds. 1995. virtual reality: scientific  and technologicalchallenges . national academy press, washington, d.c.economides, nicholas. 1994. "the economics of networks." ec9424. a white paper availablefrom the leonard n. stern school of business, new york university.economides, nicholas, and charles himmelberg. 1995. "critical mass and network size withapplication to the u.s. fax market," a white paper available from the leonard n. sternschool of business, new york university, new york.economides, nicholas, and lawrence j. white. 1994. "oneway networks, twoway networks,compatibility, and public policy," a white paper available from the leonard n. sternschool of business, new york university.the economist . 1993. "a survey of telecommunications: the end of the line," october 23 .the economist . 1995. "a survey of the internet: the accidental superhighway," july 1.edge: workgroup computing report , april 3, 1995, p. 21 .electronic government report . 1995. "do you know your duns? dun & bradstreet systemsgains prominence for electronic commerce," april 28, p. 11 .electronic industries association and telecommunications industry association . 1994. eia andtia white paper on national information  infrastructure . electronic industriesassociation and telecommunications industry association, washington, d.c.electronic mail & messaging systems . 1995. "emms quarterly mailbox census," july 24, pp. 35 .electronic marketplace report . 1995. "physicians online service prospers," august 22, p. 6 .elliott, stuart. 1995a. "a study by four agencies paints a surprising portrait of interactivecomputer users," new york times , september 25, p. d9 .elliott, stuart. 1995b. "hotwired gets nielsen to rate its cyberspace auditing to help advertisersfeel comfortable," new york times , june 19, p. d8 .elliott, stuart. 1995c. "the internet is being used because, as an executive says, everyone wantsa connection to what's new," new york  times , april 24, p. d10 .eriksson, hans. 1994. "mbone: the multicast backbone," communications  of the acm 37(8):5460 .farhi, paul. 1993. "blockbuster, bell atlantic discussing 'videoondemand' deal," washingtonpost , january 20, p. g1 .farhi, paul. 1995. "dishing up the business gets tougher," washington  post , september 6, pp.g1 and g3 .farrell, joseph, and carl shapiro. 1992. "standard setting in high definition television,"brookings papers on economic activity: microeconomics , martin neil baily and cliffordwinston (eds.). brookings institution, washington, d.c.bibliography239about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal communications commission (fcc). 1994. statistics of communications  commoncarriers , 1993/1994 edition. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.feinmore, charles, bruce field, howard frank, elden georg, michael papillo, glenn reitmeier,will stackhouse, and craig van degrift (workshop program committee). 1994. report onthe workshop on advanced  digital video in the national information infrastructure.nistr 5457. national institute of standards and technology, u.s. department ofcommerce, washington, d.c.feller, gordon. 1995. "management strategies: users and vendors to split cost of multimediaapps development," network world , may 15, p. 45 .firestone, charles m., and jorge reina schement (eds.). 1995. toward  an information bill ofrights & responsibilities . aspen institute, washington, d.c.fitzgerald, michael. 1995. "fcc inks isdn pricecut plan," computerworld , june 5, p. 15 .flanagan, j.l. 1994. "speech communicationšan overview," in voice  communication betweenhumans and machines , d.v. roe and j. wilpon (eds.). national academy press,washington, d.c.flynn, laurie. 1995. "intuit gets 19 contracts for homebanking software," new york times , july15, p. 39 .freedman, david h. 1994. "a romance blossoms between gray matter and silicon," science, vol.265, august 12, pp. 889890 .friedman, clifford h. 1994. new age media ii . bear stearns, new york, november .frost & sullivan. 1995. u.s. fiberintheloop markets . frost & sullivan, april .garcia, o.n., with a.j. goldschen and e. petajan. 1994. "continuous optical automatic speechrecognition by lipreading," in proceedings of the twentyeighth annual asilomarconference on signals, systems, and computers , october 31november 2 , pacific grove,calif.gebase, len, and steve trus. 1994. analyzing electronic commerce . national institute ofstandards and technology special publication 500218. u.s. government printing office,washington, d.c.general accounting office. 1987. telephone communications: controlling  crosssubsidy betweenregulated and competitive services . gao/rced8834. general accounting office,washington, d.c., october .general accounting office. 1994. information superhighway: issues  affecting development . gao/rced94285. general accounting office, washington, d.c., september 30 .gilder, george. 1994. "telecosm: the bandwidth tidal wave," forbes  asap , december 5, pp.163177 .gillin, paul. 1995. "best of browser breed bows," computerworld , june 26, p. 56 .global telecommunications infrastructure research project. 1994. building the nationalinformation infrastructure in k12 education:  a comprehensive survey of attitudestowards linking both sides of the desk . center for telecommunications management,university of southern california, los angeles, calif, april .goff, leslie. 1995. "internet options everywhere," computerworld , july 24, p. 96 .goldman, kevin. 1995. "advertising: now marketers can buy a service to track internetcustomer usage," wall street journal , april 5, p. b5 .greif, irene (ed.). 1988. computersupported cooperative work: a  book of readings . morgankaufmann, san mateo, calif.halper, mark. 1995. "another irs insanity," forbes asap , august 28, pp. 2628 .hamlin, suzanne. 1995. "time flies, but where does it go?" new york  times , september 6, pp.c1 and c6 .hamm, steve. 1995. "apple's spindler lifts veil on pippin technology," pc week online ,december 4 , accessible via http://www.zdnet.com/ÿpcweek/news/1204/o4ham.html.bibliography240about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hansell, saul. 1994. ''banks go interactive to beat the rush of services," new york times , october19, pp. d1 and d4 .hansell, saul. 1995a. "citibank will end most fees on electronic transactions," new york times ,may 24, pp. d1d2 .hansell, saul. 1995b. "credit cards on internet given a life," new  york times , june 24, p. 35 .hardy, eric s. 1995. "technobubble," forbes , september 25, pp. 206208 .hart, oliver, and jean tirole. 1990. "vertical integration and market foreclosure," brookingspapers on economic activity: microeconomics,  1990 , martin neil baily and cliffordwinston (eds.). brookings institution, washington, d.c., pp. 205287 .hayes, mary. 1995. "compuserve tests isdn: adoption may be slow, even if users clamor,"informationweek , october 9, p. 98 .henderson, john. 1995. "economic multiformat decoding in the home receiver," an unpublishedwhite paper prepared for hitachi america, august 29 .hertz, frank. 1995. "highspeed connections: faster speeds, new modem standards keep yourcustomers online," varbusiness , april 1, p. 119 .higgins, kelly jackson. 1995a. "tcp/ip becoming standard equipment in noses, oses: variouslevels of support are available today, but the trend is to integrate the protocol stack atthe factory," network  world , may 29, p. l11l16 .higgins, steve. 1995b. "is sell now, profit later right internet strategy?," investor's daily ,october 24, p. a8 .hodge, winston william. 1994. interactive television: a comprehensive  guide for multimediatechnologists .mcgrawhill visual technology series, mcgrawhill inc., new york.hodge, winston, and chuck milligan. 1994. "true video on demand vs. near video on demand:statistical modeling, cost, and performance tradeoffs," 1994 ncta technical papers .national cable television association, washington, d.c.hoffman, thomas, and mitch betts. 1994. "bank law to spur is revamps," computerworld ,september 19, pp. 1and 127 .infonetics research inc. 1994. the emerging remote access market . infonetics research inc, sanjose, calif., june.information & interactive services report . 1995a. "ncsa sets new standard for broser power:latest beta a revolutionary change," may 5, pp. 56 .information & interactive services report . 1995b. "spry names 24 partners for internet directprogram," may 5, pp. 67 .information & interactive services report . 1995c. "tci takes aim at internet service forresidences and business: new venture with venture capital firm uses hybrid systemfor home access," may 19, pp. 35 .information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1993. the national information infrastructure:agenda for action . information infrastructure task force, u.s. department of commerce,washington, d.c., september 15 .information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1994. national information  infrastructurešprogressreport: september 1993 september 1994 . information infrastructure task force, u.s.department of commerce, washington, d.c., september 13 .information infrastructure task force (iitf). 1995. global information  infrastructure: agenda forcooperation . information infrastructure task force, u.s. department of commerce,washington, d.c., february .interactive multimedia association (ima). 1994. ima interindustry  settop summit . report of aworkshop held april 21 in arlington, va. interactive multimedia association, annapolis,md., may 23 .bibliography241about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.intercast. 1995. "leaders in pc, broadcast, and cable industries announce formation of industrygroup to promote new digital medium for the home pc," press release dated october16 , available from http://www.intercast.org.international data corporation (idc). 1995a. "is priorities: as the information highway erabegins," a white paper and special advertising supplement appearing in computerworld ,may 22 .international data corporation (idc). 1995b. lan penetration and  implementation plans: 1995global it survey results . international data corporation, framingham, mass.international data corporation (idc). 1995c. modem market forecast,  19941999 , press releasedated october 5, 1995 available online from http://www.idcreasearch.com .international data corporation (idc). 1995d. pc nic market forecast,  19941995 . internationaldata corporation, framingham, mass.international data corporation (idc). 1995e. portable lan connectivity  market forecast,19941999 . international data corporation, framingham, mass.international data corporation (idc). 1995f. preliminary lan hub  market forecast, 19951999 .international data corporation, framingham, mass.jackson, william. 1995. "ssa begins kiosk info pilot; transactions will come," governmentcomputer news , july 17, p. 9 .kahin, brian(ed.). 1994. information infrastructure sourcebook:  version 4.0 . center for scienceand international affairs, john f. kennedy school of government, harvard university,cambridge, mass.kahin, brian, and janet abbate (eds.). 1995. standards policy for  information infrastructure .harvard information infrastructure project, mit press, cambridge, mass.kahn, alfred e., and william e. taylor. 1994. "the pricing of inputs sold to competitors: acomment," yale journal on regulation , vol. 11, pp. 225240 .katz, michael l., and carl shapiro. 1994. "systems competition and network effects," journal ofeconomic perspectives 8(2):93115 .katz, randy h. 1995. "adaptation and mobility in wireless information systems," an unpublishedwhite paper available from http://daedalus.cs.berkeley.edu , version dated august 18 .keegan, paul. 1995. "the digerati!," new york times magazine , may 21, pp. 3845 and 8688 .kessler, andrew j. 1995. "out at the top, ii," forbes , september 25, p. 200 .kirkpatrick, david. 1994. "how pcs will take over your home," fortune , february 21, pp.100104 .kobb, b.z. 1993. "personal wireless," ieee spectrum , june, p. 25 .krause, reinhardt. 1995. "improved adsl compression lures semiconductor firms," electronicnews , april 10, p. 8 .kraushaar, jonathan m. 1995a. fiber deployment update: end of year  1994 . federalcommunications commission, washington, d.c., july .kraushaar, jonathan m. 1995b . infrastructure of the local operating  companies aggregated tothe holding company level . federal communications commission, washington, d.c.,april .kraut, r., w. scherlis, t. mukhopadhyay, j. manning, and s. kiesler. 1996. "homenet: a fieldtrial of residential internet services," proceedings of chi '96 . association of computingmachinery, new york, forthcoming.krt graphics. 1995. "pcs and income," washington post , april 20, p. b13 .landler, mark. 1995. "the dishes are coming: satellites go suburban," new york times , may 29,pp. 37 and 40 .lefkin, peter. 1995. "iispšbrief summary of iisp identified nii/gii standards needs," emailmessage to iisp mailing list dated november 27 .bibliography242about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lewis, peter. 1995. "on the net: another survey of internet users is out, and this one hasstatistical credibility," new york times , october 30, p. d5 .libicki, martin c. 1994. standards: the rough road to the common  byte . program oninformation resources policy (center for information policy research and harvarduniversity), cambridge, mass., october .liebowitz, s.j., and stephen e. margolis. 1994. "network externality: an uncommon tragedy,"journal of economic perspectives 8(2):133150 .lindstrom, annie. 1995a. "bell atlantic puts video architecture plans on hold," telephony , may1, p. 6 .lindstrom, annie. 1995b. "new cable modems ready for blastoff," telephony , may 22, p. 20 .lindstrom, annie. 1995c. "us west decides to put video dialtone plans on ice," telephony , june5, p. 6 .lippman, john. 1995. "pacific telesis and times mirror end online venture due to marketchanges," wall street journal , october 23, p. b9 .lucky, robert w. 1995. "reflections: where did the web come from?," ieee spectrum , july, p.15 .mackiemason, jeffrey k., and hal varian. 1995. "economic faqs about the internet," a whitepaper available from http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/resources/infoecon/faqs .maresca, thomas. 1995. "jupiter's home pc projections," interactive  home , april , available viahttp://www.jup.com/edroom/newsletters/cia/cia45.htm.markoff, john . 1994 . "a rough start for digital tv," new york times , september 21, pp. d1,d5 .markoff, john. 1995. "at&t plan links internet and satellites," new  york times , october 4, pp.d1 and d4 .mccarthy, shira. 1995. "ameritech switches network plans," telephony , july 3, p. 6 .mcconnell, chris. 1995. "telcos pushing fcc for vdt changes," broadcasting  & cable , july31, p. 39 .mcconville, jim. 1995. "calling all cash cows: searching for new revenue streams,"broadcasting & cable , may 15, p. 22 .mcwilliams, brian. 1995. "financial insecurity," computerworld , june 26, pp. 7980 and 84 .mcwilliams, gary, with peter burrows, kathy rebello, and larry armstrong. 1995. "pcs: thebattle for the homefront," business week , september 25, pp. 110114 .mehta, stephanie n. 1994. "industrynet puts businesses in fast lane," wall street journal ,october 11, p. b2 .messmer, ellen. 1995a. "banks set up net for electronic payments," network world , may 8, pp. 6and 78 .messmer, ellen. 1995b. "navisoft offers server, authoring tool for web," network world , june26, p. 31 .messmer, ellen. 1995c. "uunet encryptor offers users secure internet communications,"network world , may 29, p. 45 .mills, mike. 1995a. "bell atlantic metering plan falls flat," washington  post , october 16, pp. 15and 20 of the business section.mills, mike. 1995b. "interactive tv: the leap looks a long way off," washington post , july 2,pp. h1 and h4 .mills, mike. 1995c. "video on demand: still on hold," washington  post , december 9, pp. a1 anda14 .mills, mike, and paul farhi. 1995. "bell atlantic to shift to 'wireless cable' tv," washingtonpost , may 17, pp. f1f2 .morris, charles r., and charles h. ferguson. 1993. "how architecture wins technology wars,"harvard business review 71(2):8696 .bibliography243about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mossberg, walter s. 1995. "personal technology," wall street journal , july 27, p. b1 .naik, gautam. 1995a. "a lot of little hassles slow spread of wireless network," wall streetjournal , may 11, pp. b1b4 .naik, gautam. 1995b. "at&t to give 110,000 schools free services," wall street journal ,november 1, pp. a3 and a8 .national cable television association (ncta). 1993. cable television  and america'stelecommunications infrastructure . national cable television association, washington,d.c., april .national institute of standards and technology (nist). 1994a. framework  for nationalinformation infrastructure services (draft) . national institute of standards andtechnology, u.s. department of commerce, gaithersburg, md., july .national institute of standards and technology (nist). 1994b. networking,  telecommunicationsand information technology: the requirements of u.s. industry . proceedings of theadvanced technology program workshop held august 3031 , gaithersburg, md., u.s.department of commerce, washington, d.c.national institute of standards and technology (nist). 1994c. report  on the workshop onadvanced digital video in the national information infrastructure . u.s. department ofcommerce, washington, d.c.national research council. 1995. standards, conformity assessment,  and trade . nationalacademy press, washington d.c.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1991. the ntiainfrastructure report: telecommunications in the age  of information . u.s. departmentof commerce, washington, d.c., october .national telecommunications and information administration . 1994 . 20/20 vision: thedevelopment of a national information infrastructure . u.s. department of commerce,washington, d.c., march .network security standards oversight group, president's national security telecommunicationsadvisory committee. 1994. network security  standards for the public switched network:issues and recommendations . president's national security telecommunicationsadvisory committee, washington, d.c., october .new york times . 1995. "chase introducing new electronicbanking account," new york times ,june 13, p. d23 .new york times . 1995. "the information 'have nots,'" september 5, p. a16 .north american telecommunications association (nata). 1995. 1995 telecommunicationsmarket review and forecast . nata, washington, d.c.o'brien, timothy l. 1995. "home banking: will it take off this time?" wall street journal ,june 8, pp. b1 and b7 .office of the vice president. 1993. creating a government that works  better & costs less:reengineering through information technology (accompanying report of the nationalperformance review) . u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., september .office of technology assessment (ota). 1995. wireless technologies  and the nationalinformation infrastructure . u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., july .olsen, j.s., s. card, t. landauer, g.m. olsen, t. malone, and j. leggett. 1993. "computersupported cooperative work: research issues for the 90s," behavior and informationtechnology 12, 115129 .peyton, david. 1994. the national information infrastructurešovercoming  the obstacles:financial, regulatory, and technical . information technology association of america,arlington, va., september.plantec, peter. 1995. "mpeg2: the new world standard for highquality digital video," anadvertisement supplement in informationweek , september 25, between pp. 85 and 86 .bibliography244about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.poppel, harvey, and craig marino. 1995. "the wireless melting pot," telephony , july 24, pp.3035 .rattay, k. 1994. "wireless messaging," at&t technical journal , may/june .reed, david p. 1995. "the transition to digital television distribution systems: a technologicalview of expected interoperability," a white paper presented at 1995 telecommunicationspolicy research conference , solomons, md., october 1 .report on electronic commerce . 1995a. "interactive advertising," july 11, p. 13 .report on electronic commerce . 1995b. "intuit unleashes fall lineup: command of market withquicken spurs microsoft into giving money away," july 25, pp. 12, 1214 .report on electronic commerce . 1995c. "the taxman cometh online," june 13, pp. 12, 7 , and1416 .rigdon, joan e. 1995a. "blame retailers for web's slow start as a mall," wall street journal ,august 16, pp. b1and b5 .rigdon, joan e. 1995b. "netscape must turn business strategy upside down to sustainenthusiasm," wall street journal , august 11, p. a3 .robichaux, mark. 1995a. "cabletv firms wonder if it's time to get hooked up," wall streetjournal , august 3, p. b4 .robichaux, mark. 1995b. "online push being readied by cable firms," wall street journal ,november 29, pp. a3a4 .rohde, david. 1995a. "desktop computertelephone integration: fact or fiction?" technologyupdate , may 15, p. 35 .rohde, david. 1995b. "once out of reach, t3 lines zoom as local access option,"networkworld , may 15, pp. 1, 8 .samuels, gary. 1995. "crowded skies," forbes , may 22, pp. 98100 .sandberg, jared. 1995a. "at&t is still missing its internet voice: phone giant hasn't divulgedstrategy for new market," wall street  journal , june 16, p. b7 .sandberg, jared. 1995b. "netscape has technical whiz in andreessen," wall street journal ,august 11, pp. b1b2 .sandberg, jared. 1995c. "online services' user counts often aren't what they seem" wall streetjournal , october 6, pp. b1 and b6 .sandberg, jared. 1995d. "online population reaches 24 million in north america," wall streetjournal , october 30, p. b3 .schwartz, evan i. 1995. "people are supposed to pay for this stuff?" wired , july, pp. 148153,187, 190191 .shaffer, richard a. 1995. "speed freaks: try isdn now," forbes , november 6, p. 348 .shank, gary. 1993. "abductive multiloguing: the semiotic dynamics of navigating the net,"electronic journal on virtual culture 1(1) .shapiro, eben. 1995. "time warner wins cellular customers in rochester, n.y.," wall streetjournal , july 3, p. b8 .shapiro, eben, and mark robichaux. 1995. "time warner to put a town online in test ofservice," wall street journal , july 18, p. b5 .shenon, philip. 1995. "2edged sword: asian regimes on the internet," new york times , may 29,pp. 1 and 40 .simba information inc. 1995. online services: 1994 review trends  & forecast update . simbainformation inc., wilton, conn.simnett, richard, thomas r. spacek, and padmanabhan srinagesh. 1995. "an economic analysisof the claimed applicability of the bill and keep interconnection arrangement to localtelecommunications competition," an unpublished white paper available from bellcommunications research, morristown, new jersey.singletary, michelle. 1995. "now home may be where the bank is," washington post , january16 , business section, p. 1 .bibliography245about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.skrzycki, cindy. 1993. "data highway plan costs may decline: cheaper systems may edge outfiberoptics," washington post , january 20, p. g1 .sullivantrainor, michael l. 1995. "the internet page: serving up the web: financial, technical,and security barriers limit inhouse management," computerworld , may 15, p. 62 .swisher, kara. 1995. "internet's reach in society grows, survey finds," washington post , october31, pp. a1 and a6 .taubes, gary. 1994a. "do immunologists dream of electric mice?," science, vol. 265, august 12,pp. 886888 .taubes, gary. 1994b. "taking the data in hand 'literally' with virtual reality," science , vol. 265,august 12, pp. 884886 .technology policy working group (tpwg), information infrastructure task force. 1994."services and the national information infrastructure," draft for public comment.technology policy working group, washington, d.c., december 2 .technology policy working group (tpwg), information infrastructure task force. 1995a. "aprocess for government selection of standards for its national information infrastructure(nii) activities," draft for public comment. technology policy working group,washington, d.c., december 14 .technology policy working group (tpwg), information infrastructure task force. 1995b."advanced digital video and the national information infrastructure," draft for publiccomment. technology policy working group, washington, d.c., february 15 .telco competition reports . 1994a. "lecs, competitors debate interconnection, compensationplans at washington conference," december 8, pp. 25 .telco competition reports . 1994b. "state update: michigan psc orders interconnection trials,denies request to mandate interim arrangements," december 8, p. 5.telecommunications reports . 1994. "u s west revises its video dialtone assumptions," june 6,pp. 1921 .telecommunications reports . 1995a. "antec gets service contract with pacific telesis," july24, p. 7 .telecommunications reports . 1995b. "bell atlantic to expand virginia video dialtone trial,"may 29, p. 31 .telecommunications reports . 1995c. "bell atlantic won't resubmit vdt plans soon," may 29,pp. 3031 .telecommunications reports . 1995d. "bellsouth proposes integrated phone/video network," july24, p. 7 .telecommunications reports . 1995e. "bill would overhaul info technology procurement," june26, p. 25 .telecommunications reports . 1995f. "broadcasters differ over digital tv standards," july 10, pp.2223 .telecommunications reports . 1995g. "coalition issues draft worldwide digital standard," june26, p. 25 .telecommunications reports . 1995h. "companies plan to offer tv services over pcs," july 24, p.4 .telecommunications reports . 1995i. "local exchange competition is decade away, report says,"june 19, p. 37 .telecommunications reports . 1995j. "ntia urges fcc to act on wireless data petitions,"november 6, pp. 4041 .telecommunications reports . 1995k. "pacific bell to offer 'first' integrated fsn network," july24, pp. 34 .telecommunications reports . 1995l. "parties view redacted vdt tariff as insufficient," may 29,p. 31 .bibliography246about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.telecommunications reports . 1995m. "restrictive fcc rules could be death knell for vdtservice, broad coalition warns," july 24, pp. 56 .telecommunications reports . 1995n. "video inquiry highlights telcos' apprehension about vdtservice, dispute over program access," july 10, pp. 1821 .templin, neal. 1995. "santa brought many gizmos for the internet," wall street journal ,december 26, pp. b1 and b3 .texas education network. 1995. networks for goals 2000 reform: bringing  the internet to k12schools . southwest educational development library, austin, tex.timmins, annmarie. 1995. "messaging vendors back 'net security standards," network world ,july 24, p. 14 .trachtenberg, jeffrey a., and mark robichaux. 1995. "bell alliance to buy over $1 billion of settop boxes to offer wireless tv," wall  street journal , september 22, p. b3 .tye, william b. 1994. "the pricing of inputs sold to competitors: a response," yale journal onregulation , vol. 11, pp. 203224 .u.s. bureau of the census, current business reports. 1995. annual  survey of communicationservices: 1993 . u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.vernon, mary k., edward d. lazowska, and steward d. personick (eds.). 1994. r&d for the nii:technical challenges . educom, washington, d.c.veronis, suhler & associates. 1994. communications industry forecast:  19941998 . veronis,suhler & associates, new york, july.veronis, suhler & associates. 1995. communications industry forecast:  19951999 . veronis,suhler & associates, new york, july.vin, harrick m., et al. 1991. "hierarchical conferencing architectures for intergroup multimediacollaboration," in proceedings of the  acm conference on organizational computingsystems , november , atlanta, ga.waldrop, m. mitchell. 1994a. "culture shock on the networks," science , vol. 265, pp. 879881 .waldrop, m. mitchell. 1994a. "software agents prepare to sift the riches of cyberspace," science ,vol. 265, pp. 882883 .wallace, bob. 1992. "study raises concerns about national isdn," global services , june 29, pp.2728 .wallace, bob. 1995. "at&t, sprint to offer nationwide t1 atm," infoworld , february 27, p. 1 .wall street journal . 1995a. "futureshop: no cash accepted; microchipcard purchases only,"july 13 .wall street journal . 1995b. "microchip cash card may replace coins, bank notes, and creditcards," july 13, p. b7 .wall street journal . 1995c. "oracle plans to sell network computer," october 6, p. b7 .wall street journal . 1995d. "snet is seeking to offer video, interactive services," april 28, p.b5 .warner, fara. 1995. "online services try to define their identities," wall street journal , july12, p. b1 .watt, peggy. 1995. "nomadic users have growing field of choices," network world , july 10, p.l4 .wexler, joanie. 1995a. "carriers build nets for electronic commerce," network world , may 15, p.15 .wexler, joanie. 1995b. "pcs players mull network compatibility issues," network world , june12, p. 6 .wildstrom, stephen. 1995. "phone circuits to the fast lane," business week , february 27, p. 28 .bibliography247about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wilpon, j., l. rabiner, c.h. lee, and e. goldman. 1990. "automatic recognition of keywords inunconstrained speech using hidden markov models," ieee transactions on acoustics,speech, and signal processing , assp38, november, pp. 18701878 .winslow, ron. 1994. "a trip to the mayo clinic via information highway," wall street journal ,october 17, 1994, pp. b1and b7 .wirbel, loring. 1995. "wans focus on home and small office market," electronic engineeringtimes , march 27, p. 40 .wireless information networks forum (winforum). 1995. "petition for rulemaking," in  thematter of allocation of spectrum in the 5.1 to  5.35 ghz band and adopt service rules fora shared unlicensed personal radio network . presented before the federalcommunications commission, washington, d.c., may 24 .wireless messaging report . 1994. "survey predicts boom in sales of lans: school, industry,health markets eyed," november 8, p. 15 .wireless messaging report . 1995a. "fcc proposes 900 mhz smr auction rules, dividesspectrum," may 9, p. 11 .wireless messaging report . 1995b. "new spectrum rules adopted in fcc's 'refarming'proceeding," july 4, p. 9 .wireless messaging report . 1995c. "paging industry adds 7.5 million customers in 1994," july 4,p. 5 .wireless messaging report . 1995d. "pcs licenses: carriers pay a high price for their pcslicenses," may 9, pp. 611 .wireless messaging report . 1995e. "wireless data predicted to have mass marketingturnaround," july 4, pp. 34, 15 .yankee group. 1995a. honing the competitive edge: the public network  access market andintegrated access devices . yankee group data communications service, bolton, mass.,april .yankee group. 1995b. out in the rain: the remote area internetworking  market . yankee groupdata communications service, bolton, mass., february .zelnick, nate. 1994. "microsoft takes the online plunge; how big will the splash be?,"information & interactive services report , november 18 , pp. 12 and 1420 .ziegler, bart. 1995a. "ibm to make lowcost pc for networks," wall  street journal , november14, p. b19 .ziegler, bart. 1995b. "publishers scramble into online services, but payoff is unclear," wallstreet journal , april 26, pp. a1 and a6 .ziegler, bart. 1995c. "staid phone giants try marriage to hollywood," wall street journal , may24, pp. b1 and b10 .zuckerman, laurence. 1995. "with internet cachet, not profit, a new stock amazes wall street,"new york times , august 10, pp. a1 and b1 .bibliography248about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes249about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes250about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aworkshop participants and agendaparticipantsduane adams, advanced research projects agencyrobert j. aiken, department of energy/lawrence livermore nationallaboratoryrobert c. atkinson, teleport communications groupdavid j. barram, department of commercetora k. bikson, rand corporationalan r. blatecky, mcncrobert j. bonometti, office of science and technology policycynthia h. braddon, the mcgraw hill companieslewis m. branscomb, harvard universityvito brugliera, zenith electronics corporationjames h. burrows, national institute of standards and technologyjames a. chiddix, time warner cableyitzuu chien, national science foundationmelvyn ciment, national science foundationdavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologymark corbitt, federal communications commissionmichael corrigan, general services administrationgeorge cotter, national security agencyd. joseph donahue, thomson consumer electronicsh. allen ecker, scientificatlanta incorporatedjoseph a. flaherty, cbs incorporatedworkshop participants and agenda251about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.howard frank, advanced research projects agencybernard r. gifford, academic systems corporationpaul e. green, jr., ibm t.j. watson research centerrichard r. green, cable television laboratories incorporatedmichael d. greenbaum, bell atlantic corporationallen s. hammond, new york law schooldaniel hitchcock, department of energysally e. howe, national coordination office for high performancecomputing and communicationspaul e. hunter, national aeronautics and space administrationlaura m. jennings, microsoft corporationbrian kahin, j.f. kennedy school of government, harvard universityrichard t. liebhaber, mci communications corporationrobert w. lucky, bell communications researchmarina m. mann, electric power research instituteeric k. marcus, commerce clearing house incorporatedmichael j. marcus, federal communications commissionclement j. mcdonald, regenstrief institute for health centerjames c. mckinney, advanced television systems committeedavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyavram c. miller, intel corporationgraham mobley, scientificatlanta incorporatedmahal mohan, at&t corporationlloyd n. morrisett, john and mary markle foundationmichael r. nelson, office of science and technology policyrichard e. ottinger (retired), georgia public telecommunicationscommissionmichael a. papillo, houston associates incorporatedstewart d. personick, bell communications researchanthony m. rutkowski, internet societylawrence seidman, hughes telecommunications and space sectorrichard s. sharpe, john a. hartford foundationdonald w. simborg, knowmed systemsj. marty tenenbaum, enterprise integration technologies corporation(eit)/commercenetshukri wakid, national institute of standards and technologymarvin i. weinberger, infonautics corporationstephen s. wolff, cisco systems incorporatedworkshop participants and agenda252about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.agendamonday, january 16, 19955:30 p.m.reception with project liaisons6:00dinner6:45welcome: lewis branscomb, workshop chairtuesday, january 17, 1995participantsatlarge (all discussion panels): tora bikson, randcorporation; michael greenbaum, bell atlantic corporation; allenhammond, new york law school; brian kahin, harvard university; davidmesserschmitt, university of california at berkeley9:00introduction and charge to workshop: lewis branscomb9:15tpwg and its sponsorship of the nii technology deployment project:howard frank, advanced research projects agency9:30technology deployment scenariosdiscussion leader: robert lucky, bell communications researchsteering committee participants: james chiddix, time warner cable;joseph flaherty, cbs incorporated; richard liebhaber, mcicommunications corporationinvited participants: robert atkinson, teleport communications group;marina mann, electric power research institute; james mckinney,advanced television systems committee; mahal mohan, at&tcorporation; richard ottinger, georgia public telecommunicationscommission (retired); stewart personick, bell communications research;lawrence seidman, hughes telecommunications and space sectorworkshop participants and agenda253about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1:00 p.m.enduser hardware/software issuesdiscussion leader: james chiddix, time warner cableinvited participants: vito brugliera, zenith electronics corporation;joseph donahue, thomson consumer electronics; allen ecker,scientificatlanta incorporated; richard green, cable televisionlaboratories inc.; laura jennings, microsoft corporation; avrammiller, intel corporation3:00domainspecific applications: specialized vs.; common conditionsdiscussion leaders: cynthia braddon, the mcgrawhill; companies,and donald simborg, knowmed systemsinvited participants:education alan blatecky, mcnc; bernard gifford, academic systemscorporation; marvin weinberger, infonautics corporationhealth care; clement mcdonald, regenstrief institute; richardsharpe , john a. hartford foundationpublishing; eric marcus, commerce clearing house inc.5:00day one concludes5:15reception6:30dinner7:30remarks: lewis branscomb, workshop chairspeech: david barram, deputy secretary; department of commerceworkshop participants and agenda254about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.wednesday, january 18, 19959:00the internet as an nii modeldiscussion leader: richard liebhaber, mci communicationssteering committee participant: david clark, massachusetts instituteof technologyinvited participants: anthony rutkowski, internet society; martytenenbaum, eit/commercenet; stephen wolff, cisco systemsincorporated10:45dueling definitionsdiscussion leader: david clark, massachusetts institute of technology1:00 p.m.capstonešnii technology deployment; barriers and driversdiscussion leader: joseph flaherty, cbs incorporatedmembers of the steering committee and designated participants2:45springing forward: next steps, white papers, and the; may 2324 forummembers of the steering committee; plenary discussion4:30adjournworkshop participants and agenda255about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bforum participants and agendaparticipantsalden abbott, department of commercemike abel, nec americaduane a. adams, advanced research projects agencyrobert j. aiken, department of energy/lawrence livermore nationallaboratorypaul allison, north communicationsallan j. arlow, attorney at law, washington, d.c.eric m. aupperle, merit network incorporateddonald m. austin, national coordination office for high performancecomputing and communicationshenriette d. avram, library of congress (retired)wendell b. bailey, national cable television associationjonathan band, morrison and foersterjohn baras, university of marylandcarol barnes, national institute of standards and technologybruce barrow, defense information systems agencyrichard barth, motorola incorporatedherbert becker, library of congressscott behnke, dyncorplouis berger, bbn systems and technologieshenry bertoni, polytechnic university, brooklynkul bhasin, nasa lewis research centerforum participants and agenda256about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles billingsley, information technology association of americaalan r. blatecky, mcncrobert t. blau, bellsouth corporationrobert bonometti, office of science and technology policyjane bortnick griffith, library of congressheather boyles, farnet incorporatedcynthia h. braddon, the mcgrawhill companiesgeorge brandenburg, harvard universityanne wells branscomb, harvard universitylewis m. branscomb, harvard universitytim brennan, umbc/resources for the futurecharles brownstein, corporation for national research initiatives/crossindustry working teamdonald p. brutzman, naval postgraduate schooljames h. burrows, national institute of standards and technologydaniel f. burton, council on competitivenessaubrey m. bush, national science foundationty carter, american bankers associationdeborah castleman, department of defenselynn chapman, raychem corporationnim cheung, bell communications researchjames a. chiddix, time warner cableyitzuu chien, national science foundationeliot j. christian, u.s. geological surveydavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologywhit clay, capitoline/ms&ltim clifford, dyncorpguy copeland, computer sciences corporationmark corbitt, federal communications commissionrobert r. cordell, bell communications commissionmichael l. corrigan, edsgeorge cotter, national security agencyrobert w. crandall, brookings institutionjohn c. davis, department of defensejohn deferrari, u.s. general accounting officepaul detering, raychem corporationgilbert devey, national science foundationd. joseph donahue, thomson consumer electronics incorporatednorman douglas, national communications systemdon dulchinos, cable television laboratories incorporatedlammot du pont, national institute of standards and technologyh. allen ecker, scientificatlanta incorporateddennis w. elliott, aloha networks incorporatedforum participants and agenda257about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.joel engel, ameritecherik fair, apple computer incorporatedmaria farnon, tufts universitygerald faulhaber, university of pennsylvaniadavid feldmeier, bell communications researchfrancis dummer fisher, university of texasjoseph a. flaherty, cbs incorporatedhoward frank, advanced research projects agencybarbara y. fraser, cert coordination centerrichard b. friedman, university of wisconsin medical schoolcita furlani, national institute of standards and technologydonald fye, gte personal communications servicesbernard r. gifford, academic systems corporationwarren gifford, bell communications researchjohn gilsenan, department of statejoseph gitlin, john hopkins medical institutionsross s. glatzer, prodigy services company (retired)norman glick, national security agencygayle f. gordon, department of the interiordiana gowen, mcipaul e. green, jr., ibm t.j. watson research centerrichard r. green, cable television laboratories incorporatedmichael d. greenbaum, bell atlantic corporationmarjorie greene, first washington associatesirene greif, lotus development corporationdavid gross, airtouch communications incorporateddaniel grulke, department of defensew. ed hammond, duke university medical centerkathryn hanson, silicon graphicsjohn harrald, george washington universityfrank hartel, national institutes of healthted hartson, post newsweek cablestephen haynes, westlawjohn hestenes, national science foundationjenifer hill, capitoline/ms&lterence hill, international monetary fundlincoln hoewing, bell atlanticlee holcomb, national aeronautics and space administrationeric s. hood, northwestnetedward horowitz, viacom incorporatedellis horowitz, university of southern californiasally e. howe, national coordination office for high performancecomputing and communicationsforum participants and agenda258about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kathleen huber, bay networkspeter w. huber, manhattan institute for policy researchpaul e. hunter, national aeronautics and space administrationlionel s. johns, office of science and technology policydavid johnson, cta incorporatedelizabeth johnston, general accounting officeanita k. jones, department of defensecharles n. judice, bell atlanticbrian kahin, harvard universitykevin kahn, intel corporationellen s. kappel, joint oceanographic institutions incorporatedjames h. keller, harvard universityleonard kleinrock, university of california at los angelesken klingenstein, university of colorado at bouldermarilyn kraus, defense information systems agencyrichard kuhn, national institute of standards and technologyhenry lai, general services administrationlarry landweber, university of wisconsincarl e. landwehr, naval research laboratorybarry m. leiner, advanced research projects agencyted leventhal, business research publicationsmartin libicki, institute for national strategic studiesrichard t. liebhaber, mci communications corporationandrew lippman, massachusetts institute of technologyfred scoresby long, national weather servicejonathan low, department of laborrobert w. lucky, bell communications researchdaniel lynch, interop company and cybercash incorporateddavid lytel, office of science and technology policymary madigan, personal communications industry associationjohn major, motorola incorporatedmarina m. mann, electric power research instituterobert mason, case western reserve universityalan mcadams, cornell universitylois clark mccoy, national institute for urban search and rescuejack mcdonald, mbx incorporatedbernadette mcguirerivera, national telecommunications andinformation administrationjames mckinney, advanced television systems committeemilo medin, @homemichael melas, ibm research divisiondavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleyforum participants and agenda259about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.jennifer miller, international communications industry associationgary j. minden, advanced research projects agencygraham mobley, scientificatlanta incorporatedmahal mohan, at&t corporationtracie e. monk, dyncorpfrank r. moore, institute for electrical and electronics engineerslloyd n. morrisett, john and mary markle foundationsushil g. munshi, sprint corporationmichelle muth, u.s. office of consumer affairstassos nakassis, national institute of standards and technologypaul narula, ag communication systemsmichael north, north communicationsann okerson, association of research librariesmichael a. papillo, houston associates incorporatedgregory l. parham, department of agriculturestewart d. personick, bell communications researchlawrence p. petak, federal communications commissioneugene t. phillip, national communications agencyronald w. piasecki, general services administrationrobert s. powers, mci telecommunications incorporatedarati prabhakar, national institute of standards and technologyapril ramey, department of treasurygordon ray, nec america incorporatedjohn c. redmond, gte laboratoriesira richer, mitre corporationjohn philip riganati, david sarnoff research centercarl ripa, bell communications researchlinda g. roberts, department of educationmichael m. roberts, educomrobert roche, cellular telecommunications industry associationthomas c. rochow, mcdonnell douglas corporationquincy rodgers, general instrument corporationjeffrey h. rohlfs, strategic policy researchtom rowbotham, technology strategy, bt centre, londonjashojit roy, national institute of standards and technologydeborah rudolph, institute for electrical and electronics engineersjohn ryan, institute for electrical and electronics engineersnora h. sabelli, national science foundationdamian saccocio, america onlinepamela samuelson, university of pittsburgh school of lawallan m. schiffman, terisa systems/commercenetgail garfield schwartz, teleport communications groupforum participants and agenda260about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mary anne scott, department of energymolly shaffer, department of commercerichard s. sharpe, john a. hartford foundationrobert shepherd, defense information systems agencym. wayne shiveley, mitre corporationedward h. shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecurtis a. siller, jr., at&t bell laboratoriesdonald w. simborg, knowmed systemskaren sollins, massachusetts institute of technologythomas spacek, bell communications researchpadmanabhan srinagesh, bell communications researchgilbert staffend, allied signal automotivemark stahlman, new media associates incorporatedross stapletongray, d.c. charter, internet societyrobert steele, boeing information servicesrupert stow, rupert stow associatesedmond thomas, nynex science and technology incorporatedjack thompson, gnostech incorporatedsuzanne p. tichenor, council on competitivenessfrank tong, ibm t.j. watson research centerjohn c. toole, national coordinating office for high performancecomputing and communicationswilliam turnbull, national coordinating office for high performancecomputing and communications/national oceanographic and atmosphericadministrationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationhal varian, university of california at berkeleyshukri wakid, national institute of standards and technologystuart wecker, symmetrix incorporatedstephen b. weinstein, nec usa incorporatedallan h. weis, advanced network and services incorporatedthomas e. wheeler, cellular telecommunications industry associationwalter wiebe, federal networking councilsteven s. wildman, northwestern universityroxanne williams, department of agriculturemichael winter, department of transportationhank wolf, ieeeusa committee on communications and informationpolicystephen s. wolff, cisco systems incorporatedronald zellner, texas a&m universitystephen zilles, adobe systems incorporatedforum participants and agenda261about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.forum agendamonday, may 22, 19956:00 p.m.reception7:00 p.m.dinner speech: mark stahlman, new media associatestuesday, may 23, 19958:30 a.m.welcoming remarks: suzanne woolsey, national research counciloverview: lewis m. branscomb, forum chairkeynote address: arati prabhakar, director, national institute ofstandards and technology9:00 a.m.nii 2000: is the future now?moderator: robert w. lucky, bell communicationsresearchparticipants: edward d. horowitz, viacom incorporated; peter w.huber , manhattan institute for policy research; david g.messerschmitt, university of california at berkeley; quincy rodgers,general instrument corporation10:40 a.m.reaching the end usermoderator: leslie l. vadasz, intel corporationparticipants: paul e. green, jr., ibm t.j. watson research center;irene greif, lotus development corporation; leonard kleinrock,university of california at los angeles; j. graham mobley, scientificatlanta incorporated; michael north, north communications; halvarian, university of california at berkeley1:00 p.m.technology deployment: investment and experimentationwireline communicationsmoderator: james a. chiddix, time warner cableparticipants: wendell b. bailey, national cable televisionassociation; tim clifford, dyncorp (formerly with sprintcorporation); joel engel , ameritech; richard r. green, cabletelevision laboratories incorporated; mahal mohan, at&tcorporationforum participants and agenda262about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stewart d. personick, bell communications research; robert s.powers , mci telecommunications corporation; john c. redmond, gte laboratories; gail garfield schwartz, teleport communicationsgroup; edmond thomas , nynex science and technology incorporated2:45 p.m.wireless communicationsmoderator: joseph a. flaherty, cbs incorporatedparticipants: d. joseph donahue, thomson consumer electronicsincorporated; mary madigan, personal communications industryassociation; john major, motorola incorporated; james c. mckinney,advanced television systems committee; robert roche, cellulartelecommunications industry association4:00 p.m.emerging architecturemoderator: david d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologyparticipants: jonathan band, morrison and foerster; robert t. blau ,bellsouth corporation; kevin kahn, intel corporation; andrewlippman , massachusetts institute of technology; padmanabhansrinagesh, bell communications researchwednesday, may 24, 19958:30 a.m.recap of tuesday session: lewis m. branscomb, forum chairperspectives from the tpwg: duane a. adams, technology policyworking group9:00 a.m.doing business on the niitechnical requirements (applicationrelated standards and beyond)moderator: donald w. simborg, knowmed systemsforum participants and agenda263about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.participants: w. ed hammond, duke university medical center; jamesh. keller, harvard university; lois clark mccoy, national institute forurban search and rescue; linda g. roberts, department of education;thomas c. rochow, mcdonnell douglas corporationbusiness and protection issuesmoderator: cynthia h. braddon, the mcgrawhill companiesparticipants: robert w. crandall, brookings institution; michael d.greenbaum, bell atlantic corporation; allan m. schiffman, terisasystems/commercenet; donald w. simborg, knowmed systems;steven s. wildman, northwestern university1:00 p.m.the internet: a modelmoderator: richard t. liebhaber, mci communications corporationparticipants: ross s. glatzer, prodigy services company (retired);daniel c. lynch, interop company and cybercash incorporated; milomedin, @home; allan h. weis, advanced network and servicesincorporated; stephen s. wolff, cisco systems incorporated2:30 p.m.forks in the road: private sector uncertainties/public policy realitiesmoderator: irene greif, lotus development corporationquestions from the audience: q & a finalewhere are the inconsistencies?where is the best business case?is all the technology here yet?what more would you like to hear?4:30 p.m.adjournment with request for additional white papers and commentsforum participants and agenda264about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ccall for white papers (abridged)the nii 2000 steering committeeša group of highlevel executives anddistinguished academiciansšseeks white papers from academia, businesses,foundations, industry, interest groups, trade associations, and other interestedparties on topics relevant to nii technology deployment. the steeringcommittee is charged by the technology policy working group (tpwg) of thefederal information infrastructure task force with a yearlong course ofactivities to develop a baseline understanding regarding what technologies areto be deployed when, where, and by whom. the project is being coordinated bythe computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) and is drawingupon inputs from multiple industries, sectors, organizations, and individualexperts. a list of nii 2000 steering committee members is attached.all white papers will be made available to federal nii decision makers andbe considered for discussion at a spring forum in washington, d.c., may 23œ24, 1995. white paper authors will have the opportunity to revise their papersafter the spring forum. all papersšregardless of whether they are selected fordiscussion at the spring forumšwill be presented to the government and willcontribute to the steering committee's final nii 2000 report to the tpwg andthe public.responding to the callin keeping with its charge, the nii 2000 steering committee seeksproperly documented discussions with quantitative evidence/analysis oncall for white papers (abridged)265about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical, financial, and economic aspects of technology deployment issues andprospects for the next 5 to 7 years. issues of particular interest to the steeringcommittee include the following:1. architecture and facilities bandwidth capacity available to and from government (alllevels), corporations (domestic and international), smallbusinesses, and residences; also mobile users of portableplatforms interoperability and openness: dimensions, barriers, andfacilitators interactivity and symmetry (i.e., relative support for twowaycommunication) internetworking and interconnection regarding different kindsof networks and services public networks, private networks, virtual private networks2. enabling technologies (e.g., enduser devices, interfaces, andprotocols)3. recovery of carrier costs (facilities and/or services) in an opennetwork environment4. middleware technologies/capabilities: (e.g., mechanisms such asdigital signatures, encryption or search agents that protectintellectual property, privacy, security; directory services)5. applications expected capabilities for digital libraries, distributedcollaboration, software agents, ''smart cards," telecommuting,video delivery (ondemand and nearondemand), multimediaservices expected attributes and implementation of electronic kiosks/public access facilities technology deployment issues affecting a particular domain(e.g., education, finance, manufacturing, transportation), whichmay have implications for other domains (e.g., establishingstandards in health care) critical hardware and/or software interface features,requirements, and standards6. equitable access and public service obligations (relative costs andimplementation rates)call for white papers (abridged)266about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7. research and development (i.e., critical areas for future projects indevice, software, and systems research; also private sector trendsand priority areas for governmentfunded research)format requirements summary papers should begin with a brief statement of a problem andconcentrate on analysis and forecast (5 to 7year horizon) ofdeployment issues and key factors, including sources of uncertainty,contingencies, barriers, and facilitators. conclusions should conciselystate the business case for a given deployment effort and anyimplications for public policy. submissions should be doublespaced and should not exceed 6,250words (approx. 25 pages). all papers must be signed by a principal and accompanied by a signednrc copyright release agreement. statistics must be referenced; cites should be formatted as endnotes.computer science and telecommunications boardestablished by the national academy of sciences in 1916, the nationalresearch council (nrc) is the federal government's principal advisor onscience and technology issues. the nrc conducts its work primarily byconvening experts (serving pro bono) on a given issue. within the nrc, thecstb oversees technology and policy projects related to informationinfrastructure and similar topics.white paper criteria and formatcriteriato the degree relevant, each paper should: distinctly frame a problem/issue related to nii technology deployment; make a projection regarding that problem/issue over the next 5 to 7years; provide a comprehensive baseline and status report of keydevelopments related to that problem or issue; assess the interaction between technical and nontechnical (legal/regulatory, economic, social) factors; identify contingencies and uncertainties related to investment anddeployment of new technologies; identify key applications, enabling technologies, and capabilities;call for white papers (abridged)267about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. identify classes of users to be served, noting (a) which users may beserved most easily or quickly, (b) which users are more difficult toserve (and why), and (c) market rampup expectations and determinants; when using terms such as "interactive," "open," ''scalable," provide ashort definition or context for understanding how those terms are beingused; and identify possible public, private, or public/private sector responses.formata. statement of the problemeach paper should provide a 1 to 2 paragraph statement of the particulartechnology deployment issue.b. background (approximately 4 to 5 pages)this section should provide a baseline understanding of the technology,service, industry, domain, or issue in question, and define terms. a picture ofthe current "stateofplay" should emerge from the section.c. analysis and forecast (approximately 12 to 15 pages)this third section is the heart of the paper and as such, should look at someof the broad factors (economic, legal/regulatory, social, technical) influencingdeployment decisions. in particular, authors should (to the extent relevant) (a)identify contingencies and uncertainties affecting investment decisions, (b)discuss factors used by the industry/domain in making the business case for anew technology, and (c) make projections regarding the next 5 to 7 years. thissection should also include a discussion of barriers to resolving any outstandingproblems/issues.d. recommendations (approximately 3 to 4 pages)in this final section, authors should state whether and how the problem(s)identified can best be addressed by the private sector, the public sector, or by acooperative effort between the two.e. additional resources (optional)a listing of relevant documents, analyses, forecasts is welcome. authorsmay attach these source materials as appendices.call for white papers (abridged)268about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dwhite papers receivedmark r. abbott (oregon state university), "the national informationinfrastructure and the earth sciences: possibilities and challenges"robert j. aiken and john s. cavallini (u.s. department of energy),"government services information infrastructure management"allan j. arlow (telecommunications consultant, annapolis, md.), "cutting thegordian knot: providing the american public with advanced universalaccess in a fully competitive marketplace at the lowest possible cost"wendell bailey (national cable television association) and james chiddix(time warner cable), "the role of cable television in the nii"jonathan band (morrison and foerster, washington, d.c.), "competingdefinitions of 'openness' on the gii"richard c. barth (motorola incorporated), "communications for people on themove: a look into the future"robert t. blau (bellsouth corporation), "building the nii: will theshareholders come (and if they don't, will anyone really care?)"gregory bothun (university of oregon), jim elias (u s westcommunications), randolph g. foldvik (u s west communications), andoliver mcbryan (university of colorado), "the electronic universe: networkdelivery of data, science, and discovery"jill boyce, john henderson, and larry pearlstein (hitachi america ltd.), "ansdtv decoder with hdtv capability: an allformat atv decoder"white papers received269about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lewis m. branscomb and jim keller (harvard university), "nii andintelligent transportation systems"hanswerner braun and kimberly claffy (san diego supercomputer center),"postnsfnet statistics collection"charles n. brownstein (crossindustry working team), "nii roadmap:residential broadband"vito brugliera (zenith electronics), james a. chiddix (time warner cable),d. joseph donahue (thomson consumer electronics), joseph a. flaherty(cbs inc.), richard r. green (cable television laboratories), james c.mckinney (atsc), richard e. ottinger (pbs), and rupert stow (rupert stowassociates), "the nii in the home: a consumer service"donald p. brutzman, michael r. macedonia, and michael j. zyda (navalpostgraduate school), "internetwork infrastructure requirements for virtualenvironments"john s. cavallini and mary anne scott (u.s. department of energy) androbert j. aiken (u.s. department of energy/lawrence livermore nationallaboratory), "electric utilities and the niišissues and opportunities"david d. clark (massachusetts institute of technology), "interoperation, openinterfaces, and protocol architecture"tim clifford (dyncorp), "service provider interoperability and the nationalinformation infrastsructure"robert w. crandall (brookings institution), "funding the national informationinfrastructure: advertising, subscription, and usage charges"d. joseph donahue (thomson consumer electronics), "nii in the home"h. allen ecker and j. graham mobley (scientificatlanta inc.), "theevolution of the analog settop terminal to a digital interactive homecommunications terminal"dennis w. elliott and norman abramson (aloha networks inc.), "spreadaloha wireless multiple access: the lowcost way for ubiquitous,tetherless access to the information infrastructure"joel s. engel (ameritech), "plans for ubiquitous broadband access to thenational information infrastructure in the ameritech region"maria farnon (tufts university), "how do traditional legal, commercial,social, and political structures, when confronted with a new service, reactand interact?"charles h. ferguson (vermeer technologies inc.), "the internet, the worldwide web, and open information services: how to build the globalinformation infrastructure"francis dummer fisher (university of texas at austin), "organizing the issues"white papers received270about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.richard friedman and sean thomas (university of wisconsin), "theargument for universal access to the health care information infrastructure:the particular needs of rural areas, the poor, and the underserved"david a. garbin (mitre corporation), "toward a national data network:architectural issues and the role of government"oscar garcia (submitted for the ieee computer society), "statement onnational information infrastructure issues"joseph gitlin (johns hopkins university), "proposal for an evaluation ofhealth care applications on the nii"ross glatzer (prodigy services, retired), "the internet: a model: thoughts onthe fiveyear outlook"jiong gong and padmanabhan srinagesh (bell communications research),"the economics of layered networks"marjorie green (first washington associates), "as we may work: anapproach toward collaboration on the nii"paul e. green, jr. (ibm t.j. watson research center), "making fiber opticbandwidth available to end users"richard r. green (cable television laboratories inc.), "cable televisiontechnology deployment"michael d. greenbaum (bell atlantic) and david ticoll (alliance foremerging technologies), "privacy, access and equity, democracy, andnetworked interactive media"w. ed hammond (duke university medical center), "the use of the socialsecurity number as the basis for the national citizen identifier"peter w. huber (manhattan institute), boban mathew (yale university), andjohn thorne (bell atlantic), "estimating the costs of telecommunicationsregulation"kevin c. kahn (intel corporation), "residential pc access: issues withbandwidth availability"randy h. katz (university of california at berkeley), william l. scherlis(carnegie mellon university), and stephen l. squires (advanced researchprojects agency), "the national information infrastructure: a highperformance computing and communications perspective"leonard kleinrock (university of california at los angeles), "nomadiccomputing and communications"mary madigan (personal communications industry association), "nii 2000:the wireless perspective"robert m. mason, chester bowling, and robert j. niemi (case westernreserve university), "small manufacturing enterprises and the nationalinformation infrastructure"white papers received271about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lois clark mccoy and douglas gillies (national institute for urban searchand rescue) and john harrald (niusr and george washington university),"architecture for an emergency lane on the nii: crisis informationmanagement"john c. mcdonald (mbx inc.), "aspects of integrity in the nii"david g. messerschmitt (university of california at berkeley), "what the niicould be: a user perspective"avram miller and ogden perry (intel corporation), "role of the pc inemerging information infrastructures"mahal mohan (at&t corporation), "nii evolutionštechnologydeployment plans, challenges, and opportunities: at&t perspective"reagan w. moore (san diego supercomputer center), "enabling petabytecomputing"organization for the protection and advancement of small telephonecompanies (opastco), "private investment and federal nationalinformation infrastructure (nii) policy"tom perrine (san diego supercomputing center), "thoughts on security andthe nii"stewart d. personick (bell communications research), "trends indeployments of new telecommunications services by local exchangecarriers in support of an advanced national information infrastructure"robert s. powers (mci telecommunications inc.), tim clifford (dyncorp),and james m. smith (competitive telecommunications association), "thefuture nii/giišviews of interexchange carriers"j.c. redmond, c.d. decker, and w.g. griffin (gte laboratories inc.),"technology in the local network"robert f. roche (cellular telecommunications industry association),"recognizing what the nii is, what it needs, and how to get it"thomas c. rochow, george e. scarborough, and frank david utterback(mcdonnell douglas corporation), "electronic integrated productdevelopment as enabled by a global information environment: arequirement for success in the twentyfirst century"quincy rodgers (general instrument corporation), "interoperability,standards, and security: will the nii be based on market principles?"russell i. rothstein and lee mcknight (massachusetts institute oftechnology), "technology and cost models of connecting k12 schools tothe national information infrastructure"david schell, lance mckee, and kurt buehler (open gis consortium),"geodata interoperabilityša key nii requirement"daniel schutzer (citibank), "electronic commerce"white papers received272about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gail garfield schwartz and paul e. cain (teleport communications group),"prospects and prerequisites for local telecommunications competition:public policy issues for the nii"john w. thompson, jr. (gnostech incorporated), "the awakening 3.0:pcs, tsbs, or dtmftv: which telecomputer architecture is right for thenext generations' public network?"gio wiederhold (stanford university), "effective information transfer forhealth care: quality versus quantity"ronald d. zellner, jon denton, and luana zellner (texas a&m university),"integrating technology with practice: a technologyenhanced fieldbasedteacher preparation program"ziebarth, john p. (national center for supercomputing applications), w. neilthompson (u.s. nuclear regulatory commission), j.d. nyhart(massachussetts institute of technology), kenneth kaplan (massachusettsinstitute of technology), bill ribarsky (georgia institute of technology), giowiederhold (stanford university), michael r. genesereth (stanforduniversity), kenneth gilpatric (consultant to national performance reviewnetresults.regnet; formerly with administrative conference of the unitedstates), tim e. roxey (national performance review regnet.industry,baltimore gas and electric, and council for excellence in government),william j. olmstead (u.s. nuclear regulatory commission), ben slone(finite matters ltd.), jim acklin (regulatory information alliance),"regnet: an npr regulatory reform initiative towards nii/giicollaboratories"stephen n. zilles and richard cohn (adobe systems incorporated),"electronic document interchange and distribution based on the portabledocument format, an open interchange format"white papers received273about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enii 2000 liaisonsandrew blau, benton foundationmichael borrus, berkeley roundtable on the international economyfiona branton, computer systems policy projectcharles n. brownstein, corporation for national research initiatives/crossindustry working teamdaniel f. burton, council on competitivenessty carter, american bankers associationed fouhy, pew center for civic journalismpaul hart, united states telephone associationted heydinger, information technology industry councillincoln hoewing, bell atlanticsuzanna hoppszallern, american hospital associationlaurie itkin, national conference of state legislaturesmary gardiner jones, alliance for public technologyjeffrey joseph, u.s. chamber of commercerobert kahn, corporation for national research initiativeslinda laskowski, u s west communicationsdoug miller, software publishers associationjennifer miller, international communications industry associationwilliam morin, national association of manufacturerspaul evan peters, coalition for networked informationdavid peyton, information technology association of americacarol risher, association of american publishersnii 2000 liaisons274about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.michael m. roberts, educomdeborah rudolph, institute for electrical and electronics engineersellen schned, viacom internationalrobert smith, jr., interactive services associationroger smith, american electronics associationcasmir skrzypczak, nynex corporationsuzanne p. tichenor, council on competitivenessfrederick weingarten, the computer research associationeric wolferman, newspaper association of americamark zalewski, x.9 financial servicesnii 2000 liaisons275about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fletter from vice president albert goremarch 6, 1995dear dr. branscomb:on behalf of the administration, i want to thank you for the work that youand your colleagues are doing in connection with the national researchcouncil's "nii 2000" committee.there is one issue that the administration is particularly interested in that ihope the committee can shed some light on. although the administration's niipolicy is technology neutral, we would like to see an nii that allows individualsto be producers as well as consumers of information, that enables "many tomany" communication, and that provides a "general purpose" infrastructurecapable of supporting a wide range of services.the nrc's previous report on the nii, realizing the information future ,concluded that some u.s. companies may invest in an infrastructure that iscapable of providing oneway video delivery but not a broader range ofservices. for this reason, it would be very helpful to have an objectiveassessment of the capabilities of different residential broadband architectures(e.g., hybrid fibercoax, fibertothecurb, wireless alternatives) being deployedby the private sector. the nrc could select a representative sample ofapplications and services (videoconferencing, highspeed access to the internetor other online services, telecommuting, distance learning, grassrootselectronic publishing) and determine whether theletter from vice president albert gore march 6, 1995276about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.broadband architectures under consideration will be capable of supporting theseapplications.clearly, market considerations will drive the technology and architecturaldecisions of u.s. telecommunications providers. futhermore, a network thatmay originally support a limited range of services can be incrementallyupgraded in response to consumer demand. the administration has absolutelyno interest in mandating a particular technology. this would be completelycontrary to the administration's nii philosophy.however, we are interested in working cooperatively with industry andacademia to promote a shared vision of a versatile, general purposeinfrastructure with a "jeffersonian" architecture. we would welcome anyconcrete suggestions the committee may have for advancing these goals.thank you again for your work on this important nrc committee.sincerely,(signed)al goreletter from vice president albert gore march 6, 1995277about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gacronyms and abbreviations usedacsaccess control and securityadslasymmetric digital subscriber lineardisadvanced radio data information servicearpaadvanced research projects agencyatisalliance for telecommunications industry solutionsatmasynchronous transfer modeatvadvanced televisionbdslbroadband digital subscriber linebtabasic trading areacatcommittee on applications and technologycdmacodedivision multiple accesscdpdcellular digital packet dataciccommittee on information and communicationscnricorporation for national research initiativescoccouncil on competitivenesscompleccompetitive local exchange carriercpucentral processing unitcsppcomputer systems policy projectcstbcomputer science and telecommunications boardctiacellular telecommunications industry association278about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.acronyms and abbreviations usedthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dbsdirect broadcast satellitedetdigital entertainment terminaldoddepartment of defensedoedepartment of energydosdisk operating systemedielectronic data interchangeeiaelectronic industries associationfccfederal communications commissionfttcfiber to the curbgbpsgigabits per secondgiiglobal information infrastructuregilsgovernment information locator servicegsmglobal system for mobile communicationsgssigovernment services information infrastructureguigraphical user interfacehcthome communications terminalhdslhighbitrate digital subscriber linehdtvhighdefinition televisionhfchybrid fiber coaxial cablehpccihigh performance computing and communications initiativehtmlhypertext markup languageicintegrated circuitieeeinstitute for electrical and electronics engineersietfinternet engineering task forceiispinformation infrastructure standards paneliitfinformation infrastructure task forceimainteractive multimedia associationipinternet protocolisinformation systemsisdnintegrated services digital networkispinternet service provideritsintelligent transportation systemituinternational telecommunications unionixcinterexchange carrierkbpskilobits per second279about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.acronyms and abbreviations usedthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lanlocal area networklatalocal access and transport arealeclocal exchange carrierleolow earth orbitlmdslocal multipoint distribution servicemanmetropolitan area networkmbpsmegabits per secondmismanagement information systemsmmdsmultichannel multipoint distribution servicempegmotion picture experts groupmsomultiple system operatormtamajor trading areanapnetwork access pointnasanational aeronautics and space administrationnatanorth american telecommunications associationnctanational cable television associationniinational information infrastructurenimnetwork interface modulenistnational institute of standards and technologynsfnational science foundationntianational telecommunications and information administrationntscnational television system committeeodnopen data networkotaoffice of technology assessment (u.s. congress; closed1995)palphase alternation by linepcpersonal computerpciapersonal communications industry associationpcspersonal communication servicepdapersonal digital assistantpoppoint of presencepots''plain old" telephone serviceqamquadrature amplitude modulationqosquality of servicer&dresearch and developmentrbhcregional bell holding company280about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.acronyms and abbreviations usedthe unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rbocregional bell operating companyrtifrealizing the information future (cstb, 1994b)sdtvstandard definition televisionsecamsequential couleur avec memoiresmdsswitched multimegabit data servicesmesmall manufacturing enterprisesonetsynchronous optical networksqlstructured query languagestbsettop boxsttsettop terminaltcptransmission control protocoltdmatimedivision multiple accesstpwgtechnology policy working grouptvtelevisionurluniversal resource locatorvanvalueadded networkvbivertical blanking intervalvpnvirtual private networkvsatvery small aperture terminalvsbvestigial side bandwanwide area networkwinfwinforum; wireless information networks forumwww, webworld wide web281about this pdf file: this new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from xml files created from the original paper book, not from theoriginal typesetting files. page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesettingspecific formatting, however, cannot beretained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.acronyms and abbreviations used