detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5131cryptography's role in securing the information society720 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309054751 | doi 10.17226/5131kenneth w. dam and herbert s. lin, editors, committee to study nationalcryptography policy, national research councilcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kenneth w. dam and herbert s. lin, editorscommittee to study national cryptography policycomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.1996ryptographyõsolenecuringthenformationocietycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwwashington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of thenational academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute ofmedicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for theirspecial competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a report review committee consisting of members of the nationalacademy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the department of defense (under contractnumber dasw0194c0178) and the department of commerce (under contract number50sbnb4c8089). any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed inthis material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.library of congress catalog card number 9668943international standard book number 0309054753the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) will be glad to receive comments on this report. please send them via internet email to crypto@nas.edu, or viaregular mail to cstb, national research council, 2101 constitution avenue nw, washington, dc 20418.copyright 1996 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americacryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee to studynational cryptography policykenneth w. dam, university of chicago law school, chairw.y. smith, institute for defense analyses (retired), vice chairlee bollinger, dartmouth collegeann caracristi, national security agency (retired)benjamin r. civiletti, venable, baetjer, howard and civiletticolin crook, citicorpsamuel h. fuller, digital equipment corporationleslie h. gelb, council on foreign relationsronald graham, at&t bell laboratoriesmartin hellman, stanford universityjulius l. katz, hills & companypeter g. neumann, sri internationalraymond ozzie, iris associatesedward c. schmults, general telephone and electronics (retired)elliot m. stone, massachusetts health data consortiumwillis h. ware, rand corporationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, study director and senior staff officerjohn m. godfrey, research associatefrank pittelli, consultant to cstbgail e. pritchard, project assistantcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcomputer science and telecommunications boardwilliam a. wulf, university of virginia, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerdavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technologyjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbarahenry fuchs, university of north carolinacharles geschke, adobe systems incorporatedjames gray, microsoft corporationbarbara grosz, harvard universityjuris hartmanis, cornell universitydeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationbarbara liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, motorolarobert l. martin, at&t network systemsdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleywilliam press, harvard universitycharles l. seitz, myricom incorporatededward shortliffe, stanford university school of medicinecasimir s. skrzypczak, nynex corporationleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerpaul d. semenza, staff officerjerry r. sheehan, staff officerjean e. smith, program associatejohn m. godfrey, research associateleslie m. wade, research assistantgloria p. bemah, administrative assistantgail e. pritchard, project assistantcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, chairpeter m. banks, environmental research institute of michigansylvia t. ceyer, massachusetts institute of technologyl. louis hegedus, elf atochem north america inc.john e. hopcroft, cornell universityrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, u.s. nuclear regulatory commissionkenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatoryken kennedy, rice universitythomas a. prince, california institute of technologyjerome sacks, national institute of statistical sciencesl.e. scriven, university of minnesotaleon t. silver, california institute of technologycharles p. slichter, university of illinois at urbanachampaignalvin w. trivelpiece, oak ridge national laboratoryshmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technologyand to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate thatrequires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technicalmatters. dr. bruce alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, underthe charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration andin the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy ofsciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programsaimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, andrecognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulfis interim president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the nationalacademy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to thehealth of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given tothe national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identifyissues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine ispresident of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science andtechnology with the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge andadvising the federal government. functioning in accordance with generalpolicies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and thenational academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. thecouncil is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairman andinterim vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.vicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceintroductionfor most of history, cryptographyñthe art and science of secret writingñhas belonged to governments concerned about protecting their ownsecrets and about asserting their prerogatives for access to informationrelevant to national security and public safety. in the united states, cryptography policy has reflected the u.s. governmentõs needs for effectivecryptographic protection of classified and other sensitive communications as well as its needs to gather intelligence for national security purposes, needs that would be damaged by the widespread use of cryptography. national security concerns have motivated such actions asdevelopment of cryptographic technologies, development of countermeasures to reverse the effects of encryption, and control of cryptographictechnologies for export.in the last 20 years, a number of developments have brought aboutwhat could be called the popularization of cryptography. first, someindustriesñnotably financial servicesñhave come to rely on encryptionas an enabler of secure electronic funds transfers. second, other industries have developed an interest in encryption for protection of proprietary and other sensitive information. third, the broadening use ofcomputers and computer networks has generalized the demand for technologies to secure communications down to the level of individual citizens and assure the privacy and security of their electronic records andtransmissions. fourth, the sharply increased use of wireless communications (e.g., cellular telephones) has highlighted the greater vulnerabilityviicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiicontentsof such communications to unauthorized intercept as well as the difficulty of detecting these intercepts.as a result, efforts have increased to develop encryption systems forprivate sector use and to integrate encryption with other informationtechnology products. interest has grown in the commercial market forcryptographic technologies and systems incorporating such technologies,and the nation has witnessed a heightened debate over individual needfor and access to technologies to protect individual privacy.still another consequence of the expectation of widespread use ofencryption is the emergence of law enforcement concerns that parallel, ona civilian basis, some of the national security concerns. law enforcementofficials fear that wide dissemination of effective cryptographic technologies will impede their efforts to collect information necessary for pursuing criminal investigations. on the other side, civil libertarians fear thatcontrols on cryptographic technologies will give government authoritiesboth in the united states and abroad unprecedented and unwarrantedcapabilities for intrusion into the private lives of citizens.charge of the committee to studynational cryptography policyat the request of the u.s. congress in november 1993, the nationalresearch councilõs computer science and telecommunications board(cstb) formed the committee to study national cryptography policy.in accordance with its legislative charge (box p.1), the committee undertook the following tasks:¥ framing the problem. what are the technology trends with whichnational cryptography policy must keep pace? what is the political environment? what are the significant changes in the postcold war environment that call attention to the need for, and should have an impact on,cryptography policy?¥ understanding the underlying technology issues and their expected development and impact on policy over time. what is and is not possible withcurrent cryptographic (and related) technologies? how could these capabilities have an impact on various u.s. interests?¥ describing current cryptography policy. to the committeeõs knowledge, there is no single document, classified or unclassified, within theu.s. government that fully describes national cryptography policy.¥ articulating a framework for thinking about cryptography policy. theinterests affected by national cryptography policy are multiple, varied,and related: they include personal liberties and constitutional rights, themaintenance of public order and national security, technology developviiiprefacecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsixprefaceixbox p.1legislative charge to the national research councilpublic law 103160defense authorization bill for fiscal year 1994signed november 30, 1993sec. 267. comprehensive independent study of nationalcryptography policy. (a) study by national research council.ñnot later than 90 days after the dateof the enactment of this act, the secretary of defense shall request the nationalresearch council of the national academy of sciences to conduct a comprehensivestudy of cryptographic technologies and national cryptography policy. (b) matters to be assessed in study.ñthe study shall assessñ (1) the effect of cryptographic technologies onñ (a) national security interests of the united states government; (b) law enforcement interests of the united states government; (c) commercial interests of united states industry; and (d) privacy interests of united states citizens; and (2) the effect on commercial interests of united states industry of export controls on cryptographic technologies. (c) interagency cooperation with study.ñthe secretary of defense shall directthe national security agency, the advanced research projects agency, and otherappropriate agencies of the department of defense to cooperate fully with the national research council in its activities in carrying out the study under this section.the secretary shall request all other appropriate federal departments and agencies toprovide similar cooperation to the national research council.ment, and u.s. economic competitiveness and markets. at a minimum,policy makers (and their critics) must understand how these interestsinterrelate, although they may decide that one particular policy configuration better serves the overall national interest than does another.¥ identifying a range of feasible policy options. the debate over cryptography policy has been hampered by an incomplete analysis and discussion of various policy optionsñboth proponents of current policy and ofalternative policies are forced into debating positions in which it is difficult or impossible to acknowledge that a competing view might havesome merit. this report attempts to discuss fairly the pros and cons of anumber of options.¥ making recommendations regarding cryptography policy. no cryptography policy will be stable for all time. that is, it is unrealistic to imaginecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xcontentsthat this committee or any set of policy makers could craft a policy thatwould not have to evolve over time as the technological and politicalmilieu itself changes. thus, the committeeõs recommendations are framedin the context of a transition, from a world characterized by slowly evolving technology, welldefined enemies, and unquestioned u.s. technological, economic, and geopolitical dominance to one characterized by rapidly evolving technology, fuzzy lines between friend and foe, andincreasing technological, economic, and political interdependencies between the united states and other nations of the world.given the diverse applications of cryptography, national cryptographypolicy involves a very large number of important issues. important tonational cryptography policy as well are issues related to the deploymentof a largescale infrastructure for cryptography and legislation and regulations to support the widespread use of cryptography for authentication anddata integrity purposes (i.e., collateral applications of cryptography), eventhough these issues have not taken center stage in the policy debate.the committee focused its efforts primarily on issues related to cryptography for confidentiality, because the contentious problem that thiscommittee was assembled to address at the center of the public policydebate relates to the use of cryptography in confidentiality applications.it also addressed issues of cryptography policy related to authenticationand data integrity at a relatively high level, casting its findings and recommendations in these areas in fairly general terms. however, it notesthat detailed consideration of issues and policy options in these collateralareas requires additional study at a level of detail and thoroughness comparable to that of this report.in preparing this report, the committee reviewed and synthesizedrelevant material from recent reports, took written and oral testimonyfrom government, industry, and private individuals, reached out extensively to the affected stakeholders to solicit input, and met seven times todiscuss the input from these sources as well as the independent observations and findings of the committee members themselves. in addition,this study built upon three prior efforts to examine national cryptographypolicy: the association for computing machinery report codes, keys, andconflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy,1 the office of technology assessment report information security and privacy in network environments,2 andxpreface1susan landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy, associationfor computing machinery inc., new york, 1994.2office of technology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, otatct606, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., september 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxithe jason encryption study.3 a number of other examinations of cryptography and/or information security policy were also important to thecommitteeõs work.4 (appendix n contains source documents (e.g., statutes, regulations, memorandums of understanding), relevant to the national debate over cryptography policy.)what this report is notthe subject of national cryptography policy is quite complex, as itfigures importantly in many areas of national interest. to keep the projectmanageable within the time, resources, and expertise available, the committee chose not to address in detail a number of issues that arose withsome nontrivial frequency during the course of its study.¥ this report is not a comprehensive study of the grand tradeoffsthat might be made in other dimensions of national policy to compensatefor changes in cryptography policy. for example, this report does notaddress matters such as relaxing exclusionary rules that govern the courtadmissibility of evidence or installing video cameras in every police helmet as part of a package that also eliminates restrictions on cryptography,though such packages are in principle possible. similarly, it does notaddress options such as increasing the budget for counterterrorist operations as a quid pro quo for relaxations on export controls of cryptography.the report does provide information that would help to assess the impactof various approaches to cryptography policy, although how that impactshould be weighed against the impact of policies related to other areas isoutside the scope of this study and the expertise of the committee assembled for it.¥ this report is not a study on the future of the national securityagency (nsa) in the postcold war era. a determination of what misprefacexi3jason program office, jason encryption/privacy study, report jsr93520 (unpublished), mitre corporation, mclean, va., august 18, 1993.4these works include global information infrastructure, a joint report by the europeanassociation of manufacturers of business machines and information technology industry,the u.s. information technology industry council, and the japan electronic industry development association (eurobititijeida), developed for the g7 summit on the globalinformation society, gii tripartite preparatory meeting, january 2627, 1995, brussels; theu.s. council for international business statement titled òbusiness requirements for encryption,ó october 10, 1994, new york; and the international chamber of commerce position paper òinternational encryption policy,ó document no. 373/202 rev. and no. 37330/9 rev., paris, undated. important source documents can be found in lance j. hoffman(ed.), building in big brother: the cryptographic policy debate, springerverlag, new york,1995, and in the cryptography policy source books published annually by the electronicprivacy information center in washington, d.c.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentssions the nsa should be pursuing and/or how it should pursue thosemissions was not in the committeeõs charge. the report does touch lightlyon technological trends that affect the ability to undertake the missions towhich cryptography is relevant, but only to the extent necessary to framethe cryptography issue.at the same time, this report does address certain conditions of thepolitical, social, and technological environment that will affect the answers that anyone would formulate to these questions, such as the potential impact on policy of a world that offers many users the possibilities ofsecure communications.¥ this report is not a study of computer and communications security, although of course cryptography is a key element of such security.even the strongest cryptography is not very useful unless it is part of asecure system, and those responsible for security must be concerned abouteverything from the trustworthiness of individuals writing the computerprograms to be used to the physical security of terminals used to accessthe system. a report that addressed system dimensions of computersecurity was the national research council report computers at risk;5 thiscurrent study draws on that report and others to the extent relevant for itsanalysis, findings, and conclusions about cryptography policy.¥ this report is not a study of the many patent disputes that havearisen with respect to national cryptography policy in the past severalyears. while such disputes may well be a sign that the various holdersexpect cryptography to assume substantial commercial importance in thenext several years, such disputes are in principle resolvable by the u.s.congress, which could simply legislate ownership by eminent domain orby requiring compulsory licensing. moreover, since many of the keypatents will expire in any case in the relatively near future (i.e., before anyinfrastructure that uses them becomes widely deployed), the issue willbecome moot in any case.¥ this report is not exclusively a study of national policy associatedwith the clipper chip. while the clipper chip has received the lionõsshare of press and notoriety in the past few years, the issues that thisstudy was chartered to address go far beyond those associated simplywith the clipper chip. this study addresses the larger context and pictureof which the clipper chip is only one part.5computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1991.xiiprefacecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiiion secrecy and report time linefor most of history, the science and technologies associated with cryptography have been the purview of national governments and/or headsof state. it is only in the last 25 years that cryptographic expertise hasbegun to diffuse into the nongovernment world. thus, it is not surprisingthat much of the basis and rationale underlying national cryptographypolicy has been and continues to be highly classified. indeed, in a 1982article, thendeputy director of the central intelligence agency bobby r.inman wrote that[o]ne sometimes hears the view that publication should not be restrainedbecause òthe government has not made its case,ó almost always referring to the absence of specific detail for public consumption. this reasoning is circular and unreasonable. it stems from a basic attitude thatthe government and its public servants cannot be trusted. specific details about why information must be protected are more often than noteven more sensitive than the basic technical information itself. publishing examples, reasons and associated details would certainly damagethe nationõs interests. public review and discussion of classified information which supports decisions is not feasible or workable.6secrecy is a twoedged sword for a democratic nation. on the onehand, secrecy has a legitimate basis in those situations in which fundamental national interests are at stake (e.g., the preservation of americanlives during wartime). moreover, the history of intelligence reveals manyinstances in which the revelation of a secret, whether intentional or inadvertent, has led to the compromise of an information source or the loss ofa key battle.7on the other hand, secrecy has sometimes been used to stifle publicdebate and conceal poorly conceived and illinformed national policies,and mistrust is therefore quite common among many responsible critics6bobby inman, òclassifying science: a government proposal . . . ,ó aviation week andspace technology, february 8, 1982, p. 10.7for example, following press reports of deciphered libyan messages before and after abombing in west berlin in which an american soldier died, libya changed its communications codes. a senior american official was quoted as saying that the subsequent libyanpurchase of advanced cryptographic equipment from a swiss firm was òone of the prices[the united states is] paying for having revealed, in order to marshal support of our alliesand public opinion, that intercepted communications traffic provided evidence that libyawas behind the bombing of the berlin disco.ó see òlibyans buy messagecoding equipment,ó washington post, april 22, 1986, p. a8.prefacexiiicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentsof government policy. a common refrain by defenders of policies whoseorigins and rationales are secret is that òif you knew what we knew, youwould agree with us.ó such a position may be true or false, but it clearlydoes not provide much reassurance for those not privy to those secrets forone very simple reason: those who fear that government is hiding poorlyconceived policies behind a wall of secrecy are not likely to trust thegovernment, yet in the absence of the substantive argument being calledfor, the governmentõs claim is essentially a plea for trust.in pursuing this study, the committee has adopted the position thatsome secrets are still legitimate in todayõs global environment, but that itsrole is to illuminate as much as possible without compromising thoselegitimate interests. thus, the committee has tried to act as a surrogate forwellintentioned and wellmeaning people who fear that the worst is hiding behind the wall of secrecyñit has tried to ask the questions that thesepeople would have asked if they could have done so. public law 103160called for all defense agencies, including the national security agency, tocooperate fully with the national research council in this study.for obvious reasons, the committee cannot determine if it did nothear a particular piece of information because an agency withheld thatinformation or because that piece of information simply did not exist. butfor a number of reasons, the committee believes that to the best of itsknowledge, the relevant agencies have complied with public law 103160and other agencies have cooperated with the committee. one importantreason is that several members of the committee have had extensive experience (on a classified basis) with the relevant agencies, and these members heard nothing in the briefings held for the committee that was inconsistent with that experience. a second reason is that these agencies hadevery motivation and selfinterest to make the best possible case for theirrespective positions on the issues before the committee. thus, on thebasis of agency assurances that the committee has indeed received allinformation relevant to the issue at hand, they cannot plausibly argue thatòif the committee knew what agency x knew, it would agree with agencyxõs position.óthis unclassified report does not have a classified annex, nor is therea classified version of it. after receiving a number of classified briefingson material relevant to the subject of this study, the fully cleared membersof the committee (13 out of the total of 16) agree that these details, whilenecessarily important to policy makers who need to decide tomorrowwhat to do in a specific case, are not particularly relevant to the largerissues of why policy has the shape and texture that it does today nor tothe general outline of how technology will and policy should evolve inthe future. for example, the committee was briefed on certain intelligence activities of various nations. policy makers care that the activitiesof nation x (a friendly nation) fall into certain categories and that those ofxivprefacecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvnation y (an unfriendly nation) fall into other categories, because theymust craft a policy toward nation x in one way and one toward nation yin another way. but for analytical purposes, the exact names of the nations involved are much less relevant than the fact that there will alwaysbe nations friendly and unfriendly to the united states. committee members are prepared to respond on a classified basis if necessary to critiquesand questions that involve classified material.8as for the time line of this study, the committee was acutely aware ofthe speed with which the market and product technologies evolve. thelegislation called for a study to be delivered within 2 years after the fullprocessing of all necessary security clearances, and the study committeeaccelerated its work schedule to deliver a report in 18 months from itsfirst meeting (and only 13 months from the final granting of the lastclearance). the delivery date of this study was affected by the fact thatthe contract to fund this study was signed by the department of defenseon september 30, 1994.a note from the chairthe title of this report is cryptographyõs role in securing the informationsociety. the committee chose this title as one best describing our inquiryand reportñthat is, the committee has tried to focus on the role thatcryptography, as one of a number of tools and technologies, can play inproviding security for an information age society through, among othermeans, preventing computerenabled crimes and enhancing national security. at the same time, the committee is not unaware of the acronym forthis reportñcrisisñand it believes that the acronym is apt.from my own standpoint as chair of the nrc committee to studynational cryptography policy, i believe that the crisis is a policy crisis,rather than a technology crisis, an industry crisis, a law enforcement crisis, or an intelligencegathering crisis.it is not a technology crisis because technologies have always beentwoedged swords. all technologiesñcryptography includedñcan beused for good or for ill. they can be used to serve society or to harm it,and cryptography will no doubt be used for both purposes by differentgroups. public policy will determine in large measure not just the netbalance of benefit and loss but also how much benefit will be derivedfrom constructive uses of this remarkable technology.prefacexv8the point of contact within the national research council for such inquiries is the computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., washington, dc 20418 (telephone 2023342605 or emailcstb@nas.edu).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontentsit is not an industry crisis, nor a law enforcement crisis, nor an intelligencegathering crisis, because industry, law enforcement, and the intelligence establishment have all had to cope with rapid technological change,and for the most part the vitality of these enterprises within the nation isa testament to their successes in so coping.but a policy crisis is upon the nation. in the face of an inevitablygrowing use of cryptography, our society, acting as it must through ourgovernment as informed by the manifold forums of our democratic processes, has been unable to develop a consensus behind a coherent national cryptography policy, either within government or with the privatestakeholders throughout societyñthe software industry, those concernedwith computer security, the civil liberties community, and so on. indeed,the committee could not even find a clear written statement of nationalcryptography policy that went beyond some very general statements.to be sure, a number of government proposals have seen the light ofday. the best known of these proposals, the clipper initiative, was anhonest attempt to address some of the issues underlying national cryptography policy, but one of its primary effects was to polarize rather thanbring together the various stakeholders, both public and private. on theother hand, it did raise public awareness of the issue. in retrospect, manyadministration officials have wished that the discourse on national cryptography policy could have unfolded differently, but in fairness we recognize that the governmentõs task is not easy in view of the deep cleavages of interest reviewed in this report. in this context, we therefore sawit as our task, commanded by our statutory charge, to analyze the underlying reasons for this policy crisis and the interests at stake, and then topropose an intelligent, workable, and acceptable policy.the committee to study national cryptography policy is a group of16 individuals with very diverse backgrounds, a broad range of expertise,and differing perspectives on the subject. the committee included individuals with extensive government service and also individuals with considerable skepticism about and suspicion of government; persons withgreat technical expertise in computers, communications, and cryptography; and persons with considerable experience in law enforcement, intelligence, civil liberties, national security, diplomacy, international trade,and other fields relevant to the formation of policy in this area. committee members were drawn from industry, including telecommunicationsand computer hardware and software, and from users of cryptography inthe forprofit and notforprofit sectors; serving as well were academicsand thinktank experts.9 the committee was by design highly heterogexvipreface9note that the committee was quite aware of potential financial conflicts of interest amongseveral of its members. in accordance with established national research council procecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxviineous, a characteristic intended to promote discussion and synergy amongits members.at first, we wondered whether these different perspectives wouldallow us to talk among ourselves at all, let alone come to agreement. butthe committee worked hard. the full committee met for a total of 23 daysin which we received briefings and argued various points; ad hoc subcommittees attended a dozen or so additional meetings to receive evenmore briefings; members of the committee and staff held a number ofopen sessions in which testimony from the interested public was soughtand received (including a very well attended session at the fifth annualconference on computers, freedom, and privacy in san francisco in early1995 and an open session in washington, d.c., in april 1995); and thecommittee reviewed nearly a hundred email messages sent in responseto its internet call for input. the opportunity to receive not only writtenmaterials but also oral briefings from a number of government agencies,vendors, trade associations, and assorted experts, as well as to participatein the firstever cryptography policy meeting of the organization for economic cooperation and development and of its business industry advisory council, provided the occasion for extended giveandtake discussions with government officials and private stakeholders.out of this extended dialogue, we found that coming to a consensusamong ourselvesñwhile difficultñwas not impossible. the nature of aconsensus position is that it is invariably somewhat different from a position developed, framed, and written by any one committee member, particularly before our dialogue and without comments from other committee members. our consensus is a result of the extended learning andinteraction process through which we lived rather than any consciouseffort to compromise or to paper over differences. the committee standsfully behind its analysis, findings, and recommendations.we believe that our report makes some reasonable proposals for national cryptography policy. but a proposal is just thatña proposal foraction. what is needed now is a public debate, using and not sidestepping the full processes of government, leading to a judicious resolution ofpressing cryptography policy issues and including, on some importantpoints, legislative action. only in this manner will the policy crisis cometo a satisfactory and stable resolution.prefacexviidures, these potential financial conflicts of interest were thoroughly discussed by the committee; no one with a direct and substantial financial stake in the outcome of the reportserved on the committee.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiicontentsacknowledgmentsthe full list of individuals (except for those who explicitly requestedanonymity) who provided input to the committee and the study project iscontained in appendix a. however, a number of individuals deservespecial mention. michael nelson, office of science and technology policy,kept us informed about the evolution of administration policy. dorothydenning of georgetown university provided many useful papers concerning the law enforcement perspective on cryptography policy. clintonbrooks and ron lee from the national security agency and ed robackand raymond kammer from the national institute of standards and technology acted as agency liaisons for the committee, arranging briefingsand providing other information. marc rotenberg from the electronicprivacy information center and john gilmore from cygnus support provided continuing input on a number of subjects as well as documentsreleased under freedom of information act requests. rebecca gouldfrom the business software alliance, steve walker from trusted information systems, and ollie smoot from the information technology industrycouncil kept the committee informed from the business perspective. finally, the committee particularly acknowledges the literally hundreds ofsuggestions and criticisms provided by the reviewers of an early draft ofthis report. those inputs helped the committee to sharpen its messageand strengthen its presentation, but of course the content of the report isthe responsibility of the committee.the committee also received a high level of support from the nationalresearch council. working with the special security office of the officeof naval research, kevin hale and kimberly striker of the nrcõs national security office had the complex task of facilitating the promptprocessing of security clearances necessary to complete this study in atimely manner and otherwise managing these security clearances. susanmaurizi worked under tight time constraints to provide editorial assistance. acting as primary staff for the committee were marjoryblumenthal, john godfrey, frank pittelli, gail pritchard, and herb lin.marjory blumenthal directs the computer science and telecommunications board, the program unit within the national research council towhich this congressional tasking was assigned. she sat with the committee during the great majority of its meetings, providing not only essentialinsight into the nrc process but also an indispensable longterm perspective on how this report could build on other cstb work, most notably the 1991 nrc report computers at risk. john godfrey, research associate for cstb, was responsible for developing most of the factual materialin most of the appendixes as well as for tracking down hundreds of looseends; his prior work on a previous nrc report on standards also proxviiiprefacecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxixvided an important point of departure for the committeeõs discussion onstandards as they apply to cryptography policy. frank pittelli is a consultant to cstb, whose prior experience in computer and informationsecurity was invaluable in framing a discussion of technical issues incryptography policy. gail pritchard, project assistant for cstb, handledlogistical matters for the committee with the utmost skill and patience aswell as providing some research support to the committee. finally, herblin, senior staff officer for cstb and study director on this project, arranged briefings, crafted meeting agendas, and turned the thoughts ofcommittee members into drafts and then report text. it is fair to say thatthis study could not have been carried out nor this report written, especially on our accelerated schedule, without his prodigious energy and hisextraordinary talents as study director, committee coordinator, writer,and editor.kenneth w. dam, chaircommittee to study national cryptography policyprefacexixcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary1a road map through this report15part iñframing the policy issues1growing vulnerability in theinformation age191.1the technology context of the information age, 191.2transition to an information societyñincreasinginterconnections and interdependence, 221.3coping with information vulnerability, 271.4the business and economic perspective, 301.4.1protecting important business information, 301.4.2ensuring the nationõs ability to exploitglobal markets, 381.5individual and personal interests in privacy, 401.5.1privacy in an information economy, 411.5.2privacy for citizens, 441.6special needs of government, 461.7recap, 48xxicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxiicontents2cryptography: roles, market, andinfrastructure512.1cryptography in context, 512.2what is cryptography and what can it do?, 522.3how cryptography fits into the big security picture, 572.3.1factors inhibiting access to information, 582.3.2factors facilitating access to information, 602.4the market for cryptography, 652.4.1the demand side of the cryptographymarket, 662.4.2the supply side of the cryptography market, 722.5infrastructure for widespread use of cryptography, 742.5.1key management infrastructure, 742.5.2certificate infrastructures, 752.6recap, 773needs for access to encrypted information793.1terminology, 793.2law enforcement: investigation and prosecution, 813.2.1the value of access to information forlaw enforcement, 813.2.2the legal framework governing surveillance, 843.2.3the nature of the surveillance needs oflaw enforcement, 883.2.4the impact of cryptography and new mediaon law enforcement (stored and communicateddata), 903.3national security and signals intelligence, 943.3.1the value of signals intelligence, 953.3.2the impact of cryptography on signalsintelligence, 1013.4similarities in and differences between foreignpolicy/national security and law enforcementneeds for communications monitoring, 1023.4.1similarities, 1023.4.2differences, 1043.5business and individual needs for exceptional accessto protected information, 1043.6other types of exceptional access to protectedinformation, 1083.7recap, 109cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxxiiipart iiñpolicy instruments4export controls1134.1brief description of current export controls, 1134.1.1the rationale for export controls, 1134.1.2general description, 1144.1.3discussion of current licensing practices, 1224.2effectiveness of export controls on cryptography, 1274.3the impact of export controls on u.s. informationtechnology vendors, 1344.3.1de facto restrictions on the domesticavailability of cryptography, 1344.3.2regulatory uncertainty related to exportcontrols, 1384.3.3the size of the affected market forcryptography, 1454.3.4inhibiting vendor responses to user needs, 1524.4the impact of export controls on u.s. economic andnational security interests, 1534.4.1direct economic harm to u.s. businesses, 1534.4.2damage to u.s. leadership in informationtechnology, 1554.5the mismatch between the perceptions of government/national security and those of vendors, 1574.6export of technical data, 1594.7foreign policy considerations, 1624.8technologypolicy mismatches, 1634.9recap, 1655escrowed encryption and related issues1675.1what is escrowed encryption?, 1675.2administration initiatives supporting escrowedencryption, 1695.2.1the clipper initiative and the escrowedencryption standard, 1705.2.2the capstone/fortezza initiative, 1765.2.3the relaxation of export controls on softwareproducts using òproperly escrowedó 64bitencryption, 1775.2.4other federal initiatives in escrowedencryption, 1795.3other approaches to escrowed encryption, 179cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxivcontents5.4the impact of escrowed encryption on informationsecurity, 1815.5the impact of escrowed encryption on lawenforcement, 1845.5.1balance of crime enabled vs. crimeprosecuted, 1845.5.2impact on law enforcement access toinformation, 1855.6mandatory vs. voluntary use of escrowedencryption, 1875.7process through which policy on escrowed encryptionwas developed, 1885.8affiliation and number of escrow agents, 1895.9responsibilities and obligations of escrow agentsand users of escrowed encryption, 1935.9.1partitioning escrowed information, 1935.9.2operational responsibilities of escrow agents, 1945.9.3liabilities of escrow agents, 1975.10the role of secrecy in ensuring product security, 2015.10.1algorithm secrecy, 2015.10.2product design and implementation secrecy, 2045.11the hardware/software choice in productimplementation, 2085.12responsibility for generation of unit keys, 2115.13issues related to the administration proposal torelax export controls on 64bit escrowed encryptionin software, 2135.13.1the definition of òproper escrowing,ó 2135.13.2the proposed limitation of key lengths to64 bits or less, 2145.14recap, 2156other dimensions of nationalcryptography policy2166.1the communications assistance for lawenforcement act, 2166.1.1brief description of and stated rationale forthe calea, 2176.1.2reducing resource requirements forwiretaps, 2186.1.3obtaining access to digital streams inthe future, 220cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxxv6.1.4the calea exemption of information serviceproviders and distinctions between voice anddata services, 2216.2other levers used in national cryptography policy, 2216.2.1federal information processing standards, 2226.2.2the government procurement process, 2246.2.3implementation of policy: fear, uncertainty,doubt, delay, complexity, 2256.2.4r&d funding, 2276.2.5patents and intellectual property, 2286.2.6formal and informal arrangements with variousother governments and organizations, 2316.2.7certification and evaluation, 2326.2.8nonstatutory influence, 2346.2.9interagency agreements within theexecutive branch, 2356.3organization of the federal government with respectto information security, 2376.3.1role of national security vis‹vis civilianinformation infrastructures, 2376.3.2other government entities with influence oninformation security, 2416.4international dimensions of cryptography policy, 2436.5recap, 244part iiiñpolicy options, findings, andrecommendations7policy options for the future2497.1export control options for cryptography, 2497.1.1dimensions of choice for controlling the exportof cryptography, 2497.1.2complete elimination of export controls oncryptography, 2517.1.3transfer of all cryptography products to thecommerce control list, 2547.1.4enduse certification, 2567.1.5nationbynation relaxation of controls andharmonization of u.s. export control policy oncryptography with export/import policies ofother nations, 2567.1.6liberal export for strong cryptography withweak defaults, 257cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxvicontents7.1.7liberal export for cryptographic applicationsprogramming interfaces, 2597.1.8liberal export for escrowable products withencryption capabilities, 2627.1.9alternatives to government certification of escrowagents abroad, 2637.1.10use of differential work factors incryptography, 2647.1.11separation of cryptography from other itemson the u.s. munitions list, 2647.2alternatives for providing government exceptionalaccess to encrypted data, 2657.2.1a prohibition on the use and sale of cryptographylacking features for exceptional access, 2657.2.2criminalization of the use of cryptography in thecommission of a crime, 2737.2.3technical nonescrow approaches for obtainingaccess to information, 2747.2.4networkbased encryption, 2787.2.5distinguishing between encrypted voiceand data communications services forexceptional access, 2817.2.6a centralized decryption facility for governmentexceptional access, 2847.3looming issues, 2867.3.1the adequacy of various levels of encryptionagainst highquality attack, 2867.3.2organizing the u.s. government for betterinformation security on a national basis, 2897.4recap, 2928synthesis, findings, and recommendations2938.1synthesis and findings, 2938.1.1the problem of information vulnerability, 2938.1.2cryptographic solutions to informationvulnerabilities, 2968.1.3the policy dilemma posed by cryptography, 2978.1.4national cryptography policy for theinformation age, 2988.2recommendations, 3038.3additional work needed, 3388.4conclusion, 339cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxxviiappendixesacontributors to the nrc project on nationalcryptography policy343a.1committee members, 343a.2additional contributors to the project, 349bglossary353ca brief primer on cryptography364c.1a very short history of cryptography, 364c.2capabilities enabled by cryptography, 365c.2.1ensuring the integrity of data, 365c.2.2authentication of users, 367c.2.3nonrepudiation, 370c.2.4preservation of confidentiality, 371c.3basic constructs of cryptography, 374c.4attacks on cryptographic systems, 378c.5elements of cryptographic security, 383c.6expected lifetimes of cryptographic systems, 384c.6.1background, 385c.6.2asymmetric cryptographic systems, 385c.6.3conventional cryptographic systems, 388c.6.4timing attacks, 390c.6.5skipjack/clipper/ees, 391c.6.6a warning, 391c.6.7quantum and dna computing, 392c.6.8elliptic curve cryptographic systems, 394c.6.9quantum cryptography, 394dan overview of electronic surveillance:history and current status396d.1the legal framework for domestic law enforcementsurveillance, 396d.1.1the general prohibition on electronicsurveillance, 396d.1.2title iii of the omnibus crime control andsafe streets act of 1968 and the electroniccommunications privacy act of 1986, 396d.1.3the foreign intelligence surveillance act, 403d.2historical overview of electronic surveillance, 410cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxviiicontentsea brief history of cryptography policy414e.1export controls, 414e.2academic research and the control of informationabout cryptography, 415e.3commercial cryptography, 417e.4recent developments, 419fa brief primer on intelligence421f.1the intelligence mission, 423f.2the intelligence cycle, 425f.2.1planning, 426f.2.2collection, 426f.2.3processing, 428f.2.4analysis, 428f.2.5dissemination, 429gthe international scope of cryptographypolicy430g.1international dimensions of cryptography policy, 430g.2similarities in and differences between the united statesand other nations with respect to cryptography, 431g.3foreign export control regimes, 434g.4foreign import and use control regimes, 436g.5the state of international affairs today, 438g.6obtaining international cooperation on policy regardingsecure communications, 439g.7the fundamental questions of international cryptographypolicy, 444g.7.1who holds the keys?, 444g.7.2under what circumstances does the key holderrelease the keys to other parties?, 444g.7.3how will nations reach consensus oninternational cryptography policy regardingexports and use?, 447hsummary of important requirements for apublickey infrastructure450iindustryspecific dimensions of security455i.1banking and financial services, 455i.2medical consultations and health care, 457i.3manufacturing, 461cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxxixi.4the petroleum industry, 463i.5the pharmaceutical and chemical industries, 465i.6the entertainment industry, 466i.7government, 466jexamples of risks posed by unprotectedinformation469j.1risks addressed by cryptography forauthentication, 469j.2risks addressed by cryptography forconfidentiality, 470j.3risks addressed by cryptography for bothauthentication and confidentiality, 471j.4risks addressed by cryptography for data integrity, 472kcryptographic applications programminginterfaces474lother looming issues related tocryptography policy477l.1digital cash, 477l.1.1anonymity and criminal activity, 480l.1.2public trust, 480l.1.3taxation, 482l.1.4crossborder movements of funds, 482l.2cryptography for protecting intellectual property, 482mfederal information processing standards485nlaws, regulations, and documents relevantto cryptography489n.1statutes, 489n.1.1wire and electronic communications interceptionand interception of oral communications(u.s. code, title 18, chapter 119), 489n.1.2foreign intelligence surveillance(u.s. code, title 50, chapter 36), 511n.1.3pen register and traffic analysis (u.s. code,title 18, chapters 121 and 206), 526n.1.4communications assistance for lawenforcement act of 1995, 540n.1.5computer security act of 1987, 551n.1.6arms export control act (u.s. code, title 22,chapter 39), 558cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxxcontentsn.2executive orders, 573n.2.1executive order 12333 (u.s. intelligenceactivities), 573n.2.2executive order 12958 (classified nationalsecurity information), 589n.2.3executive order 12472 (assignment of nationalsecurity and emergency preparednesstelecommunications functions), 612n.2.4national security directive 42 (national policy for thesecurity of national security telecommunicationsand information systems), 620n.3memorandums of understanding (mou) and agreement(moa), 627n.3.1national security agency/national institute ofstandards and technology mou, 627n.3.2national security agency/federal bureau ofinvestigation mou, 630n.3.3national security agency/advanced researchprojects agency/defense information systemsagency moa, 632n.4regulations, 636n.4.1international traffic in arms regulations(22 cfr, excerpts from parts 120123, 125,and 126), 636n.4.2export administration regulations, 655index677cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxxxiryptographyõsolenecuringthenformationocietycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1in an age of explosive worldwide growth of electronic data storageand communications, many vital national interests require the effectiveprotection of information. when used in conjunction with other approaches to information security, cryptography is a very powerful tool forprotecting information. consequently, current u.s. policy should bechanged to promote and encourage the widespread use of cryptographyfor the protection of the information interests of individuals, businesses,government agencies, and the nation as a whole, while respecting legitimate national needs of law enforcement and intelligence for national security and foreign policy purposes to the extent consistent with goodinformation protection.basic policy issuesthe information security problemtodayõs information age requires u.s. businesses to compete on aworldwide basis, sharing sensitive information with appropriate partieswhile protecting that information against competitors, vandals, suppliers,executive summarycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox es.1the foreign threat to u.s. business interestsof the wide variety of information risks facing u.s. companies operating internationally, those resulting from electronic vulnerabilities appear to be the most significant. the national counterintelligence center (nacic), an arm of the u.s. intelligence community established in 1994 by presidential directive, concluded thatòspecialized technical operations (including computer intrusions, telecommunications targeting and intercept, and privatesector encryption weaknesses) account forthe largest portion of economic and industrial information lost by u.s. corporations.óspecifically, the nacic noted that[b]ecause they are so easily accessed and intercepted, corporate telecommunicationsñparticularly international telecommunicationsñprovide a highlyvulnerable and lucrative source for anyone interested in obtaining trade secrets or competitive information. because of the increased usage of theselinks for bulk computer data transmission and electronic mail, intelligencecollectors find telecommunications intercepts costeffective. for example,foreign intelligence collectors intercept facsimile transmissions through governmentowned telephone companies, and the stakes are largeñapproximately half of all overseas telecommunications are facsimile transmissions.innovative òhackersó connected to computers containing competitive information evade the controls and access companiesõ information. in addition,many american companies have begun using electronic data interchange, asystem of transferring corporate bidding, invoice, and pricing data electronically overseas. many foreign government and corporate intelligence collectors find this information invaluable.source: national counterintelligence center, annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrial espionage, july 1995, pp. 16ð17.customers, and foreign governments (box es.1). private lawabiding citizens dislike the ease with which personal telephone calls can be tapped,especially those carried on cellular or cordless telephones. elements ofthe u.s. civilian infrastructure such as the banking system, the electricpower grid, the public switched telecommunications network, and the airtraffic control system are central to so many dimensions of modern lifethat protecting these elements must have a high priority. the federalgovernment has an important stake in assuring that its important andsensitive political, economic, law enforcement, and military information,both classified and unclassified, is protected from foreign governments orother parties whose interests are hostile to those of the united states.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3cryptographic dimensions of information security solutionsinformation vulnerabilities cannot be eliminated through the use ofany single tool. for example, it is impossible to prevent with technicalmeans a party authorized to view information from improperly disclosing that information to someone else. however, as part of a comprehensive approach to addressing information vulnerabilities, cryptography isa powerful tool that can help to assure the confidentiality and integrity ofinformation in transit and in storage and to authenticate the assertedidentity of individuals and computer systems. information that has beenproperly encrypted cannot be understood or interpreted by those lackingthe appropriate cryptographic òkeyó; information that has been integritychecked cannot be altered without detection. properly authenticated identities can help to restrict access to information resources to those properlyauthorized individuals and to take fuller advantage of audit trails to trackdown parties who have abused their authorized access.law enforcement and national security dilemmasposed by cryptographyfor both law enforcement and national security, cryptography is atwoedged sword. the public debate has tended to draw lines that framethe policy issues as the privacy of individuals and businesses against theneeds of national security and law enforcement. while such a dichotomydoes have a kernel of truth, when viewed in the large, this dichotomy ismisleading. if cryptography can protect the trade secrets and proprietaryinformation of businesses and thereby reduce economic espionage (whichit can), it also supports in a most important manner the job of law enforcement. if cryptography can help protect nationally critical informationsystems and networks against unauthorized penetration (which it can), italso supports the national security of the united states. framing discussion about national cryptography policy in this larger law enforcementand national security context would help to reduce some of the polarization among the relevant stakeholders.on the other hand, cryptography intended primarily to maintain theconfidentiality of information that is available to the general public forlegitimate purposes such as defending against information theft is alsoavailable for illegitimate purposes such as terrorism. encryption thusdoes pose a threat to the capability that law enforcement authorities mayseek under appropriate legal authorization to gain access to informationfor the purpose of investigating and prosecuting criminal activity. encryption also poses a threat to intelligence gathering for national securitycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyand foreign policy purposes, an activity that depends on access to information of foreign governments and other foreign entities.note that other applications of cryptographyñfor purposes of assuring data integrity and authenticating identities of users and computersystemsñdo not pose dilemmas for law enforcement and national security in the same way that confidentiality does.national cryptography policy for the information agefor many years, concern over foreign threats to national security hasbeen the primary driver of a national cryptography policy that has soughtto maximize the protection of u.s. military and diplomatic communications while denying the confidentiality benefits of cryptography to foreign adversaries through the use of export controls on cryptography andrelated technical data. more recently, the u.s. government has aggressively promoted the domestic use of a certain kind of cryptographyñescrowed encryptionñthat would provide strong protection for legitimate uses but would permit access by law enforcement officials whenauthorized by law. today, these and other dimensions of current national cryptography policy generate considerable controversy.all of the various stakes are legitimate: privacy for individuals, protection of sensitive or proprietary information for businesses, ensuringthe continuing reliability and integrity of nationally critical informationsystems and networks, law enforcement access to stored and communicated information for purposes of investigating and prosecuting crime,and national security access to information stored or communicated byforeign powers or other entities and organizations whose interests andintentions are relevant to the national security and the foreign policyinterests of the united states. informed public discussion of the issuesmust begin by acknowledging the legitimacy both of information gathering for law enforcement and national security purposes and of information security for lawabiding individuals and businesses.the conduct of the debate regarding national cryptography policyhas been complicated because a number of participants have often invoked classified information that cannot be made public. however, thecleared members of the national research councilõs committee to studynational cryptography policy (13 of the 16 committee members) concluded that the debate over national cryptography policy can be carriedout in a reasonable manner on an unclassified basis. classified materialis often important to operational matters in specific cases, but it is neitheressential to the big picture of why cryptography policy is the way it is norrequired for the general outline of how technology will and policy shouldevolve in the future.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5box es.2the past and future world environmentpastfuture trendscomputing and communicationswere expensive and rare.communications networks were analog and voice oriented; communications made heavy use of dedicated lines.telecommunications was controlledby a small number of players.the u.s. economy was unquestionably dominant in the world.the economy was oriented towardmaterial production.the security threat was relativelyhomogeneous (soviet union andcold war).cryptography was used primarily formilitary and diplomatic purposes.government had a relative monopoly on cryptographic expertiseand capability.computing and information acquisition,retrieval, and processing are inexpensiveand ubiquitous. rapid growth is evidentin the development and deployment ofdiverse technologyenabled services.communications networks are digital andoriented toward video and data transmissions.communications make heavy use ofshared infrastructure and multiple channels of different media (e.g., satellites,wireless). passive eavesdropping is thusharder to detect.telecommunications involves a largenumber of players.the u.s. economy is important but notdominant in the world, and it is increasingly interlinked with allies, customers,suppliers, vendors, and competitors allover the world.the economy is oriented toward information and services.security threats are much more heterogenous than in the cold war, both in origin and in nature.cryptography has important applicationsthroughout all aspects of society. nongovernmental entities have significantexpertise and capability built on anopen, public, and expanding base of scientific and technical knowledge aboutcryptography.the problems of information vulnerability, the legitimacy of the various national interests described above, and trends such as those outlinedin box es.2 point to the need for a concerted effort to protect vital information assets of the united states. cryptography is one important element of a comprehensive u.s. policy for better information security.the committee believes that u.s. national policy should be changedto support the broad use of cryptography in ways that take into accountcompeting u.s. needs and desires for individual privacy, internationaleconomic competitiveness, law enforcement, national security, andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyworld leadership. because cryptography is an important tool for protecting information and because it is very difficult for governments to control, the committee believes that widespread nongovernment use of cryptography in the united states and abroad is inevitable in the long run.accordingly, the proper role of national cryptography policy is to facilitate a judicious transition between todayõs world of high informationvulnerability and a future world of greater information security, while tothe extent possible meeting the legitimate needs of law enforcement andinformation gathering for national security and foreign policy purposes.the committee found that current national cryptography policy isnot adequate to support the information security requirements of aninformation society. indeed, current policy discourages the use of cryptography, whether intentionally or not, and in so doing impedes the ability of the nation to use cryptographic tools that would help to remediatecertain important vulnerabilities. national cryptography policy shouldsupport three objectives:1.broad availability of cryptography to all legitimate elements ofu.s. society;2.continued economic growth and leadership of key u.s. industriesand businesses in an increasingly global economy, including but not limited to u.s. computer, software, and communications companies; and3.public safety and protection against foreign and domestic threats.objectives 1 and 2 argue for a policy that places few governmentrestrictions on the use of cryptography and actively promotes the use ofcryptography on a broad front. objective 3 argues that some kind ofgovernment policy role in the deployment and use of cryptography forconfidentiality may continue to be necessary for public safety and national security reasons. these three objectives can be met within a framework recognizing that on balance, the advantages of more widespreaduse of cryptography outweigh the disadvantages.the recommendations below address several critical policy areas. inthe interests of brevity, only short rationales for the recommendations aregiven here. the reader is urged to read chapter 8 of the report for essential qualifications, conditions, and explanations.a framework for national cryptography policythe framework for national cryptography policy should provide coherent structure and reduce uncertainty for potential vendors and fornongovernment and government users of cryptography in ways thatpolicy does not do today.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7recommendation 1: no law should bar the manufacture, sale, or use ofany form of encryption within the united states. specifically, a legislative ban on the use of unescrowed encryption would raise both technicaland legal or constitutional issues. technically, many methods are available to circumvent such a ban; legally, constitutional issues, especiallythose related to free speech, would be almost certain to arise, issues thatare not trivial to resolve. recommendation 1 is made to reinforce thisparticular aspect of the administrationõs cryptography policy.recommendation 2: national cryptography policy should be developed by the executive and legislative branches on the basis of openpublic discussion and governed by the rule of law. only a nationaldiscussion of the issues involved in national cryptography policy canresult in the broadly acceptable social consensus that is necessary for anypolicy in this area to succeed. a consensus derived from such deliberations, backed by explicit legislation when necessary, will lead to greaterdegrees of public acceptance and trust, a more certain planning environment, and better connections between policy makers and the private sector on which the nationõs economy and social fabric rest.recommendation 3: national cryptography policy affecting the development and use of commercial cryptography should be more closelyaligned with market forces. as cryptography has assumed greater importance to nongovernment interests, national cryptography policy hasbecome increasingly disconnected from market reality and the needs ofparties in the private sector. experience with technology deploymentsuggests that reliance on market forces is generally the most effective wayto promote the widespread use of a new technology. since the committeebelieves that widespread deployment and use of cryptography are in thenational interest, it believes that national cryptography policy should alignitself with user needs and market forces to the maximum feasible extent.accordingly, national cryptography policy should emphasize the freedom of domestic users to determine cryptographic functionality, protection, and implementations according to their security needs as they seefit; encourage the adoption of cryptographic standards by the federalgovernment and private parties that are consistent with prevailing industry practice; and support the use of algorithms, product designs, andproduct implementations that are open to public scrutiny.export controlsfor many years, the united states has controlled the export of cryptographic technologies, products, and related technical information as mucryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8cryptographyõs role in securing the information societynitions (on the u.s. munitions list administered by the state department). however, the current export control regime for cryptography isan increasing impediment to the information security efforts of u.s. firmscompeting and operating in world markets, developing strategic alliancesinternationally, and forming closer ties with foreign customers and suppliers. export controls also have had the effect of reducing the domesticavailability of products with strong encryption capabilities. looking tothe future, both u.s. and foreign companies have the technical capabilityto integrate highquality cryptographic features into their products andservices. u.s. export controls may stimulate the growth of significantforeign competition for u.s. vendors to the detriment of both u.s. national security interests and u.s. business and industry.some relaxation of todayõs export controls on cryptography is warranted. relaxation would create an environment in which u.s. and multinational firms and individuals could use the same security products inthe united states and abroad, thereby supporting better information security for u.s. firms operating internationally. it would also increase theavailability of good cryptography products in the united states. finally,it would help to solidify u.s. leadership in a field critical to nationalsecurity and economic competitiveness.at the same time, cryptography is inherently dualuse in character,with important applications to both civilian and military purposes. because cryptography is a particularly critical military application for whichfew technical alternatives are available, retention of some export controlson cryptography will mitigate the loss to u.s. national security interestsin the short term, allow the united states to evaluate the impact of relaxation on national security interests before making further changes, andòbuy timeó for u.s. national security authorities to adjust to a new technical reality.recommendation 4: export controls on cryptography should be progressively relaxed but not eliminated.recommendation 4.1ñproducts providing confidentiality at a levelthat meets most general commercial requirements should be easily exportable.1 today, products with encryption capabilities that incorporate the 56bit des algorithm provide this level of confidentiality and1for purposes of recommendation 4.1, a product that is òeasily exportableó will automatically qualify for treatment and consideration (i.e., commodity jurisdiction, or cj) underthe commerce control list (ccl). automatic qualification refers to the same procedureunder which software products using rc2 or rc4 algorithms for confidentiality with 40bitkey sizes currently qualify for the ccl.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9should be easily exportable. as a condition of export, vendors of products covered under this recommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) would berequired to provide to the u.s. government full technical specifications oftheir product and reasonable technical assistance upon request in order toassist the u.s. government in understanding the productõs internal operations.recommendation 4.2ñproducts providing stronger confidentialityshould be exportable on an expedited basis to a list of approved companies if the proposed product user is willing to provide access to decrypted information upon legally authorized request. firms on the listwould agree to abide by a set of requirements described in chapter 8 thatwould help to ensure the ability of the u.s. government to obtain theplaintext of encrypted information upon presentation of a proper lawenforcement request. (plaintext is the information that was initially encrypted.)recommendation 4.3ñthe u.s. government should streamline andincrease the transparency of the export licensing process for cryptography. greater efforts in this area would reduce uncertainty regardingrules, time lines, and the criteria used in making decisions about theexportability of particular products. chapter 8 describes specific possiblesteps that might be taken.adjusting to new technical realitiesas noted above, cryptography is helpful to some dimensions of lawenforcement and national security and harmful to others. the committeeaccepts that the onset of an information age is likely to create many newchallenges for public safety, among them the greater use of cryptographyby criminal elements of society. if law enforcement authorities are unableto gain access to the encrypted communications and stored information ofcriminals, some criminal investigations and prosecutions will be significantly impaired. for these reasons, specific steps should be taken tomitigate these difficulties. in the realm of national security, new capabilities are needed to better cope with the challenges that cryptography presents.since 1993, the approach of the u.s. government to these problemshas been an aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption (see chapter 5)as a pillar of the technical foundation for national cryptography policy,primarily in response to the law enforcement concerns described above.initiatives promoted by the u.s. government include the escrowed encryption standard (a voluntary federal information processing standardcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyfor secure voice telephony), the capstone/fortezza initiative that provides escrowed encryption capabilities for secure data storage and communications, and a recent proposal to liberalize export controls on certainencryption products if the keys are òproperly escrowed.óthe committee understands the administrationõs rationale for promoting escrowed encryption but believes that escrowed encryptionshould be only one part of an overall strategy for dealing with the problems that encryption poses for law enforcement and national security.the committeeõs view of an appropriate overall strategy is described below, and escrowed encryption is the focus of recommendation 5.3.recommendation 5: the u.s. government should take steps to assistlaw enforcement and national security to adjust to new technical realities of the information age. over the past 50 years, both law enforcementand national security authorities have had to cope with a variety of changing technological circumstances. for the most part, they have coped withthese changes quite well. today, however, òbusiness as usualó will notsuffice to bring agencies responsible for law enforcement and nationalsecurity into the information age. at the same time, both law enforcement and national security have demonstrated considerable adaptabilityto new environments; this record of adaptability provides considerableconfidence that they can adapt to a future of digital communications andstored data as well.the specific subrecommendations that follow attempt to build on thisrecord. they are intended to support law enforcement and national security missions in their totalityñfor law enforcement, in both crime prevention and crime prosecution and investigation; and for national security, inboth the defense of nationally critical information systems and the collection of intelligence information.recommendation 5.1ñthe u.s. government should actively encourage the use of cryptography in nonconfidentiality applications suchas user authentication and integrity checks. these applications are particularly important in addressing vulnerabilities of nationally critical information systems and networks. furthermore, these applications of cryptography are important crimefighting measures. to date, nationalcryptography policy has not fully supported such nonconfidentiality uses.some actions have been taken in this area, but these actions have sometimes conflicted with government concerns about confidentiality. as importantly, government has expressed considerably more concern in thepublic debate regarding the deleterious impact of widespread cryptography used for confidentiality than over the deleterious impact of not deploying cryptographic capabilities for user authentication and data integcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11rity. chapter 8 provides a number of illustrative examples to demonstrate what specific actions government can take to promotenonconfidentiality applications of cryptography.recommendation 5.2ñthe u.s. government should promote thesecurity of the telecommunications networks more actively. at a minimum, the u.s. government should promote the link encryption of cellular communications2 and the improvement of security at telephoneswitches. such steps would not diminish government access for lawfullyauthorized wiretaps through the requirements imposed on carriers todayto cooperate with law enforcement in such matters. furthermore, byaddressing public demands for greater security in voice communicationsthat are widely known to be nonsecure through the telecommunicationsservice providers, these measures would also reduce the demand for (andthus the availability of) devices used to provide endtoend encryption ofvoice communications. without a ready supply of such devices, a criminal user would have to go to considerable trouble to obtain a device thatcould thwart a lawfully authorized wiretap.recommendation 5.3ñto better understand how escrowed encryption might operate, the u.s. government should explore escrowed encryption for its own uses. to address the critical international dimensions of escrowed communications, the u.s. government should workwith other nations on this topic. escrowed encryption has both benefitsand risks. the benefits for law enforcement and national security are thatwhen escrowed encryption is properly implemented and widely deployed, law enforcement and national security authorities will be able toobtain access to escrowencrypted data in specific instances when authorized by law. escrowed encryption also enables end users to recoverencrypted stored data to which access has been inadvertently lost. therisk to end users is that escrowed encryption provides a potentially lowerdegree of confidentiality because it is specifically designed to permit exceptional access by parties not originally intended to have access to theencrypted data.aggressive government promotion of escrowed encryption is not appropriate at this time for several reasons: the lack of operational experi2òlink encryptionó refers to the practice of encrypting information being communicatedin such a way that it is encrypted only in between the node from which it is sent and thenode where it is received; while the information is at the nodes themselves, it isunencrypted. in the context of link encryption for cellular communications, a cellular callwould be encrypted between the mobile handset and the ground station. when carried onthe landlines of the telephone network, the call would be unencrypted.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyence with how a largescale infrastructure for escrowed encryption wouldwork; the lack of demonstrated evidence that escrowed encryption willsolve the most serious problems that law enforcement authorities face;the likely harmful impact on the natural market development of applications made possible by new information services and technologies; andthe uncertainty of the market response to such aggressive promotion. atthe same time, many policy benefits can be gained by an operationalexploration of escrowed encryption by the u.s. government for government applications; such exploration would enable the u.s. government todevelop the base of experience on which to build a more aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption should circumstances develop in such away that encrypted communications come to pose a significant problemfor law enforcement.recommendation 5.4ñcongress should seriously consider legislation that would impose criminal penalties on the use of encrypted communications in interstate commerce with the intent to commit a federalcrime. the purpose of such a statute would be to discourage the use ofcryptography for illegitimate purposes, thus focusing the weight of thecriminal justice system on individuals who were in fact guilty of criminalactivity rather than on lawabiding citizens and criminals alike. anystatute in this area should be drawn narrowly.recommendation 5.5ñhigh priority should be given to research,development, and deployment of additional technical capabilities forlaw enforcement and national security for use in coping with new technological challenges. such r&d should be undertaken during the timethat it will take for cryptography to become truly ubiquitous. these newcapabilities are almost certain to have a greater impact on future information collection efforts than will aggressive attempts to promote escrowedencryption to a resistant market.the policy relationship betweeninformation security and cryptographyalthough this report is concerned primarily with national cryptography policy, any such policy is only one component of a national information security policy. without a forwardlooking and comprehensive national information security policy, changes in national cryptographypolicy may have little operational impact on u.s. information security.recommendation 6: the u.s. government should develop a mechanism to promote information security in the private sector. as is widelycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13acknowledged, the u.s. government is not well organized to meet thechallenges presented by an information society, and no governmentagency has the responsibility to promote information security in the private sector. absent a coordinated approach to promoting informationsecurity, the needs of many stakeholders may well be given inadequateattention and notice; those who are pursuing enhanced information security and those who have a need for legal access to stored or communicated information must both be included in a robust process for managing the oftencompeting issues and interests that will inevitably arise overtime. government has an important role in actively promoting the security of information systems and networks critical to the nationõs welfare(e.g., the banking and financial system, the public switched telecommunications network, the air traffic control system, the electric power grid). inother sectors of the economy, the role of the u.s. government should belimited to providing information and expertise. chapter 8 provides someillustrative examples of what the government might do to promote information security in the private sector.conclusionthe committee believes that its recommendations will lead to enhanced confidentiality and protection of information for individuals andcompanies, thereby reducing economic and financial crimes and economicespionage from both domestic and foreign sources. in addition, they willresult in improved security and assurance for the information systemsand networks used by the nationña more secure national informationinfrastructure. while the recommendations will in these ways contributeto the prevention of crime and enhance national security, the committeerecognizes that the spread of cryptography will increase the burden ofthose in government charged with carrying out certain specific law enforcement and intelligence activities. it believes that widespread commercial and private use of cryptography in the united states and abroadis inevitable in the long run and that its advantages, on balance, outweighits disadvantages. thus, the committee concluded that the overall interests of the government and the nation would best be served by a policythat fosters a judicious transition toward the broad use of cryptography.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary15a road map through this report15this report responds to a request made in the defense authorizationact of fy 1994 by the u.s. congress for the national research council toconduct a comprehensive study of national cryptography policy, a subjectthat has generated considerable controversy in the past few years.this report is organized into three parts. part i frames the policyissues. chapter 1 outlines the problem of growing information vulnerability and the need for technology and policy to mitigate this problem.chapter 2 describes possible roles for cryptography in reducing information vulnerability and places cryptography into context as one element ofan overall approach to ensuring information security. chapter 3 discusses needs for access to encrypted information and related public policyissues, specifically those related to information gathering for law enforcement and national security purposes.part ii of this report describes the instruments and goals of currentu.s. cryptography policy and some of the issues raised by current policy.chapter 4 is concerned primarily with export controls on cryptography, apowerful tool that has long been used in support of national securityobjectives but whose legitimacy has come under increasing fire in the lastseveral years. chapter 5 addresses escrowed encryption, an approachcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyaggressively promoted by the federal government as a technique for balancing national needs for information security with those of law enforcement and national security for information gathering. chapter 6 discusses other dimensions of national cryptography policy, including thedigital telephony act of 1995 (also known as the communications assistance for law enforcement act) and a variety of other levers used innational cryptography policy that do not often receive much attention inthe debate.part iii has two goalsñenlarging the space of possible policy optionsand offering findings and recommendations. chapter 7 discusses a variety of options for cryptography policy, some of which have been suggested or mentioned in different forums (e.g., in public and/or privateinput received by the committee, or by various members of the committee). these policy options include alternative export control regimes forcryptography and alternatives for providing exceptional access capabilities when necessary. in addition, chapter 7 addresses several issues related to or affected by cryptography that will appear on the horizon in theforeseeable future. chapter 8 describes the committeeõs findings andrecommendations.a set of appendixes provides more detail where needed.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i is intended to explicate the fundamental issues underlying nationalcryptography policy. chapter 1 outlines basic elements of a critical problemfacing the nationñthe increasing vulnerability of information, a commodity thathas become essential to national wellbeing and future opportunity. this vulnerability results from a number of trends, including the explosive growth of digitalcommunications and data storage, the increasingly international dimensions ofbusiness, and the growing dependence of the nation on a number of criticalinformation systems and networks. chapter 2 describes how cryptography canplay an important role in reducing the information vulnerability of the nation, ofbusinesses, and of private individuals. chapter 2 also places cryptography intocontext, as one element of an overall approach to information security, as aproduct that responds to factors related to both supply and demand, and as atechnology whose largescale use requires a supporting infrastructure. chapter 3discusses public policy issues raised by the need for access to encrypted information. the prospect of nearabsolute confidentialty of informationña prospectenabled by modern cryptographyñis reassuring to some and quite disturbing toothers. important public policy issues are raised by law enforcement authorities,who regard the ability to obtain information surreptitiously but legally as essential to their crimefighting abilities, and by national security authorities, whoplace a high value on the ability to monitor the communications of potentialadversaries. even private individuals, who might wish to encrypt records securely, may face the need to recover their data as though they were outsiders ifthey have forgotten how to gain òlegitimateó access; the same is true for businesses in many situations.part iframing the policy issues17cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.191growing vulnerability in theinformation agechapter 1 frames a fundamental problem facing the united statestodayñthe need to protect against the growing vulnerability of information to unauthorized access and/or change as the nation makes the transition from an industrial age to an information age. societyõs reliance ona changing panoply of information technologies and technologyenabledservices, the increasingly global nature of commerce and business, andthe ongoing desire to protect traditional freedoms as well as to ensurethat government remains capable of fulfilling its responsibilities to thenation all suggest that future needs for information security will be large.these factors make clear the need for a broadly acceptable national cryptography policy that will help to secure vital national interests.1.1 the technology context of theinformation agethe information age is enabled by computing and communicationstechnologies (collectively known as information technologies) whoserapid evolution is almost taken for granted today. computing and communications systems appear in virtually every sector of the economy andincreasingly in homes and other locations. these systems focus economicand social activity on informationñgathering, analyzing, storing, presenting, and disseminating information in text, numerical, audio, image,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyand video formatsñas a product itself or as a complement to physical ortangible products.1todayõs increasingly sophisticated information technologies cover awide range of technical progress:¥ microprocessors and workstations are increasingly important to thecomputing infrastructure of companies and the nation. further increasesin speed and computational power today come from parallel or distributed processing with many microcomputers and processors rather thanfaster supercomputers.¥ specialpurpose electronic hardware is becoming easier to develop.thus, it may make good sense to build specialized hardware optimizedfor performance, speed, or security with respect to particular tasks; suchspecialized hardware will in general be better adapted to these purposesthan generalpurpose machines applied to the same tasks.¥ media for transporting digital information are rapidly becomingfaster (e.g., fiber optics instead of coaxial cables), more flexible (e.g., thespread of wireless communications media), and less expensive (e.g., thespread of cdroms as a vehicle for distributing digital information).thus, it becomes feasible to rely on the electronic transmission of largerand larger volumes of information and on the storage of such volumes oneversmaller physical objects.¥ convergence of technologies for communications and for computing. today, the primary difference between communications and computing is the distance traversed by data flows: in communications, thetraversed distance is measured in miles (e.g., two people talking to eachother), while in computing the traversed distance is measured in microns(e.g., between two subcomponents on a single integrated circuit). a similar convergence affects companies in communications and in computingñtheir boundaries are blurring, their scopes are changing, and theirproduction processes overlap increasingly.¥ software is increasingly carrying the burden of providing functionality in information technology. in general, software is what gives hardware its functional capabilities, and different software running on thesame hardware can change the functionality of that hardware entirely.since software is intangible, it can be deployed widely on a very short1citations to a variety of press accounts can be found in computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council, information technology and manufacturing: a research agenda, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1993; cstb, information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever, 1993; cstb, realizing theinformation future: the internet and beyond, 1994; cstb, keeping the computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment, 1995;and cstb, the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000, 1996.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age21box 1.1communications and computing devicesand the role of softwarecommunications and computing devices can be dedicated to a single purpose ormay serve multiple purposes. dedicated singlepurpose devices are usually (thoughnot always) hardware devices whose functionality cannot be easily altered. examples include unprogrammable pocket calculators, traditional telephones, walkietalkies, pagers, fax machines, and ordinary telephone answering machines.a multipurpose device is one whose functionality can be altered by the end user.in some instances, a hardware device may be òreprogrammedó to perform differentfunctions simply by the physical replacement of a single chip by another chip or bythe addition of a new circuit board. open bus architectures and standard hardwareinterfaces such as the pc card are intended to facilitate multipurpose functionality.despite such interfaces and architectures for hardware, software is the primarymeans for implementing multipurpose functionality in a hardware device. withsoftware, physical replacement of a hardware component is unnecessaryña newsoftware program is simply loaded and executed. examples include personal computers (which do word processing or mathematical calculations, depending on whatsoftware the user chooses to run), programmable calculators (which solve differentproblems, depending on the programming given to them), and even many moderntelephones (which can be programmed to execute functions such as speed dialing).in these instances, the software is the medium in which the expectations of the userare embedded.today, the lines between hardware and software are blurring. for example, someòhardwareó devices are controlled by programs stored in semipermanent readonlymemory. òreadonly memoryó (rom) originally referred to memory for storing instructions and data that could never be changed, but this characteristic made romcontrolled devices less flexible. thus, the electronics industry responded with òreadonlyó memory whose contents take special effort to change (such as exposing thememory chip to a burst of ultraviolet light or sending only a particular signal to aparticular pin on the chip). the flexibility and cheapness of todayõs electronic devices make them ubiquitous. most homes now have dozens of microprocessors incoffee makers, tvs, refrigerators, and virtually anything that has a control panel.time scale compared to that of hardware. box 1.1 contains more discussion of this point.as these examples suggest, information technologies are ever moreaffordable and ubiquitous. in all sectors of the economy, they drive demand for information systems; such demand will continue to be strongand experience significant growth rates. highbandwidth and/or wireless media are becoming more and more common. interest in and use ofthe internet and similar public networks will continue to grow rapidly.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22cryptographyõs role in securing the information society1.2 transition to an information societyñincreasing interconnections and interdependenceas the availability and use of computerbased systems grow, so, too,does their interconnection. the result is a shared infrastructure of information, computing, and communications resources that facilitates collaboration at a distance, geographic dispersal of operations, and sharingof data. with the benefits of a shared infrastructure also come costs.changes in the technology base have created more vulnerabilities, as wellas the potential to contain them. for example, easier access for users ingeneral implies easier access for unauthorized users.the design, mode of use, and nature of a shared infrastructure createvulnerabilities for all users. for national institutions such as banking,new risks arise as the result of greater public exposure through suchinterconnections. for example, a criminal who penetrates one bank interconnected to the worldõs banking system can steal much larger amountsof money than are stored at that one bank. (box 1.2 describes a recentelectronic bank robbery.) reducing vulnerability to breaches of securitywill depend on the ability to identify and authenticate people, systems,and processes and to assure with high confidence that information is notimproperly manipulated, corrupted, or destroyed.although society is entering an era abounding with new capabilities,many societal practices today remain similar to those of the 1960s and1970s, when computing was dominated by large, centralized mainframecomputers. in the 1980s and 1990s, they have not evolved to reflect theintroduction of personal computers, portable computing, and increasingly ubiquitous communications networks. thus, people continue torelinquish control over substantial amounts of personal informationthrough credit card transactions, proliferating uses of social security numbers, and participation in frequentbuyer programs with airlines andstores. organizations implement trivial or no protection for proprietarydata and critical systems, trusting policies to protect portable storagemedia or relying on simple passwords to protect information.these practices have endured against a backdrop of relatively modestlevels of commercial and individual risk; for example, the liability of acredit card owner for credit card fraud perpetrated by another party islimited by law to $50. yet most computer and communications hardwareand software systems are subject to a wide range of vulnerabilities, asdescribed in box 1.3. moreover, information on how to exploit such vulnerabilities is often easy to obtain. as a result, a large amount of information that people say they would like to protect is in fact available throughentirely legal channels (e.g., purchasing a credit report on an individual)or in places that can be accessed improperly through technical attacksrequiring relatively modest effort.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age23box 1.2an attempted electronic theft from citicorpelectronic money transfers are among the most closely guarded activities in banking. in 1994, an international group of criminals penetrated citicorpõs computerizedelectronic transfer system and moved about $12 million from legitimate customeraccounts to their own accounts in banks around the world. according to citicorp,this is the first time its computerized cashmanagement system has been breached.corporate customers access the system directly to transfer funds for making investments, paying bills, and extending loans, among other purposes. the citicorp system moves about $500 billion worldwide each day. authority to access the systemis verified with a cryptographic code that only the customer knows.the case began in june 1994, when vladimir levin of st. petersburg, russia,allegedly accessed citicorp computers in new york through the international telephone network, posing as one of citicorpõs customers. he moved some customerfunds to a bank account in finland, where an accomplice withdrew the money inperson. in the next few months, levin moved various citicorp customersõ funds toaccomplicesõ personal or business accounts in banks in st. petersburg, san francisco, tel aviv, rotterdam, and switzerland.accomplices had withdrawn a total of about $400,000 by august 1994. by thattime, bank officials and their customers were on alert. citicorp detected subsequenttransfers quickly enough to warn the banks into which funds were moved to freezethe destination accounts. (bank officials noted that they could have blocked some ofthese transfers, but they permitted and covertly monitored them as part of the effort toidentify the perpetrators.) other perpetrators were arrested in tel aviv and rotterdam; they revealed that they were working with someone in st. petersburg. anexamination of telephone company records in st. petersburg showed that citicorpcomputers had been accessed through a telephone line at ao saturn, a softwarecompany. a person arrested after attempting to make a withdrawal from a frozenaccount in san francisco subsequently identified levin, who was an ao saturnemployee. russia has no extradition treaty with the united states; however, levintraveled to britain in march 1995 and was arrested there. as of september 1995,proceedings to extradite him for trial in the united states were in progress.levin allegedly penetrated citicorp computers using customersõ user identifications and passwords. in each case, levin electronically impersonated a legitimatecustomer, such as a bank or an investment capital firm. some investigators suspectthat an accomplice inside citicorp provided levin with necessary information; otherwise, it is unclear how he could have succeeded in accessing customer accounts.he is believed to have penetrated citicorpõs computers 40 times in all. citicorp saysit has upgraded its systemõs security to prevent future breakins.sources: william carley and timothy oõbrien, òcyber caper: how citicorpsystem was raided and funds moved around world,ó wall street journal,september 12, 1995, p. a1; saul hansell, òa $10 million lesson in the risksof electronic banking,ó new york times, august 19, 1995, p. 31.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.3vulnerabilities in information systems and networksinformation systems and networks can be subject to four generic vulnerabilities:1. eavesdropping or data browsing. by surreptitiously obtaining the confidentialdata of a company or by browsing a sensitive file stored on a computer to which onehas obtained improper access, an adversary could be in a position to undercut acompany bid, learn company trade secrets (e.g., knowledge developed through proprietary company research) that would eliminate a competitive advantage of thecompany, or obtain the companyõs client list in order to steal customers. moreover,damage can occur independent of the use of stealthñmany companies would bedamaged if their sensitive data were disclosed, even if they knew that such a disclosure had occurred.2. clandestine alteration of data. by altering a companyõs data clandestinely, anadversary could destroy the confidence of the companyõs customers in the company,disrupt internal operations of the company, or subject the company to shareholderlitigation.3. spoofing. by illicitly posing as a company, an adversary could place falseorders for services, make unauthorized commitments to customers, defraud clients,and cause no end of public relations difficulties for the company. similarly, anadversary might pose as a legitimate customer, and a companyñwith an interest inbeing responsive to user preferences to remain anonymous under a variety of circumstancesñcould then find itself handicapped in seeking proper confirmation ofthe customerõs identity.4. denial of service. by denying access to electronic services, an adversarycould shut down company operations, especially timecritical ones. on a nationalscale, critical infrastructures controlled by electronic networks (e.g., the air trafficcontrol system, the electrical power grid) involving many systems linked to eachother are particularly sensitive.today, the rising level of familiarity with computerbased systems iscombining with an explosion of experimentation with information andcommunications infrastructure in industry, education, health care, government, and personal settings to motivate new uses of and societal expectations about the evolving infrastructure. a key feature of the newenvironment is connection or exchange: organizations are connecting internal private facilities to external public ones; they are using public networks to create virtual private networks, and they are allowing outsiderssuch as potential and actual customers, suppliers, and business allies toaccess their systems directly. one vision of a world of electronic commerce and what it means for interconnection is described in box 1.4.whereas a traditional national security perspective might call forkeeping people out of sensitive stores of information or communicationsnetworks, national economic and social activity increasingly involves thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age25box 1.4electronic commerce and the implications for interconnectivitya number of reports have addressed the potential nature and impact of electroniccommerce.1 out of such reports, several common elements can be distilled:¥ the interconnection of geographically dispersed units into a òvirtualó company.¥ the linking of customers, vendors, and suppliers through videoconferencing,electronic data interchange, and electronic networks.¥ the creation of temporary or more permanent strategic alliances for businesspurposes.¥a vast increase in the online availability of information and information products, both free and for a fee, that are useful to individuals and organizations.¥the electronic transaction of retail business, beginning with todayõs tollfreecatalog shopping and extending to electronic network applications that enable customers to:ñapply for bank loans;ñorder tangible merchandise (e.g., groceries) for later physical delivery;ñorder intangible merchandise (e.g., music, movies) for electronic delivery;ñobtain information and electronic documents (e.g., official documents such asdriverõs licenses and birth certificates).¥ the creation of a genuinely worldwide marketplace that matches buyers tosellers largely without intermediaries.¥ new business opportunities for small entrepreneurs that could sell lowvalueproducts to the large numbers of potential customers that an electronic marketplacemight reach.in general, visions of electronic commerce writ large attempt to leverage thecompetitive edge that information technologies can provide for commercial enterprises. originally used exclusively to facilitate internal communications, information technology is now used by corporations to connect directly with their suppliersand business partners.2 in the future, corporate networks will extend all the way tocustomers, enabling improvements in customer service and more direct channels forcustomer feedback. furthermore, information technologies will facilitate the formation of ad hoc strategic alliances among diverse enterprises and even among competitors on a short time scale, driven by changes in business conditions that demandprompt action. this entire set of activities is already well under way.1see, for example, crossindustry working team, electronic cash, tokens,and payments in the national information infrastructure, corporation for national research initiatives, 1895 preston white drive, suite 100, reston, virginia 220915434 (internet: infoxiwt@cnri.reston.va.us; tel: 703/6208990),1994; office of technology assessment, electronic enterprises: looking to thefuture, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., july 1994.2for example, in manufacturing, collaborative information technologies canhelp to improve the quality of designs and reduce the cost and time needed torevise designs; product designers will be able to create a òvirtualó product,make extensive computer simulations of its behavior without supplying all ofcontinuedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.4continuedits details, and òshowó it to the customer for rapid feedback. networks willenable the entire manufacturing enterprise to be integrated all along the supply chain, from design shops to truck fleets that deliver the finished products.(see computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, information technology and manufacturing: a research agenda,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1995.)in the delivery of services, the more effective use and transmission of information have had dramatic effects. todayõs air transportation system wouldnot exist without rapid and reliable information flows regarding air trafficcontrol, sales, marketing, maintenance, safety, and logistics planning. retailers and wholesalers depend on the rapid collection and analysis of sales datato plan purchasing and marketing activities, to offer more differentiated services to customers, and to reduce operational costs. the insurance industrydepends on rapid and reliable information flows to its sales force and tocustomize policies and manage risks. (see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, information technology in theservice society: a twentyfirst century lever, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1994.)box 1.5tensions between security and opennessbusinesses have long been concerned about the tension between openness andsecurity. an environment that is open to everyone is not secure, while an environment that is closed to everyone is highly secure but not useful. a number of trendsin business today tend to exacerbate this conflict. for example:¥modern competitive strategies emphasize openness to interactions with potential customers and suppliers. for example, such strategies would demand that abank present itself as willing to do business with anyone, everywhere, and at anytime. however, such strategies also offer potential adversaries a greater chance ofsuccess, because increasing ease of access often facilitates the penetration of securityprotections.¥many businesses today emphasize decentralized management that pushesdecisionmaking authority toward the customer and away from the corporate hierarchy. yet security often has been (and is) approached from a centralized perspective.(for example, access controls are necessarily hierarchical (and thus centralized) ifthey are to be maintained uniformly.)¥many businesses rely increasingly on highly mobile individuals. when keyemployees were tied to one physical location, it made sense to base security onphysical presence, e.g., to have a user present a photo id card to an operator at thecentral corporate computer center. today, mobile computing and communicationsare common, with not even a physical wire to ensure that the person claiming to bean authorized user is accessing a computer from an authorized location or to preventpassive eavesdropping on unencrypted transmissions with a radio scanner.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age27exact opposite: inviting people from around the world to come inñwithvarying degrees of recognition that all who come in may not be benevolent. box 1.5 describes some of the tensions between security and openness. such a change in expectations and perspective is unfolding in acontext in which controls on system access have typically been deficient,beginning with weak operating system security. the distributed andinternetworked communications systems that are emerging raise questions about protecting information regardless of the path traveled (endtoend security), as close to the source and destination as possible.the international dimensions of business and the growing importance of competitiveness in the global marketplace complicate the picturefurther. although òmultinationalsó have long been a feature of the u.s.economy, the inherently international nature of communications networksand the growing capabilities for distributing and accessing informationworldwide are helping many activities and institutions to transcend national boundaries. (see box 1.6.)at the same time, export markets are at least as important as domesticu.s. markets for a growing number of goods and service producers, including producers of information technology products as well as a growing variety of high and lowtechnology products. the various aspects ofglobalizationñidentifying product and merchandising needs that varyby country; establishing and maintaining employment, customer, supplier, and distribution relationships by country; coordinating activitiesthat may be dispersed among countries but result in products deliveredto several countries; and so onñplace new demands on u.s.based andu.s.owned information, communication, organizational, and personalresources and systems.1.3 coping with information vulnerabilitysolutions to cope with the vulnerabilities described above requireboth appropriate technology and user behavior and are as varied as theneeds of individual users and organizations. cryptographyña technology described more fully in chapter 2 and appendix cñis an importantelement of many solutions to information vulnerability that can be usedin a number of different ways. national cryptography policyñthe focusof this reportñconcerns how and to what extent government affects thedevelopment, deployment, and use of this important technology. to date,public discussion of national cryptography policy has focused on oneparticular application of cryptography, namely its use in protecting theconfidentiality of information and communications.accordingly, consideration of national cryptography policy must takeinto account two fundamental issues:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.6international dimensions of business and commerce todayu.s. firms increasingly operate in a global environment, obtaining goods andservices from companies worldwide, participating in global virtual corporations, andworking as part of international strategic alliances. one key dimension of increasingglobalization has been the dismantling of barriers to trade and investment. in thepast 40 years, tariffs among developed countries have been reduced by more thantwothirds. after the uruguay round reductions are phased in, tariffs in these countries will be under 4%, with 43% of current trade free of any customs duties.while tariffs of developing countries are at higher levels, they have recently begun to decline substantially. after the uruguay round, tariffs in these countries willaverage 12.3% by agreement and will be even lower as a result of unilateral reductions. in response to the reductions in trade barriers, trade has grown rapidly. from1950 to 1993, u.s. and world trade grew at an average compound rate of 10%annually.investment has also grown rapidly in recent years, stimulated by the removal ofrestrictions and by international rules that provide assurances to investors againstdiscriminatory or arbitrary treatment. u.s. foreign direct investment also has grownat almost 10% annually during the past 20 years and now totals about half a trilliondollars. foreign direct investment in the united states has risen even faster over thesame periodñat almost 19% annuallyñand now also totals almost $500 billion.the expansion of international trade and investment has resulted in a much moreintegrated and interdependent world economy. for the united states, this has meanta much greater dependence on the outside world. more than a quarter of the u.s.gross domestic product is now accounted for by trade in goods and services andreturns on foreign investment. over 11 million jobs are now directly or indirectlyrelated to our merchandise trade.because the u.s. economy is mature, the maintenance of a satisfactory rate ofeconomic growth requires that the united states compete vigorously for international markets, especially in the faster growing regions of the world. many sectors of oureconomy are now highly dependent on export markets. this is particularly the casefor, but is not limited to, hightechnology goods, as indicated in table 1.1.a second international dimension is the enormous growth in recent years of multinational enterprises. such firms operate across national boundaries, frequently inmultiple countries. according to the 1993 world investment report of the unitedtable 1.1 dependence of u.s. business sectors on export marketsexports as a percentagearea of exportof u.s. outputelectronic computing and parts52semiconductors and related devices47magnetic and optical recording media40(includes software products)source: u.s. department of commerce, commerce news, august 9, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age29nations, transnational corporations (tncs) with varying degrees of integration account for about a third of the worldõs private sector productive assets.the number of tncs has more than tripled in the last 20 years. at the outset ofthis decade, about 37,000 u.s. firms had a controlling equity interest in some170,000 foreign affiliates. this does not include nonequity relationships, such asmanagement contracts, subcontracting, franchising, or strategic alliances. there aresome 300 tncs based in the united states and almost 15,000 foreign affiliates, ofwhich some 10,000 are nonbank enterprises.the strategies employed by tncs vary among firms. they may be based on tradein goods and services alone or, more often, involve more complex patterns of integrated production, outsourcing, and marketing. one measure of the extent of integration by u.s. firms is illustrated by the u.s. census bureau, which reported that in1994, 46% of u.s. imports and 32% of u.s. exports were between related firms. ofu.s. exports to canada and mexico, 44% were between related parties; for the european union and japan, the share was 37%.with respect to imports, the shares of relatedparty transactions were 75.5% forjapan, 47.2% for the european union, 44.6% for canada, and 69.2% for mexico.among those sectors with the highest levels of interparty trade are data processingequipment, including computers, and parts and telecommunications equipment,ranging from 50% to 90%.¥if the public information and communications infrastructure continues to evolve with very weak security throughout, reflecting both deployed technology and user behavior, the benefits from cryptography forconfidentiality will be significantly less than they might otherwise be.¥the vulnerabilities implied by weak security overall affect the ability of specific mechanisms such as cryptography to protect not only confidentiality but also the integrity of information and systems and theavailability of systems for use when sought by their users. simply protecting (e.g., encrypting) sensitive information from disclosure can stillleave the rest of a system open to attacks that can undermine the encryption (e.g., the lack of access controls that could prevent the insertion ofmalicious software) or destroy the sensitive information.cryptography thus must be considered in a wider context. it is not apanacea, but it is extremely important to ensuring security and can beused to counter several vulnerabilities.recognition of the need for system and infrastructure security and demand for solutions are growing. although demand for solutions has yet tobecome widespread, the trend is away from a marketplace in which thefederal government2 was the only meaningful customer. growing reliance2the more general statement is that the market historically involved national governments in several countries as the principal customers.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyon a shared information and communications infrastructure means that allindividuals and organizations should be, and the committee believes willbecome, the dominant customers for better security. that observation isinherent in the concept of infrastructure as something on which people rely.what may be less obvious is that as visions of ubiquitous access andinterconnection are increasingly realized, individual, organizational, andgovernmental needs may become aligned. such an alignment wouldmark a major change from the past. again, sharing of a common infrastructure is the cause: everyone, individual or organization, public orprivate sector, is a user. as significantly, all of these parties face a multitude of threats to the security of information (box 1.7). consideration ofthe nationõs massive dependence on the public switched telecommunications network, which is one of many components of the information andcommunications infrastructure, provides insight into the larger set ofchallenges posed by a more complex infrastructure (box 1.8).to illustrate the broad panorama of stakeholder interests in whichnational cryptography policy is formulated, the next several sections examine different aspects of society from the standpoint of needs for information security.1.4 the business and economic perspectivefor purposes of this report, the relationship of u.s. businesses to theinformation society has two main elements. one element is that of protecting information important to the success of u.s. businesses in a global marketplace. the second element is ensuring the nationõs continuing ability toexploit u.s. strengths in information technology on a worldwide basis.1.4.1 protecting important business informationa wide range of u.s. companies operating internationally are threatened by foreign informationcollection efforts. the national counterintelligence center (nacic) reports that òthe u.s. industries that have been thetargets in most cases of economic espionage and other foreign collectionactivities include biotechnology; aerospace; telecommunications; computerhardware/software, advanced transportation and engine technology; advanced materials and coatings; energy research; defense and armamentstechnology; manufacturing processes; and semiconductors.ó3 foreign col3national counterintelligence center, annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrial espionage, washington, d.c., july 1995, p. 15.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age31lectors target proprietary business information such as bid, contract, customer, and strategy information, as well as corporate financial and tradedata.of all of the information vulnerabilities facing u.s. companies internationally (see box 1.7), electronic vulnerabilities appear to be the mostsignificant. for example, the nacic concluded that òspecialized technical operations (including computer intrusions, telecommunications targeting and intercept, and privatesector encryption weaknesses) accountfor the largest portion of economic and industrial information lost by u.s.corporations.ó the nacic noted,because they are so easily accessed and intercepted, corporate telecommunicationsñparticularly international telecommunicationsñprovide ahighly vulnerable and lucrative source for anyone interested in obtaining trade secrets or competitive information. because of the increasedusage of these links for bulk computer data transmission and electronicmail, intelligence collectors find telecommunications intercepts costeffective. for example, foreign intelligence collectors intercept facsimiletransmissions through governmentowned telephone companies, andthe stakes are largeñapproximately half of all overseas telecommunications are facsimile transmissions. innovative òhackersó connected tocomputers containing competitive information evade the controls andaccess companiesõ information. in addition, many american companieshave begun using electronic data interchange, a system of transferringcorporate bidding, invoice, and pricing data electronically overseas.many foreign government and corporate intelligence collectors find thisinformation invaluable.4why is electronic information so vulnerable? the primary reason isthat it is computer readable and thus much more vulnerable to automatedsearch than are intercepted voice or postal mail transmissions. once theinformation is collected (e.g., through an existing wiretap or a protocolanalyzer on an internet router), it is relatively simple for computers tosearch streams of electronic information for word combinations of interest (e.g., òibm,ó òresearch,ó and òsuperconductivityó in the same message). as the cost of computing drops, the cost of performing such4from the national counterintelligence center, annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrial espionage, july 1995. further, intelligence collections by foreign powers are facilitated when a hostile government interested in eavesdropping controlsthe physical environment in which a u.s. company may be operating. for example, theu.s. company may be in a nation in which the telecommunications system is under thedirect control of the government. when a potentially hostile government controls the territory on which a company must operate, many more compromises are possible.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.7threat sources¥ foreign national agencies (including intelligence services). foreign intelligence operations target key u.s. businesses. for example, two former directors ofthe french intelligence service have confirmed publicly that the french intelligenceservice collects economic intelligence information, including classified governmentinformation and information related to or associated with specific companies of interest.1 foreign intelligence agencies may break into facilities such as the foreignoffices of a u.s. company or the hotel suite of a u.s. executive and copy computerfiles from within that facility (e.g., from a laptop computer in a hotel room, or adesktop computer connected to a network in an office).2 having attained suchaccess, they can also insert malicious code that will enable future information theft.¥ disgruntled or disloyal employees that work òfrom the inside.ó such partiesmay collude with outside agents. threats involving insiders are particularly pernicious because insiders are trusted with critical information that is not available tooutsiders. such information is generally necessary to understand the meaning ofvarious data flows that may have been intercepted, even when those data flows arereceived in the clear.¥ network hackers and electronic vandals that are having fun or making politicalstatements through the destruction of intellectual property without the intent of theft.information terrorists may threaten to bring down an information network unlesscertain demands are met; extortionists may threaten to bring down an informationnetwork unless a ransom is paid. disgruntled customers seeking revenge on a company also fall into this category.¥ thieves attempting to steal money or resources from businesses. such individuals may be working for themselves or acting as part of a larger conspiracy (e.g., inassociation with organized crime). the spreading of electronic commerce will increase the opportunities for new and different types of fraud, as illustrated by thelarge increase in fraud seen as the result of increased electronic filing to the internalrevenue service. even worse, customers traditionally regarded as the first line ofdefense against fraud (because they check their statements and alert the merchants orbanks involved to problems) may become adversaries as they seek to deny a signature on a check or alter the amount of a transaction.it is difficult to know the prevalence of such threats, because many companies donot discuss for the record specific incidents of information theft. in some cases, theyfear stockholder ire and losses in customer confidence over security breaches; inothers, they are afraid of inspiring òcopycató attacks or revealing security weaknesses. in still other cases, they simply do not know that they have been the victim ofsuch theft. finally, only a patchwork of state laws apply to the theft of trade secretsand the like (and not all states have such laws). there is no federal statute thatprotects trade secrets or that addresses commercial information theft, and federalauthorities probing the theft of commercial information must rely on proving violations of other statutes, such as wire and mail fraud laws, interstate transport of stolenproperty, conspiracy, or computer fraud and abuse laws; as a result, documentationof what would be a federal offense if such a law were present is necessarily spotty.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age33for all of these reasons, what is known on the public record about economic lossesfrom information theft almost certainly understates the true extent of the problem.1two former directors of the dgse (the french intelligence service),have publicly stated that one of the dgseõs top priorities was to collecteconomic intelligence. during a september 1991 nbc news program,pierre marion, former dgse director, revealed that he had initiated anespionage program against us businesses for the purpose of keepingfrance internationally competitive. marion justified these actions onthe grounds that the united states and france, although political andmilitary allies, are economic and technological competitors. during aninterview in march 1993, then dgse director charles silberzahn statedthat political espionage was no longer a real priority for france but thatfrance was interested in economic intelligence, òa field which is crucialto the worldõs evolution.ó silberzahn advised that the french had somesuccess in economic intelligence but stated that much work is stillneeded because of the growing global economy. silberzahn advisedduring a subsequent interview that theft of classified information, aswell as information about large corporations, was a longterm frenchgovernment policy. these statements were seemingly corroborated bya dgse targeting document prepared in late 1989 and leaked anonymously to the us government and the press in may 1993. it allegedthat french intelligence had targeted numerous us government agencies and corporations to collect economic and industrial information.industry leaders such as boeing, general dynamics, hughes aircraft,lockheed, mcdonnell douglas, and martin marietta all were on the list.heading the us government listing was the office of the us traderepresentative.the above unclassified paragraph can be found in the secret version ofannual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrialespionage, national counterintelligence center, washington, d.c., july 1995.2according to a report from the national communications system, countriesthat currently have significant intelligence operations against the united statesfor national security and/or economic purposes include russia, the peopleõsrepublic of china, cuba, france, taiwan, south korea, india, pakistan, israel,syria, iran, iraq, and libya. òall of the intelligence organizations listed [above]have the capability to target telecommunications and information systems forinformation or clandestine attacks. the potential for exploitation of suchsystems may be significantly larger.ó see national communications system(ncs), the electronic intrusion threat to national security and emergencypreparedness telecommunications: an awareness document, 2nd ed., ncs,alexandria, va., december 5, 1994, pp. 220.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.8vulnerability of the public switched telecommunications networkthe nationõs single most critical nationallevel component of information infrastructure vulnerable to compromise is the public switched telecommunications network (pstn). the pstn provides information transport services for geographicallydispersed and national assets such as the banking system and financial markets,1 andthe air traffic control system.2 even the traditional military3 is highly dependent onthe pstn. parties connected to the pstn are therefore vulnerable to failure of thepstn itself and to attacks transmitted over the pstn.the fundamental characteristic of the pstn from the standpoint of informationvulnerability is that it is a highly interconnected network of heterogeneously controlled and operated computerbased switching stations. network connectivity implies that an attackerñwhich might range from a foreign government to a teenagedhackerñcan in principle connect to any network site (including sites of critical importance for the entire network) from any other network site (which may be geographically remote and even outside the united states).4 the sites of critical importance for the pstn are the switching nodes that channel the vast majority oftelecommunications traffic in the united states. access to these critical nodes, andto other switching facilities, is supposed to be limited to authorized personnel, but inpractice these nodes are often vulnerable to penetration. once in place on a criticalnode, hostile and unauthorized users are in a position to disrupt the entire network.the systemic vulnerabilities of the pstn are the result of many factors. one is theincreasing accessibility of network software to third parties other than the commoncarriers, resulting from the federal communications commission requirement thatthe pstn support open, equal access for thirdparty providers of enhanced servicesas well as for the common carriers; such accessibility offers intruders many opportunities to capture user information, monitor traffic, and remotely manipulate the network. a second reason is that service providers are allowing customers more directaccess to network elements, in order to offer customerdefinable services such as callforwarding. a third reason is that advanced services made possible by signalingsystem 7 are dependent on a common, outofband signaling system for control ofcalls through a separate packetswitched data network that adds to network vulnerability.5 finally, spacebased pstn components (i.e., satellites) have few controlcenters, are susceptible to electronic attack, and generally do not encrypt their command channels, making the systems vulnerable to hackers copying their commandsand disrupting service.6 these conditions imply that the pstn is a system that wouldbenefit from better protection of system integrity and availability.threats to the pstn affect all national institutions whose ability to function fullyand properly depends on being able to communicate, be it through telephony, datatransmission, video, or all of these. indeed, many data networks operated òprivatelyóby large national corporations or national institutions such as those described aboveare private only in the sense that access is supposed to be limited to corporate purposes; in fact, national institutions or corporations generally use all forms of communications, including those physically carried by the pstn.7 however, the physicaland computational infrastructure of these networks is in general owned by the telecommunications service provider, and this infrastructure is part of the larger pstninfrastructure. thus, like the internet, the òprivateó data network of a national corporation is in general not physically independent of the pstn. similarly, it is depencryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age35dence on the pstn that has led to failures in the air traffic control system and important financial markets:¥ in january 1991, the accidental severing of an at&t fiberoptic cable in newark, new jersey, led to the disruption of federal aviation administration (faa) airtraffic control communications in the bostonwashington corridor and the shutdownof the new york mercantile exchange and several commodities exchanges. in may1991, the severing of a fiberoptic cable led to the shutdown of four of the faaõs 20major air traffic control centers with òmassive operational impact.ó8¥ the 1991 failure of a pstn component in new york caused the loss of connectivity between a major securities house and the securities industry automation corporation, resulting in an inability to settle the dayõs trades over the network.9examples of smallscale activities by the computer òundergroundó against thepstn demonstrate capabilities that, if coupled to an intent to wage serious information warfare against the united states, pose a serious threat to the u.s. informationinfrastructure:¥ in 1990, several members of the legion of doomõs atlanta branch werecharged with penetrating and disrupting telecommunications network elements.they were accused of planting òtime bombó programs in network elements in denver, atlanta, and new jersey; these were designed to shut down major switchinghubs but were defused by telephone carriers before causing damage.10¥ members of a group known as mod were indicted on july 8, 1992, on 11accounts. it is significant that they appear to have worked as a team. among theiralleged activities were developing and unleashing òprogrammed attacksó (see below) on telephone company computers and accessing telephone company computers to create new circuits and add services with no billing records.11¥ reported (but not well documented) is a growing incidence of òprogrammedattacks.ó12 these have been detected in several networks and rely on customizedsoftware targeting specific types of computers or network elements. they are rarelydestructive, but rather seek to add or modify services. òthe capability illustrated bythis category of attacks has not fully matured. however, if a coordinated attack usingthese types of tools were directed at the pstn with a goal of disrupting nationalsecurity/emergency preparedness (ns/ep) telecommunications, the result could besignificant.ó13 (the same point probably applies to the goal of disrupting other kindsof telecommunications beyond those used for ns/ep.)a number of reports and studies14 have called attention to the vulnerability ofcomponents of the national telecommunications infrastructure.1these private networks for banking include fedwire (operated by the federal reserve banks), the clearinghouse for interbank payment systems (chips;operated by new york clearinghouse, an association of money center banks),the society for worldwide interbank financial telecommunication (swift; aninternational messaging system that carries instructions for wire transfers between pairs of correspondent banks), and the automated clearing house (ach)continuedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 1.8 continuedsystems for domestic transfers, typically used for routine smaller purchasesand payments. in the 1980s, several u.s. banks aggressively developed globalnetworks with packet switches, routers, and so on, to interconnect their localand wide area networks; or, they used thirdparty service providers to interconnect. in the 1990s, there are signs that u.s. international banks are moving to greater use of carrierprovided or hybrid networks because of the availability of virtual private networks from carriers. carrierprovided networks aremore efficient than networks built on top of dedicated leased lines, becausethey can allocate demand dynamically among multiple customers.2the air traffic control system uses leased lines to connect regional air trafficcontrol centers.3over 95% of u.s. military and intelligence community voice and data communications are carried over facilities owned by public carriers. (see jointsecurity commission, redefining security: a report to the secretary of defense and the director of central intelligence, february 28, 1994, chapter 8.)of course, the 95% figure includes some noncritical military communications;however, only 30% of the telecommunications networks that would be usedduring wartime operate in the classified environment (and are presumablymore secure), while the other 70% are based on the use of unclassified facilities of public carriers. see richard powers, information warfare: a csispecial report, computer security institute, washington, d.c., fall 1995.4clifford stoll, the cuckooõs egg, pocket books, new york, 1989.5national research council, growing vulnerability of the public switchednetworks: implications for national security and emergency preparedness (nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1989), p. 36; reliability and vulnerabilityworking group, telecommunications policy committee, information infrastructuretask force, reliability and vulnerability of the nii: capability assessments,from the national communications system home page at http://164.117.147.223/ncia/html.6reliability and vulnerability working group, telecommunications policycommittee, information infrastructure task force, reliability and vulnerabilityof the nii: capability assessments, from the national communications systemhome page at http://164.117.147.223/ncia/html.7both shared circuits and private networks are expected to grow dramaticallyin the next several years. see, for example, michael csenger, òprivate linesdead? donõt buy those flowers just yet,ó network world, may 1, 1995, p. 1.8software engineering notes, volume 17, january 1992, as cited in peter g.neumann, computerrelated risks, addisonwesley, new york, 1995, p. 17.9see office of technology assessment, u.s. congress, u.s. banks and international telecommunicationsñbackground paper, otabptct100, u.s.government printing office, washington, d.c., september 1992, pp. 3233.10national communications system (ncs), the electronic intrusion threat tonational security and emergency preparedness telecommunications: an awarenessdocument, 2nd ed., ncs, alexandria, va., december 5, 1994, p. 25.11ncs, the electronic intrusion threat to national security and emergencypreparedness telecommunications, 1994, pp. 28 to 29.12ncs, the electronic intrusion threat to national security and emergencypreparedness telecommunications, 1994, p. 26.13ncs, the electronic intrusion threat to national security and emergencypreparedness telecommunications, 1994, p. 26.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age3714joint security commission, redefining security: a report to the secretaryof defense and the director of central intelligence, washington, d.c., february 28, 1994; national research council, growing vulnerability of the publicswitched networks: implications for national security and emergency preparedness, 1989; ncs, the electronic intrusion threat to national securityand emergency preparedness telecommunications, 1994; reliability and vulnerability working group, telecommunications policy committee, information infrastructure task force, reliability and vulnerability of the nii: capability assessments, from the national communications system home page athttp://164.117.147.223/ncia/html.searches drops.5 the threat posed by automated search, coupled with thesensitivity of certain communications that are critical for nongovernmentusers, is at the root of nongovernment demand for security.6note that solutions for coping with informationage vulnerabilitiesmay well create new responsibilities for businesses. for example, businesses may have to ensure that the security measures they take are appropriate for the information they are protecting, and/or that the information they are protecting remains available for authorized use. failure todischarge these responsibilities properly may result in a set of liabilitiesthat these businesses currently do not face.5as a rough rule of thumb, martin hellman estimates that 10 billion (1010) words can besearched for $1. this estimate is based on an experiment in which hellman used the unixutility program òfgrepó to search a 1 million (106) character file for a specific string of 10characters known to be at the end of the file and nowhere else. it took the next workstation on which this experiment was run approximately 1 second to find these last 10 characters. since there are approximately 105 seconds in a day and 103 days (about 3 years) in theuseful life of the workstation, it can search roughly 1013 over its life. since such a workstation is worth on the order of $1,000 today, this works out to 1010 words searched for $1.(with the use of specialized hardware, this cost could be reduced significantly. for example, in the 1976 book iv of the senate select committee on intelligence report, r.l.garwin describes the use of òmatch registersó to efficiently implement queries against adatabase; see frank church et al., u.s. congress, senate select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities, u.s. government printing office,washington, d.c., 1976, volume 4.)6other noncomputerbased technology for the clandestine gathering of information iswidely available on the retail market. in recent years, concern over the ready availability ofsuch equipment has grown. see, for example, ross e. milloy, òspying toys for adults orsupplies for crimes?,ó new york times, august 28, 1995, p. a10; pam belluck, òa shadowover the spyshop business,ó new york times, september 22, 1995, p. b3; and james c.mckinley, jr., òu.s. agents raid stores in 24 cities to seize spy gear,ó new york times,april 6, 1995, p. a1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyappendix i of this report elaborates issues of information vulnerability in the context of key industries such as banking and financial services,health care, manufacturing, the petroleum industry, pharmaceuticals, theentertainment industry, and government.1.4.2 ensuring the nationõs ability to exploitglobal marketswith the increasing globalization of business operations, informationtechnology plays a key role in maintaining the competitive strengths ofu.s. business. in particular, u.s. businesses have proven adept at exploiting information and information technologies to create new market nichesand expand old ones. this pattern has deep roots. for example, beginning in the 1960s, american airlines pioneered in computerized reservations systems and extended use of the information captured and stored insuch systems, generating an entire new business that is more profitablethan air transport services. more recently, creative uses of informationtechnology have advanced u.s. leadership in the production of entertainment products (e.g., movies and videos, recorded music, online services)for the world.u.s. innovation in using information technology reflects in part theeconomic vitality that makes new technology affordable. it also reflectsproximity to the research and production communities that supply keyinformation technology products, communities with which a variety ofu.s. industries have successfully exchanged talent, communicated theirneeds as customers, and collaborated in the innovation process. in otherwords, it is not an accident that innovation in both use and production ofinformation technology has blossomed in the united states.the business advantages enjoyed by u.s. companies that use information technology are one important reason that the health of u.s. computer, telecommunications, and information industries is important tothe economy as a whole. a second important reason is the simple factthat the u.s. information technology sector (the set of industries that supply information technology goods and services) is the worldõs strongest.7the industry has an impressive record of product innovation; key u.s.7for example, a staff study by the u.s. international trade commission found that 8 ofthe worldõs top 10 applications software vendors, 7 of the worldõs top 10 systems softwarevendors, the top 5 systems integration firms, and 8 of the top 10 custom programming firmsare u.s. firms; the top 9 global outsourcing firms have headquarters in the united states.see office of industries, u.s. international trade commission, global competitiveness of theu.s. computer software and service industries, staff research study #21, washington, d.c.,june 1995, chapter 5.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age39products are de facto world standards; u.s. marketing and distributioncapabilities for software products are unparalleled; and u.s. companieshave considerable strengths in the manufacture of specialized semiconductor technologies and other key components. a strong informationtechnology sector makes a significant contribution to the u.s. balance ofpayments and is responsible for large numbers of highpaying jobs. thesestrengths establish a firm foundation for continued growth in sales foru.s. information technology products and services as countries worldwide assimilate these technologies into their economies.finally, because of its technological leadership the united statesshould be better positioned to extend that lead, even if the specific benefits that may result are not known in advance. the head start in learninghow to use information technology provides a high baseline on whichu.s. individuals and organizations can build.the committee believes that information technology is one of a fewhightechnology areas (others might include aerospace and electronics)that play a special role in the economic health of the nation, and thatleadership in this area is one important factor underlying u.s. economicstrength in the world today.8 to the extent that this belief is valid, theeconomic dimension of national security and perhaps even traditionalnational security itself may well depend critically on a few key industriesthat are significant to military capabilities, the industrial base, and theoverall economic health of the nation. policy that acts against the healthand global viability of these industries or that damages the ability of theprivate sector to exploit new markets and identify niches globally thusdeserves the most careful scrutiny.because it is inevitable that other countries will expand their installedinformation technology bases and develop their own innovations and8the committee acknowledges that there is a wide range of judgment among responsibleeconomists on this matter. some argue that the economy is so diverse that the fate of asingle industry or even a small set of industries has a relatively small effect on broadereconomic trends. others argue that certain industries are important enough to warrantsubsidy or industrial policy to promote their interests. the committee discussed this specific issue to a considerable extent and found a middle ground between these two extremesñthat information technology is one important industry among others, and that thehealth and wellbeing of that industry are important to the nation. this position is alsosupported by the u.s. government, which notes that telecommunications and computerhardware/software are among a number of industries that are of òstrategic interest to theunited states . . . because they produce classified products for the government, producedual use technology used in both the public and private sectors, and are responsible forleadingedge technologies critical to maintaining u.s. economic securityó (national counterintelligence center, annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrialespionage, washington, d.c., july 1995, p. 15).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyentrepreneurial strengths, u.s. leadership is not automatic. already, evidence of such development is available, as these nations build on thefalling costs of underlying technologies (e.g., microprocessors, aggregatecommunications bandwidth) and worldwide growth in relevant skills.the past three decades of information technology history provide enoughexamples of both successful first movers and strategic missteps to suggestthat u.s. leadership can be either reinforced or undercut: leadership is anasset, and it is sensitive to both public policy and private action.public and private factors affecting the competitive health of u.s.information technology producers are most tightly coupled in the arenaof foreign trade.9 u.s. producers place high priority on ease of access toforeign markets. that access reflects policies imposed by u.s. and foreigngovernments, including governmental controls on what can be exportedto whom. export controls affect foreign trade in a variety of hardware,software, and communications systems.10 they are the subject of chroniccomplaints from industry, to which government officials often respondby pointing to other, industrycentered explanations (e.g., deficiencies inproduct design or merchandising) for observed levels of foreign sales andmarket shares. chapter 4 addresses export controls in the context ofcryptography and national cryptography policy.1.5 individual and personal interests in privacythe emergence of the information age affects individuals as well asbusinesses and other organizations. as numerous reports argue, thenationõs information infrastructure promises many opportunities for selfeducation, social exchange, recreation, personal business, costeffectivedelivery of social programs, and entrepreneurship.11 yet the same tech9of course, many intrafirm and intraindustry factors shape competitive strength, such asgood management, adequate financing, good fit between products and consumer preferences, and so on.10see, for example, john harvey et al., a commonsense approach to hightechnology export controls, center for international security and arms control, stanford university,stanford, calif., march 1995; national research council, finding common ground: u.s. export controls in a changed global environment, national academy press, washington, d.c.,1991; computer science and technology board, national research council, global trends incomputer technology and their impact on export control, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1988.11see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), nationalresearch council, the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1996; cstb, white papers: the unpredictable certainty, 1996; and cstb, the changing nature of telecommunications/information infrastructure,1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age41nologies that enable such benefits may also convey unwanted side effects.some of those can be considered automated versions of problems seen inthe paper world; others are either larger in scale or different in kind. forindividuals, the area relevant to this report is privacy and the protectionof personal information. increasing reliance on electronic commerce andthe use of networked communication for all manner of activities suggestthat more information about more people will be stored in networkaccessible systems and will be communicated more broadly and more often,thus raising questions about the security of that information.privacy is generally regarded as an important american value, a rightwhose assertion has not been limited to those òwith something to hide.óindeed, assertion of the right to privacy as a matter of principle (ratherthan as an instrumental action) has figured prominently in u.s. politicaland social history; it is not merely abstract or theoretical.in the context of an information age, an individualõs privacy can beaffected on two levels: privacy in the context of personal transactions(with businesses or other institutions and with other individuals), andprivacy vis‹vis governmental units. both levels are affected by the availability of tools, such as cryptography in the context of information andcommunications systems, that can help to preserve privacy. todayõs information security technology, for example, makes it possible to maintainor even raise the cost of collecting information about individuals. it alsoprovides more mechanisms for government to help protect that information. the clinton administration has recognized concerns about the needto guard individual privacy, incorporating them into the security andprivacy guidelines of its information infrastructure task force.12 theseguidelines represent an important step in the process of protecting individual privacy.1.5.1 privacy in an information economytoday, the prospect of easier and more widespread collection and useof personal data as a byproduct of ordinary activities raises questionsabout inappropriate activities by industry, nosy individuals, and/orcriminal elements in society. criminals may obtain sensitive financialinformation to defraud individuals (credit card fraud, for example,amounts to approximately $20 per card per year). insurance companiesmay use health data collected on individuals to decide whether to provide or deny health insuranceñputting concerns about business profit12information infrastructure task force, national information infrastructure security issues forum, nii security: the federal role, washington, d.c., june 5, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyability in possible conflict with individual and public health needs. onthe other hand, much of the personal data in circulation is willingly divulged by individuals for specific purposes; the difficulty is that onceshared, such information is available for additional uses. controlling thefurther dissemination of personal data is a function both of proceduresfor how information should be used and of technology (including but notlimited to cryptography) and procedures for restricting access to thoseauthorized.given such considerations, individuals in an information age maywish to be able to:¥keep specific information private. disclosure of information of a personal nature that could be embarrassing if known, whether or not suchdisclosure is legal, is regarded as an invasion of privacy by many people.a letter to ann landers from a reader described his inadvertent eavesdropping on some very sensitive financial transactions being conductedon a cordless telephone.13 a staff member of this study committee hasheard broadcasts of conversations that apparently emanate from a nextdoor baby monitor whose existence has been forgotten. home bankingservices using telephone lines or network connections and personal computers will result in the flow on public networks of large amounts ofpersonal information regarding finances. even the ad copy in some oftodayõs consumer catalogues contains references to information securitythreats.14¥ensure that a party with whom they are transacting business is indeedthe party he or she claims to be. likewise, they may seek to authenticatetheir own identity with confidence that such authentication will be accepted by other parties, and that anyone lacking such authentication willbe denied the ability to impersonate them.15 such a capability is needed13ann landers, òann landers,ó washington post, creators syndicate, october 20, 1995, p.d5.14for example, a catalogue from comtrad industries notes that òburglars use ôcode grabbersõ to open electric garage doors and break into homes,ó defining òcode grabbersó asòdevices that can record and play back the signal produced from your garage door remotecontroló (comtrad industries catalogue, 1995, p. 20). the herrington catalogue advertisesthe òenigmaó phone scrambler by noting that ò[a] recent wall street journal article documents the increasing acceptance and prevalence of industrial espionageó and mentions asan òexample of the alarming intrusion of the federal government into citizensõ privatelivesó the fact that òthe fbi petitioned congress to further expand its wiretapping authorityó (herrington catalogue, winter 1996, p. 13). note that both of these mailorder firmscater to mainstream consumer sentiment.15for example, a journalist who had reported on the trafficking of illegally copied software on america online was the victim of hackers who assumed his online identity,thereby intercepting his email messages and otherwise impersonating him. see petercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age43to transfer money among mutual funds with a telephone call or to minimize unauthorized use of credit card accounts.16 in an electronic domainwithout facetoface communications or recognizable indicators such asvoices and speech patterns (as used today in telephone calls), forgery ofidentity becomes increasingly easy.¥prevent the false repudiation of agreedto transactions. it is undesirablefor a party to a transaction to be able to repudiate (deny) his agreement tothe terms of the transaction. for example, an individual may agree to paya certain price for a given product; he or she should not then be able todeny having made that agreement (as he or she might be tempted to doupon finding a lower price elsewhere).¥communicate anonymously (i.e., carry out the opposite of authenticated communication). individuals may wish to communicate anonymously to criticize the government or a supervisor, report illegal or unethical activity without becoming further involved, or obtain assistancefor a problem that carries a social stigma. in other instances, they maysimply wish to speak freely without fear of social reprisal or for the entertainment value of assuming a new digital identity in cyberspace.¥ensure the accuracy of data relevant to them. many institutions suchas banks, financial institutions, and hospitals keep records on individuals.these individuals often have no personal control of the records, eventhough the integrity of the data in these records can be of crucial significance. occasional publicity attests to instances of the inaccuracy of suchdata (e.g., credit records) and to the consequences for individuals.practical safeguards for privacy such as those outlined above may bemore compelling than abstract or principled protection of a right to privacy.lewis, òsecurity is lost in cyberspace,ó new york times, february 22, 1995, p. d1. othercases of òstolen identitiesó have been reported in the press, and while these cases remainrelatively isolated, they are still a matter of public concern. thieves forge signatures andimpersonate the identities of lawabiding citizens to steal money from bank accounts and toobtain credit cards in the name of those citizens; see charles hall, òa personal approach tostealing,ó washington post, april 1, 1996, p. a1.16for example, a recent press article calls attention to security concerns raised by the easeof access to 401(k) retirement accounts (for which there is no cap on the liability incurred ifa third party with unauthorized access transfers funds improperly). see timothymiddleton, òwill thieves crack your automated nest egg?,ó new york times, march 10,1996, business section, p. 10. another article describes a halfdozen easytoapply methodsthat can be used by criminals to undertake fraud. see albert crenshaw, òcreative creditcard crooks draw hightech response,ó washington post, august 6, 1995, business section, p. h1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44cryptographyõs role in securing the information society1.5.2 privacy for citizenspublic protection of privacy has been less active in the united statesthan in other countries, but the topic is receiving increasing attention. inparticular, it has become an issue in the political agenda of people andorganizations that have a wide range of concerns about the role and performance of government at all levels; it is an issue that attracts advocatesfrom across the spectrum of political opinion. the politicization of privacy may inhibit the orderly consideration of relevant policy, includingcryptography policy, because it revolves around the highly emotionalissue of trust in government. the trust issue surfaced in the initial criticisms of the clipper chip initiative proposal in 1993 (chapter 5) and continues to color discussion of privacy policy generally and cryptographypolicy specifically.to many people, freedom of expression and association, protectionagainst undue governmental, commercial, or public intrusion into theirpersonal affairs, and fair treatment by various authorities are concernsshaped by memories of highly publicized incidents in which such rightswere flouted.17 it can be argued that such incidents were detectable andcorrectable precisely because they involved government units that wereobligated to be publicly accountableñand indeed, these incidentsprompted new policies and procedures as well as greater public vigilance. it is also easy to dismiss them as isolated instances in a socialsystem that for the most part works well. but where these episodesinvolve government, many of those skeptical about government believethat they demonstrate a capacity of government to violate civil liberties of17some incidents that are often cited include the surveillance of political dissidents, suchas martin luther king, jr., malcolm x, and the student nonviolent coordinating committee in the mid to late 1960s; the activities of the nixon òplumbersó in the late 1960s, including the harassment and surveillance of sitting and former government officials and journalists and their associates in the name of preventing leaks of sensitive national securityinformation; u.s. intelligence surveillance of the international cable and telephone communications of u.s. citizens from the early 1940s through the early 1970s in support of fbi andother domestic law enforcement agencies; and the creation of fbi dossiers on opponents ofthe vietnam war in the mid1960s. the description of these events is taken largely fromfrank j. donner, the age of surveillance, alfred a. knopf, new york, 1980 (surveillance ofpolitical dissidents, pp. 244248; plumbers, pp. 248252; fbi dossiers on antiwar protesters,pp. 252256; nsa surveillance, pp. 276277). donnerõs book documents many of theseevents. see also final report of the senate select committee to study governmental operationswith respect to intelligence activities, book ii, april 26, 1974, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., p. 12.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age45americans who are exercising their constitutional rights.18 this perception is compounded by attempts to justify past incidents as having beenrequired for purposes of national security. such an approach both limitspublic scrutiny and vitiates policybased protection of personal privacy.it is hard to determine with any kind of certainty the prevalence of thesentiments described in this section. by some measures, over half of thepublic is skeptical about government in general,19 but whether that skepticism translates into widespread public concern about government surveillance is unclear. the committee believes that most people acting asprivate individuals feel that their electronic communications are secureand do not generally consider it necessary to take special precautionsagainst threats to the confidentiality of those communications. theseattitudes reflect the fact that most people, including many who are highlyknowledgeable about the risks, do not give much conscious thought tothese issues in their daytoday activities.at the same time, the committee acknowledges the concerns of manylawabiding individuals about government surveillance. it believes thatsuch concerns and the questions they raise about individual rights andgovernment responsibilities must be taken seriously. it would be inappropriate to dismiss such individuals as paranoid or overly suspicious.moreover, even if only a minority is worried about government surveillance, it is an important consideration, given the nationõs history as a18for example, at the 4th conference on computers, freedom, and privacy in chicago,illinois, held in 1994, a government speaker asked the audience if they were more concerned about government abuse and harassment or about criminal activity that might bedirected at them. an overwhelming majority of the audience indicated greater concernabout the first possibility. for recent accounts that give the flavor of concerns about malfeasance by law enforcement officials, see ronald smothers, òatlanta holds six policemen incrackdown,ó new york times, september 7, 1995, p. 9; george james, òpolice officer isarrested on burglary charges in sting operation,ó new york times, september 7, 1995,p. b5; kenneth b. noble, òmany complain of bias in los angeles police,ó new york times,september 4, 1995, p. 11; kevin sack, òracism of a rogue officer casts suspicion on policenationwide,ó new york times, september 4, 1995, p. 1; gordon witkin, òwhen the badguys are cops,ó u.s. news & world report, september 11, 1995, p. 20; barry tarlow, òdoingthe fuhrman shuffle,ó washington post, august 27, 1995, p. c2; and david w. dunlap,òf.b.i. kept watch on aids group during protest years,ó new york times, may 16, 1995, p.b3.19for example, a national harris poll in january 1994 asked òwhich type of invasions ofprivacy worry you the most in america todayñactivities of government agencies or businesses?ó fiftytwo percent said that government agencies were their greater worry, while40% selected business. see center for social and legal research, privacy & american business, volume 1(3), hackensack, n.j., 1994, p. 7.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46cryptographyõs role in securing the information societydemocracy,20 for determining whether and how access to and use of cryptography may be considered a citizenõs right (chapter 7).1.6 special needs of governmentgovernment encompasses many functions that generate or dependon information, and current efforts to reduce the scope and size of government depend heavily on information technology. in many areas ofgovernment, the information and information security needs resemblethose of industry (see appendix i). government also has important responsibilities beyond those of industry, including those related to publicsafety. for two of the most important and least understood in detail, lawenforcement and national security, the need for strong information security has long been recognized.domestic law enforcement authorities in our society have two fundamental responsibilities: preventing crime and prosecuting individualswho have committed crimes. crimes committed and prosecuted are morevisible to the public than crimes prevented (see chapter 3).the following areas relevant to law enforcement require high levelsof information security:¥ prevention of information theft from businesses and individuals, consistent with the transformation of economic and social activities outlinedabove.¥ tactical law enforcement communications. law enforcement officialsworking in the field need secure communications. at present, policescanners available at retail electronics stores can monitor wireless com20protecting communications from government surveillance is a timehonored techniquefor defending against tyranny. a most poignant example is the u.s. insistence in 1945 thatthe postwar japanese constitution include protection against government surveillance ofthe communications of japanese citizens. in the aftermath of the japanese surrender inworld war ii, the united states drafted a constitution for japan. the initial u.s. draftcontained a provision saying that ò[n]o censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the secrecy of any means of communication be violated.ó the japanese response to this provisionwas a revised provision stating that ò[t]he secrecy of letter and other means of communication is guaranteed to all of the people, provided that necessary measures to be taken for themaintenance of public peace and order, shall be provided by law.ó general douglasmacarthur, who was supervising the drafting of the new japanese constitution, insistedthat the original provision regarding communications secrecy and most other provisions ofthe original u.s. draft be maintained. the japanese agreed, this time requesting only minorchanges in the u.s. draft and accepting fully the original u.s. provision on communicationssecrecy. see osamu nishi, ten days inside general headquarters (ghq): how the originaldraft of the japanese constitution was written in 1946, seibundo publishing co. ltd., tokyo,1989.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age47munications channels used by police; criminals eavesdropping on suchcommunications can receive advance warning of police responding tocrimes being committed.¥ efficient use by law enforcement officials of the large amounts of information compiled on criminal activity. getting the most use from such information implies that it be remotely accessible and not be improperly modified(assuming its accuracy and proper context, a requirement that in itselfleads to much controversy21).¥ reliable authentication of law enforcement officials. criminals havebeen known to impersonate law enforcement officials for nefarious purposes, and the information age presents additional opportunities.in the domain of national security, traditional missions involve protection against military threats originating from other nationstates anddirected against the interests of the united states or its friends and allies.these traditional missions require strong protection for vital information:¥ u.s. military forces require secure communications. without cryptography and other information security technologies in the hands offriendly forces, hostile forces can monitor the operational plans of friendlyforces to gain an advantage.22¥ force planners must organize and coordinate flows of supplies,personnel, and equipment. such logistical coordination involves databases whose integrity and confidentiality as well as remote access mustbe maintained.¥ sensitive diplomatic communications between the united statesand its representatives or allies abroad, and/or between critical elements21see, for example, u.s. general accounting office (gao), national crime informationcenter: legislation needed to deter misuse of criminal justice information, gao/tggd9341,gao, washington, d.c., 1993.22for example, the compromise of the black code used by allied military forces inworld war ii enabled german forces in africa in 1942, led by general erwin rommel, todetermine the british order of battle (quantities, types, and locations of forces), estimatebritish supply and morale problems, and know the tactical plans of the british. the compromise of one particular message enabled rommel to thwart a critical british counterattack. in july of that year, the british switched to a new code, thus denying rommel animportant source of strategic intelligence. rommel was thus surprised at the battle ofalamein, widely regarded as a turning point in the conflict in the african theater. seedavid kahn, the codebreakers: the story of secret writing, macmillan, new york, 1967, pp.472477.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyof the u.s. government, must be protected as part of the successful conduct of foreign affairs, even in peacetime.23in addition, the traditional missions of national security have expanded in recent years to include protection against terrorists24 and international criminals, especially drug cartels.25 furthermore, recognitionhas been growing that in an information age, economic security is part ofnational security.more broadly, there is a practical convergence under way amongprotection of individual liberties, public safety, economic activity, andmilitary security. for example, the nation is beginning to realize thatcritical elements of the u.s. civilian infrastructureñincluding the bankingsystem, the air traffic control system, and the electric power gridñmustbe protected against the threats described above, as must the civilianinformation infrastructure that supports the conduct of sensitive government communications. because civilian infrastructure provides a significant degree of functionality on which the military and defense sectordepends, traditional national security interests are at stake as well, andconcerns have grown about the implications of what has come to beknown as information warfare (box 1.9). more generally, the need formore secure systems, updated security policies, and effective proceduralcontrols is taking on truly nationwide dimensions.1.7 recapchapter 1 underscores the need for attention to protecting vital u.s.interests and values in an information age characterized by a number oftrends:¥ the world economy is in the midst of a transition from an indus23an agreement on palestinian selfrule was reached in september 1995. according topublic reports, the parties involved, yasir arafat (leader of the palestinian liberation organization) and shimon peres (then foreign minister of israel), depended heavily on thetelephone efforts of dennis ross, a u.s. negotiator, in mediating the negotiations that led tothe agreement. obviously, in such circumstances, the security of these telephone effortswas critical. see steven greenhouse, òtwist to shuttle diplomacy: u.s. aide mediated byphone,ó new york times, september 25, 1995, p. 1.24terrorist threats generally emanate from nongovernmental groups, though at timesinvolving the tacit or implicit (but publicly denied) support of sponsoring national governments. furthermore, the united states is regarded by many parties as a particularly important target for political reasons by virtue of its prominence in world affairs. thus, terroristsin confrontation with a u.s. ally may wish to make a statement by attacking the unitedstates directly rather than its ally.25see, for example, phil williams, òtransnational criminal organizations and international security,ó survival, volume 36(1), spring 1994, pp. 96113.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.growing vulnerability in the information age49box 1.9information warfareòinformation warfareó (iw) is a term used in many different ways. of most utilityfor this report is the definition of iw as hostile action that targets the informationsystems and information infrastructure of an opponent (i.e., offensive actions thatattack an opponentõs communications, weapon systems, command and control systems, intelligence systems, information components of the civil and societal infrastructure such as the power grid and banking system) coupled with simultaneousactions seeking to protect u.s. and allied systems and infrastructure from such attacks. other looser uses of the term iw include the following:¥ the use of information and tactical intelligence to apply weapon systems moreeffectively. iw may be used in connection with informationbased suppression ofenemy air defenses or òsmartó weapons using sensor data to minimize the volume ofordnance needed to destroy a target.¥ the targeting of companiesõ information systems for iw attacks. as industrialespionage spreads and/or international competitiveness drives multinational corporations into militarylike escapades, the underlying notion of informationbased probing of and attack on a competitorõs information secrets could take on a flavor ofintergovernment military or intelligence activities.¥ the fight against terrorism, organized crime, and even street crime, whichmight be characterized as iw to the extent that information about these subjects isused to prosecute the battle. this usage is not widespread, although it may developin the future.usage of the term has shifted somewhat as federal agencies, notably the department of defense, struggle to fully appreciate this new domain of warfare (or lowintensity conflict) and to create relevant policy and doctrine for it. conversely, thereis some discussion of the vulnerabilities of the u.s. civil information infrastructure tosuch offense.a broad range of activities can take place in information warfare:¥ physical destruction of informationhandling facilities to destroy or degradefunctionality;¥ denial of use of an opponentõs important information systems;¥ degradation of effectiveness (e.g., accuracy, speed of response) of an opponentõs information systems;¥ insertion of spurious, incorrect, or otherwise misleading data into an opponentõs information systems (e.g., to destroy or modify data, or to subvert softwareprocesses via improper data inputs);¥ withdrawal of significant tactical or strategic data from an opponentõs information systems;¥ insertion of malicious software into an opponentõs system to affect its intendedbehavior in various ways and, perhaps, to do so at a time controlled by the aggressor;and¥ subversion of an opponentõs software and/or hardware installation to make itan inplace selfreporting mole for intelligence purposes.as an operational activity, information warfare clearly is related closely to, butyet is distinct from, intelligence functions that are largely analytical. iw is also related to information security, since its techniques are pertinent both to prosecution ofoffensive iw and to protection for defensive iw.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytrial to an information age in which information products are extensivelybought and sold, information assets provide leverage in undertaking business activities, and communications assume evergreater significance inthe lives of ordinary citizens. at the same time, national economies areincreasingly interlinked across national borders, with the result that international dimensions of public policy are important.¥ trends in information technology suggest an everincreasing panoply of technologies and technologyenabled services characterized by highdegrees of heterogeneity, enormous computing power, and large datastorage and transmission capabilities.¥ given the transition to a global information society and trends ininformation technology, the future of individuals and businesses alike islikely to be one in which information of all types plays a central role.electronic commerce in particular is likely to become a fundamental underpinning of the information future.¥ government has special needs for information security that arisefrom its role in society, including the protection of classified informationand its responsibility for ensuring the integrity of information assets onwhich the entire nation depends.collectively, these trends suggest that future needs for informationsecurity will be large. threats to information security will emerge from avariety of different sources, and they will affect the confidentiality andintegrity of data and the reliable authentication of users; these threats doand will affect businesses, government, and private individuals.chapter 2 describes how cryptography may help to address all ofthese problems.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.512cryptography:roles, market, and infrastructurecryptography is a technology that can play important roles in addressing certain types of information vulnerability, although it is not sufficient to deal with all threats to information security. as a technology,cryptography is embedded into products that are purchased by a largenumber of users; thus, it is important to examine various aspects of themarket for cryptography. chapter 2 describes cryptography as a technology used in products, as a product within a larger market context, andwith reference to the infrastructure needed to support its largescale use.2.1 cryptography in contextcomputer system security, and its extension network security, areintended to achieve many purposes. among them are safeguardingphysical assets from damage or destruction and ensuring that resourcessuch as computer time, network connections, and access to databases areavailable only to individualsñor to other systems or even software processesñauthorized to have them.1 overall information security is dependent on many factors, including various technical safeguards, trustworthy and capable personnel, high degrees of physical security, competentadministrative oversight, and good operational procedures. of the avail1the term òinformation securityó and shortened versions such as infosec, compsec,and netsec are also in use.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyable technical safeguards, cryptography has been one of the least utilizedto date.2in general, the many security safeguards in a system or network notonly fulfill their principal task but also act collectively to mutually protectone another. in particular, the protection or operational functionality thatcan be afforded by the various cryptographic safeguards treated in thisreport will inevitably require that the hardware or software in question beembedded in a secure environment. to do otherwise is to risk that thecryptography might be circumvented, subverted, or misusedñhenceleading to a weakening or collapse of its intended protection.as individual standalone computer systems have been incorporatedinto ever larger networks (e.g., local area networks, wide area networks,the internet), the requirements for cryptographic safeguards have alsoincreased. for example, users of the earliest computer systems were almost always clustered in one place and could be personally recognized asauthorized individuals, and communications associated with a computersystem usually were contained within a single building. today, users ofcomputer systems can be connected with one another worldwide, throughthe public switched telecommunications network, a local area network,satellites, microwave towers, and radio transmitters. operationally, anindividual or a software process in one place can request service from asystem or a software process in a far distant place. connectivity amongsystems is impromptu and occurs on demand; the internet has demonstrated how to achieve it. thus, it is now imperative for users and systems to identify themselves to one another with a high degree of certaintyand for distant systems to know with certainty what privileges for accessing databases or software processes a remote request brings. protectionthat could once be obtained by geographic propinquity and personal recognition of users must now be provided electronically and with extremelyhigh levels of certainty.2.2 what is cryptography and what can it do?the word òcryptographyó is derived from greek words that meansecret writing. historically, cryptography has been used to hide informa2other safeguards, in particular software safeguards, are addressed in various standardtexts and reports. see, for example, national institute of standards and technology, anintroduction to computer security, nist special publication 80012, department of commerce, washington, d.c., october 1995; department of defense, trusted computer systemevaluation criteria, august 15, 1983; computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure53tion from access by unauthorized parties, especially during communications when it would be most vulnerable to interception. by preservingthe secrecy, or confidentiality, of information, cryptography has played avery important role over the centuries in military and national affairs.3in the traditional application of cryptography for confidentiality, anoriginator (the first party) creates a message intended for a recipient (thesecond party), protects (encrypts) it by a cryptographic process, and transmits it as ciphertext. the receiving party decrypts the received ciphertextmessage to reveal its true content, the plaintext. anyone else (the thirdparty) who wishes undetected and unauthorized access to the messagemust penetrate (by cryptanalysis) the protection afforded by the cryptographic process.in the classical use of cryptography to protect communications, it isnecessary that both the originator and the recipient(s) have commonknowledge of the cryptographic process (the algorithm or cryptographicalgorithm) and that both share a secret common elementñtypically, thekey or cryptographic key, which is a piece of information, not a materialobject. in the encryption process, the algorithm transforms the plaintextinto the ciphertext, using a particular key; the use of a different key resultsin a different ciphertext. in the decryption process, the algorithm transforms the ciphertext into the plaintext, using the key that was used toencrypt4 the original plaintext. such a scheme, in which both communicating parties must have a common key, is now called symmetric cryptography or secretkey cryptography; it is the kind that has been used for centuries and written about widely.5 it has the property, usually an operationaldisadvantage, of requiring a safe method of distributing keys to relevantparties (key distribution or key management).it can be awkward to arrange for symmetric and secret keys to beavailable to all parties with whom one might wish to communicate, especially when the list of parties is large. however, a scheme called asymmetric cryptography (or, equivalently, publickey cryptography), developed inthe mid1970s, helps to mitigate many of these difficulties through the use3the classic work on the history of cryptography is david kahn, the codebreakers,macmillan, new york, 1967.4this report uses the term òencryptó to describe the act of using an encryption algorithmwith a given key to transform one block of data, usually plaintext, into another block,usually ciphertext.5historical perspective is provided in david kahn, kahn on codes, macmillan, new york,1983; f.w. winterbotham, the ultra secret, harper & row, new york, 1974; and ronaldlewin, ultra goes to war, hutchinson & co., london, 1978. a classic reference on thefundamentals of cryptography is dorothy denning, cryptography and data security,addisonwesley, reading, mass., 1982.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyof different keys for encryption and decryption.6 each participant actually has two keys. the public key is published, is freely available toanyone, and is used for encryption; the private key is held in secrecy bythe user and is used for decryption.7 because the two keys are inverses,knowledge of the public key enables the derivation of the private key intheory. however, in a welldesigned publickey system, it is computationally infeasible in any reasonable length of time to derive the privatekey from knowledge of the public key.a significant operational difference between symmetric and asymmetric cryptography is that with asymmetric cryptography anyone whoknows a given personõs public key can send a secure message to thatperson. with symmetric cryptography, only a selected set of people (thosewho know the private key) can communicate. while it is not mathematically provable, all known asymmetric cryptographic systems are slowerthan their symmetric cryptographic counterparts, and the more publicnature of asymmetric systems lends credence to the belief that this willalways be true. generally, symmetric cryptography is used when a largeamount of data needs to be encrypted or when the encryption must bedone within a given time period; asymmetric cryptography is used forshort messages, for example, to protect key distribution for a symmetriccryptographic system.regardless of the particular approach taken, the applications of cryptography have gone beyond its historical roots as secret writing; today,cryptography serves as a powerful tool in support of system security.cryptography can provide many useful capabilities:¥confidentialityñthe characteristic that information is protected frombeing viewed in transit during communications and/or when stored inan information system. with cryptographically provided confidentiality,encrypted information can fall into the hands of someone not authorizedto view it without being compromised. it is almost entirely the confidentiality aspect of cryptography that has posed public policy dilemmas.the other capabilities, described below, can be considered collectivelyas nonconfidentiality or collateral uses of cryptography:6gustavus j. simmons (ed.), contemporary cryptology: the science of information integrity,ieee press, piscataway, n.j., 1992; whitfield diffie, òthe first ten years of publickeycryptography,ó proceedings of the ieee, volume 76, 1988, pp. 560577.7the seminal paper on publickey cryptography is whitfield diffie and martin hellman,ònew directions in cryptography,ó ieee transactions on information theory, volume it22,1976, pp. 644654.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure55¥authenticationñcryptographically based assurance that an assertedidentity is valid for a given person (or computer system). with suchassurance, it is difficult for an unauthorized party to impersonate an authorized one.¥integrity checkñcryptographically based assurance that a messageor computer file has not been tampered with or altered.8 with suchassurance, it is difficult for an unauthorized party to alter data.¥digital signatureñcryptographically based assurance that a message or file was sent or created by a given person. a digital signaturecryptographically binds the identity of a person with the contents of themessage or file, thus providing nonrepudiationñthe inability to deny theauthenticity of the message or file. the capability for nonrepudiationresults from encrypting the digest (or the message or file itself) with theprivate key of the signer. anyone can verify the signature of the messageor file by decrypting the signature using the public key of the sender.since only the sender should know his or her own private key, assuranceis provided that the signature is valid and the sender cannot later repudiate the message. if a person divulges his or her private key to any otherparty, that party can impersonate the person in all electronic transactions.¥digital date/time stampñcryptographically based assurance that amessage or file was sent or created at a given date and time. generally,such assurance is provided by an authoritative organization that appendsa date/time stamp and digitally signs the message or file.these cryptographic capabilities can be used in complementary ways.for example, authentication is basic to controlling access to system ornetwork resources. a person may use a password to authenticate his ownidentity; only when the proper password has been entered will the system allow the user to òlog onó and obtain access to files, email, and soon.9 but passwords have many limitations as an access control measure(e.g., people tell others their passwords or a password is learned via eavesdropping), and cryptographic authentication techniques can provide 8digital signatures and integrity checks use a condensed form of a message or fileñcalled a digestñwhich is created by passing the message or file through a oneway hashfunction. the digest is of fixed length and is independent of the size of the message or file.the hash function is designed to make it highly unlikely that different messages (or files)will yield the same digest, and to make it computationally very difficult to modify a message (or file) but retain the same digest.9an example more familiar to many is that the entry of an appropriate personal identification number into an automatic teller machine (atm) gives the atm user access to account balances or cash.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56cryptographyõs role in securing the information societymuch better and more effective mechanisms for limiting system or resource access to authorized parties.access controls can be applied at many different points within a system. for example, the use of a dialin port on an information system ornetwork can require the use of cryptographic access controls to ensurethat only the proper parties can use the system or network at all. manysystems and networks accord privileges or access to resources dependingon the specific identity of a user; thus, a hospital information system maygrant physicians access that allows entering orders for patient treatment,whereas laboratory technicians may not have such access. authentication mechanisms can also be used to generate an audit trail identifyingthose who have accessed particular data, thus facilitating a search forthose known to have compromised confidential data.in the event that access controls are successfully bypassed, the use ofencryption on data stored and communicated in a system provides anextra layer of protection. specifically, if an intruder is denied easy accessto stored files and communications, he may well find it much more difficult to understand the internal workings of the system and thus be lesscapable of causing damage or reading the contents of encrypted inactivedata files that may hold sensitive information. of course, when an application opens a data file for processing, that data is necessarily unencryptedand is vulnerable to an intruder that might be present at that time.authentication and access control can also help to protect the privacyof data stored on a system or network. for example, a particular databaseapplication storing data files in a specific format could allow its users toview those files. if the access control mechanisms are set up in such a waythat only certain parties can access that particular database application,then access to the database files in question can be limited and the privacyof data stored in those databases protected. on the other hand, an unauthorized user may be able to obtain access to those files through a different, uncontrolled application, or even through the operating system itself.thus, encryption of those files is necessary to protect them against suchòbackdooró access.10the various cryptographic capabilities described above may be usedwithin a system in order to accomplish a set of tasks. for example, a10the measurecountermeasure game can continue indefinitely. in response to file encryption, an intruder can insert into an operating system a trojan horse program that waitsfor an authorized user to access the encrypted database. since the user is authorized, thedatabase will allow the decryption of the relevant file, and the intruder can simply òpiggybackó on that decryption. thus, those responsible for system security must provide a wayto check for trojan horses, and so the battle goes round.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure57banking system may require confidentiality and integrity assurances onits communications links, authentication assurances for all major processing functions, and integrity and authentication assurances for highvaluetransactions. on the other hand, merchants may need only digital signatures and date/time stamps when dealing with external customers orcooperating banks when establishing contracts. furthermore, dependingon the type of capability to be provided, the underlying cryptographicalgorithms may or may not be different.finally, when considering what cryptography can do, it is worth making two practical observations. first, the initial deployment of any technology often brings out unanticipated problems, simply because the products and artifacts embodying that technology have not had the benefit ofsuccessive cycles of failure and repair. similarly, human procedures andpractices have not been tested against the demands of reallife experience.cryptography is unlikely to be any different, and so it is probable thatearly largescale deployments of cryptography will exhibit exploitablevulnerabilities.11the second point is that against a determined opponent that is highlymotivated to gain unauthorized access to data, the use of cryptographymay well simply lead that opponent to exploit some other vulnerability inthe system or network on which the relevant data is communicated orstored, and such an exploitation may well be successful. but the use ofcryptography can help to raise the cost of gaining improper access to dataand may prevent a resourcepoor opponent from being successful at all.more discussion of cryptography can be found in appendix c.2.3 how cryptography fits into thebig security picturein the context of confidentiality, the essence of information security isa battle between information protectors and information interceptors.protectorsñwho may be motivated by ògoodó reasons (if they are legitimate businesses) or òbadó reasons (if they are criminals)ñwish to restrictaccess to information to a group that they select. interceptorsñwho mayalso be motivated by òbadó reasons (if they are unethical business competitors) or ògoodó reasons (if they are law enforcement agents investigating serious crimes)ñwish to obtain access to the information beingprotected whether or not they have the permission of the informationprotectors. it is this dilemma that is at the heart of the public policycontroversy and is addressed in greater detail in chapter 3.11for a discussion of this point, see ross anderson, òwhy cryptosystems fail,ó communications of the acm, volume 37(11), november 1994, pp. 3240.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyfrom the perspective of the information interceptor, encryption isonly one of the problems to be faced. in general, the complexity of todayõsinformation systems poses many technical barriers (section 2.3.1). on theother hand, the information interceptor may be able to exploit productfeatures or specialized techniques to gain access (section 2.3.2).2.3.1 factors inhibiting access to information12compared to the task of tapping an analog telephone line, obtainingaccess to the content of a digital information stream can be quite difficult.with analog òlisteningó (traditional telephony or radio interception), thetechnical challenge is obtaining access to the communications channel.when communications are digitized, gaining access to the channel is onlythe first step: one must then unravel the digital format, a task that can becomputationally very complex. furthermore, the complexity of the digital format tends to increase over time, because more advanced information technology generally implies increased functionality and a need formore efficient use of available communications capacity.increased complexity is reflected in particular in the interpretation ofthe digital stream that two systems might use to communicate with eachother or the format of a file that a system might use to store data. consider, for example, one particular sequence of actions used to communicate information. the original application in the sending system mighthave started with a plaintext message, and then compressed it (to make itsmaller); encrypted it (to conceal its meaning); and appended errorcontrol bits to the compressed, encrypted message (to prevent errors fromcreeping in during transmission).13 thus, a party attempting to intercepta communication between the sender and the receiver could be facedwith a data stream that would represent the combined output of manydifferent operations that transform the data stream in some way. theinterceptor would have to know the errorcontrol scheme and the decompression algorithms as well as the key and the algorithm used to encryptthe message.when an interceptor moves onto the lines that carry bulk traffic, iso12this section addresses technical factors that inhibit access to information. but technicalmeasures are only one class of techniques that can be used to improve information security.for example, statutory measures can help contribute to information security. laws thatimpose criminal penalties for unauthorized access to computer systems have been used toprosecute intruders. such laws are intended to deter attacks on information systems, andto the extent that individuals do not exhibit such behavior, system security is enhanced.13error control is a technique used to detect errors in transmission and sometimes tocorrect them as well.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure59lating the bits associated with a particular communication of interest isitself quite difficult.14 a highbandwidth line (e.g., a longhaul fiberopticcable) typically carries hundreds or thousands of different communications; any given message may be broken into distinct packets and intermingled with other packets from other contemporaneously operating applications.15 the traffic on the line may be encrypted òin bulkó by the lineprovider, thus providing an additional layer of protection against theinterceptor. moreover, since a message traveling from point a to point bmay well be broken into packets that traverse different physical paths enroute, an interceptor at any given point between a and b may not evensee all of the packets pass by.another factor inhibiting access to information is the use of technologies that facilitate anonymous communications. for the most part, intercepted communications are worthless if the identity of the communicating parties is not known. in telephony, call forwarding and pagercallbacks from pay telephones have sometimes frustrated the efforts oflaw enforcement officials conducting wiretaps. in data communications,socalled anonymous remailers can strip out all identifying informationfrom an internet email message sent from person a to person b in such away that person b does not know the identity of person a. some remailerseven support return communications from person b to person a withoutthe need for person b to know the identity of person a.access is made more difficult because an information protector canswitch communications from one medium to another very easily withoutchanging enduser equipment. some forms of media may be easily accessed by an interceptor (e.g., conventional radio), whereas other formsmay be much more challenging (e.g., fiberoptic cable, spreadspectrumradio). the proliferation of different media that can interoperate smoothlyeven at the device level will continue to complicate the interceptorõs attempts to gain access to communications.finally, obtaining access also becomes more difficult as the number ofservice providers increases (box 2.1). in the days when at&t held a14this point is made independently in a report that came to the attention of the committee as this report was going to press. a staff study of the permanent select committee onintelligence, u.s. house of representatives, concluded that òthe ability to filter through thehuge volumes of data and to extract the information from the layers of formatting, multiplexing, compression, and transmission protocols applied to each message is the biggestchallenge of the future, [while] increasing amounts and sophistication of encryption addanother layer of complexityó (ic21: intelligence community in the 21st century, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., p. 121).15paul haskell and david g. messerschmitt, òin favor of an enhanced network interfacefor multimedia services,ó submitted to ieee multimedia magazine.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 2.1the evolution of the telecommunications industryprior to 1984, the u.s. telecommunications industry was dominated by one primary playerñat&t. an elaborate regulatory structure had evolved in the precedingdecades to govern what had become an essential national service on which privatecitizens, government, and business had come to rely.by contrast, the watchword in telecommunications a mere decade later has become competition. at&t is still a major player in the field, but the regional belloperating companies (rbocs), separated from at&t as part of the divestiture decision of 1984, operate entirely independently, providing local services. indeed, thecurrent mood in congress toward deregulation is already causing increasingly activecompetition and confrontation among all of the players involved, including cable tvcompanies, cellular and mobile telephone companies, the longdistance telecommunications companies (at&t, mci, sprint, and hundreds of others), the rbocsand other local exchange providers, tv and radio broadcast companies, entertainment companies, and satellite communications companies. today, all of these players compete for a share of the telecommunications pie in the same geographic area;even railroads and gas companies (which own geographic rights of way along whichtransmission lines can be laid) and power companies (which have wires going toevery house) have dreams of profiting from the telecommunications boom. theplaying field is even further complicated by the fact of resellingñinstitutions oftenbuy telecommunications services from òprimaryó providers in bulk to serve their ownneeds and resell the excess to other customers.in short, todayõs telecommunications industry is highly heterogeneous and widely deployed with multiple public and private service providers, and will becomemore so in the future.monopoly on voice communications and criminal communications couldgenerally be assumed to be carried on at&toperated lines, law enforcement and national security authorities needed only one point of contactwith whom to work. as the telecommunications industry becomes increasingly heterogeneous, law enforcement authorities may well be uncertain about what company to approach about implementing a wiretaprequest.2.3.2 factors facilitating access to informationsystem or product designunauthorized access to protected information can inadvertently befacilitated by product or system features that are intended to providelegitimate access but instead create unintentional loopholes or weaknessesthat can be exploited by an interceptor. such points of access may becryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure61deliberately incorporated into product or system designs, and they include the following:¥maintenance and monitoring ports.16 for example, many telephoneswitches and computer systems have dialin ports that are intended tofacilitate monitoring and remote maintenance and repair by offsite technicians.¥master keys. a product can have a single master key that allows itspossessor to decrypt all ciphertext produced by the product.¥mechanisms for key escrow or key backup. a third party, for example,may store an extra copy of a private key or a master key. under appropriate circumstances, the third party releases the key to the appropriateindividual(s), who is (are) then able to decrypt the ciphertext in question.this subject is discussed at length in chapter 5.¥weak encryption defaults. a product capable of providing verystrong encryption may be designed in such a way that users invoke thosecapabilities only infrequently. for example, encryption on a secure telephone may be designed so that the use of encryption depends on the userpressing a button at the start of a telephone call. the requirement to pressa button to invoke encryption is an example of a weak default, becausethe telephone could be designed so that encryption is invoked automatically when a call is initiated; when weak defaults are designed into systems, many users will forget to press the button.despite the good reasons for designing systems and products withthese various points of access (e.g., facilitating remote access throughmaintenance ports to eliminate travel costs of system engineers), any suchpoint of access can be exploited by unauthorized individuals as well.methods facilitating access to informationsurreptitious access to communications can also be gained by methods such as the following:¥interception in the ether. many pointtopoint communications makeuse of a wireless (usually radio) link at some point in the process. since itis impossible to ensure that a radio broadcast reaches only its intendedreceiver(s), communications carried over wireless linksñsuch as thoseinvolving cellular telephones and personal pagersñare vulnerable to interception by unauthorized parties.16a port is a point of connection to a given information system to which another party(another system, an individual) can connect.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62cryptographyõs role in securing the information society¥use of pen registers. telephone communications involve both thecontent of a call and callsetup information such as numbers called, originating number, time and length of call, and so on. setup information isoften easily accessible, some of it even to end users.17¥wiretapping. to obtain the contents of a call carried exclusively bynonwireless means, the information carried on a circuit (actually, a replica of the information) is sent to a monitoring station. a call can bewiretapped when an eavesdropper picks up an extension on the sameline, hooks up a pair of alligator clips to the right set of terminals, orobtains the cooperation of telephone company officials in monitoring agiven call at a chosen location.¥exploitation of related data. a great deal of useful information can beobtained by examining in detail a digital stream that is associated with agiven communication. for example, people have developed communications protocol analyzers that examine traffic as it flows by a given pointfor passwords and other sensitive information.¥reverse engineering (discussed in greater detail in chapter 5).decompilation or disassembly of software can yield deep understandingof how that software works. one implication is that any algorithm builtinto software cannot be assumed to be secret for very long, since disassembly of the software will inevitably reveal it to a technically trainedindividual.¥cryptanalysis (discussed in greater detail in appendix c). cryptanalysis is the task of recovering the plaintext corresponding to a givenciphertext without knowledge of the decrypting key. successful cryptanalysis can be the result of:ñ inadequately sized keys. a product with encryption capabilities thatimplements a strong cryptographic algorithm with an inadequately sizedkey is vulnerable to a òbruteforceó attack.18 box 2.2 provides more detail.ñweak encryption algorithms. some encryption algorithms have weaknesses that, if known to an attacker, require the testing of only a smallfraction of the keys that could in principle be the proper key.¥product flaws. like weak encryption, certain design choices such aslimits on the maximum size of a password, the lack of a reasonable lowerbound on the size of a password, or use of a random number generatorthat is not truly random may lead to a product that presents a work factor17òcaller id,ó a feature that identifies the number of the calling party, makes use of callsetup information carried on the circuit.18a bruteforce attack against an encryption algorithm is a computerbased test of allpossible keys for that algorithm undertaken in an effort to discover the key that actually hasbeen used. hence, the difficulty and time to complete such attacks increase markedly as thekey length grows (specifically, the time doubles for every bit added to the key length).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure63box 2.2fundamentals of cryptographic strengthcryptographic strength depends on two factors: the size of the key and the mathematical structure of the algorithm itself. for welldesigned symmetric cryptographicsystems, òbruteforceó exhaustive searchñtrying all possible keys with a given decryption algorithm until the (meaningful) plaintext appearsñis the best publiclyknown cryptanalytic method. for such systems the work factor (i.e., the time tocryptanalyze) grows exponentially with key size. hence, with a sufficiently longkey, even an eavesdropper with very extensive computing resources would have totake a very long time (longer than the age of the universe) to test all possible combinations. adding one binary digit (bit) to the length of a key doubles the length of timeit takes to undertake a bruteforce attack while adding only a very small increment(or sometimes none at all) to the time it takes to encrypt the plaintext.how long is a òlongó key? to decipher by brute force a message encrypted witha 40bit key requires 240 (approximately 1012) tests. if each test takes 106 secondsto conduct, 1 million seconds of testing time on a single computer are required toconduct a bruteforce attack, or about 11.5 days. a 56bit key increases this time bya factor of 216, or 65,536; under the same assumptions, a bruteforce attack on amessage encrypted with a 56bit key would take over 2,000 years.two important considerations mitigate the bleakness of this conclusion from theperspective of the interceptor. one is that computers can be expected to grow morepowerful over time. speed increases in the underlying silicon technology have exhibited a predictable pattern for the past 50 yearsñcomputational speed doublesevery 18 months (mooreõs law), equivalent to increasing by a factor of 10 every 5years. thus, if a single test takes 106 seconds today, in 15 years it can be expectedto take 109 seconds. additional speedup is possible using parallel processing. somesupercomputers use tens of thousands of microprocessors in parallel, and cryptanalytic problems are particularly well suited to parallel processing. but even 1,000processors working in parallel, each using the underlying silicon technology of 15years hence, would be able to decrypt a single 56bit encrypted message in 18 hours.as for the exploitation of alternatives to bruteforce search, all known asymmetric (i.e., publickey) cryptographic systems allow shortcuts to exhaustive search. because more information is public in such systems, it is also likely that shortcut attackswill exist for any new systems invented. shortcut attacks also exist for poorly designed symmetric systems. newly developed shortcut attacks constitute unforeseenbreakthroughs, and so by their very nature introduce an unpredictable òwild cardóinto the effort to set a reasonable key size. because such attacks are applicable primarily to publickey systems, larger key sizes and larger safety margins are neededfor such systems than for symmetric cryptographic systems. for example, factoring a512bit number by exhaustive search would take 2256 tests (since at least one factormust be less than 2256); known shortcut attacks would allow such numbers to befactored in approximately 265 operations, a number on the order of that required toundertake a bruteforce exhaustive search of a message encrypted with a 64bit symmetric cryptographic system. while symmetric 64bit systems are considered relatively safe, fear of future breakthroughs in cryptanalyzing publickey systems has ledmany cryptographers to suggest a minimum key size of 1,024 bits for publickeysystems, thereby providing in key length a factoroftwo safety margin over the safetyafforded by 512bit keys.more discussion of this topic can be found in appendix c.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyfor an attacker that is much smaller than the theoretical strength impliedby the algorithm it uses.19¥monitoring of electronic emissions. most electronic communicationsdevices emit electromagnetic radiation that is highly correlated with theinformation carried or displayed on them. for example, the contents ofan unshielded computer display or terminal can in principle be read froma distance (estimates range from tens of meters to hundreds of meters) byequipment specially designed to do so. coined by a u.s. governmentprogram, tempest is the name of a class of techniques to safeguardagainst monitoring of emissions.¥device penetration. a softwarecontrolled device can be penetratedin a number of ways. for example, a virus may infect it, making a clandestine change. a message or a file can be sent to an unwary recipientwho activates a hidden program when the message is read or the file isopened; such a program, once active, can record the keystrokes of theperson at the keyboard, scan the mass storage media for sensitive dataand transmit it, or make clandestine alterations to stored data.¥infrastructure penetration. the infrastructure used to carry communications is often based on softwarecontrolled devices such as routers.router software can be modified as described above to copy and forwardall (or selected) traffic to an unauthorized interceptor.the last two techniques can be categorized as invasive, because theyalter the operating environment in order to gather or modify information.in a network environment, the most common mechanisms of invasiveattacks are called viruses and trojan horses. a virus gains access to asystem, hides within that system, and replicates itself to infect other systems. a trojan horse exploits a weakness from within a system. eitherapproach can result in intentional or unintentional denial of services forthe host system.20 modern techniques for combining both techniques tocovertly exfiltrate data from a system are becoming increasingly powerful19ówork factoró is used in this report to mean a measure of the difficulty of undertakinga bruteforce test of all possible keys against a given ciphertext (and known algorithm). a40bit work factor means that a bruteforce attack must test at most 240 keys to be certainthat the corresponding plaintext message is retrieved. in the literature, the term òworkfactoró is also used to mean the ratio of work needed for bruteforce cryptanalysis of anencrypted message to the work needed to encrypt that message.20on november 2, 1988, robert t. morris, jr., released a òwormó program that spreaditself throughout the internet over the course of the next day. at trial, morris maintainedthat he had not intended to cause the effects that had resulted, a belief held by many in theinternet community. morris was convicted on a felony count of unauthorized access. seepeter g. neumann, computerrelated risks, addisonwesley, reading, mass., 1995, p. 133.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure65and difficult to detect.21 such attacks will gain in popularity as networksbecome more highly interconnected.2.4 the market for cryptographycryptography is a product as well as a technology. products offeringcryptographic capabilities can be divided into two general classes:¥securityspecific or standalone products that are generally addonitems (often hardware, but sometimes software) and often require thatusers perform an operationally separate action to invoke the encryptioncapabilities. examples include an addon hardware board that encryptsmessages or a program that accepts a plaintext file as input and generatesa ciphertext file as output.¥integrated (often ògeneralpurposeó) products in which cryptographic functions have been incorporated into some software or hardware application package as part of its overall functionality. an integrated product is designed to provide a capability that is useful in its ownright, as well as encryption capabilities that a user may or may not use.examples include a modem with onboard encryption or a word processor with an option for protecting (encrypting) files with passwords.2221the popular world wide web provides an environment in which an intruder can act tosteal data. for example, an industrial spy wishing to obtain data stored on the informationnetwork of a large aerospace company can set up a web page containing information ofinterest to engineers at the aerospace company (e.g., information on foreign aerospace business contracts in the making), thereby making the page an attractive site for those engineersto visit through the web. once an engineer from the company has visited the spyõs webpage, a channel is set up by which the web page can send back a trojan horse (th) program for execution on the workstation being used to look at the page. the th can bepassed as part of any executable program (java and postscript provide two such vehicles)that otherwise does useful things but on the side collects data resident on that workstation(and any other computers to which it might be connected). once the data is obtained, it canbe sent back to the spyõs web page during the same session, or emailed back, or sentduring the next session used to connect to that web page. furthermore, because contactswith a web page by design provide the specific address from which the contact is coming,the th can be sent only to the aerospace company (and to no one else), thus reducing thelikelihood that anyone else will stumble upon it. furthermore, the web page contact alsoprovides information about the workstation that is making the contact, thus permitting acustomized and specially debugged th to be sent to that workstation.22from a system design perspective, it is reasonable to assert that word processing anddatabase applications do not have an intrinsic requirement for encryption capabilities andthat such capabilities could be better provided by the operating system on which theseapplications operate. but as a practical matter, operating systems often do not provide suchcapabilities, and so vendors have significant incentives to provide encryption capabilitiesthat are useful to customers who want better security.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyin addition, an integrated product may provide sockets or hooks tousersupplied modules or components that offer additional cryptographicfunctionality. an example is a software product that can call upon a usersupplied package that performs certain types of file manipulation such asencryption or file compression. cryptographic sockets are discussed inchapter 7 as cryptographic applications programming interfaces.a product with cryptographic capabilities can be designed to providedata confidentiality, data integrity, and user authentication in any combination; a given commercial cryptographic product may implement functionality for any or all of these capabilities. for example, a pc card mayintegrate cryptographic functionality for secure authentication and forencryption onto the same piece of hardware, even though the user maychoose to invoke these functions independently. a groupware programfor remote collaboration may implement cryptography for confidentiality(by encrypting messages sent between users) and cryptography for dataintegrity and user authentication (by appending a digital signature to allmessages sent between users). further, this program may be implementedin a way that these features can operate independently (either, both, orneither may be operative at the same time).because cryptography is usable only when it is incorporated into aproduct, whether integrated or securityspecific, issues of supply anddemand affect the use of cryptography. the remainder of this sectionaddresses both demand and supply perspectives on the cryptographymarket.2.4.1 the demand side of the cryptography marketchapter 1 discussed vulnerabilities that put the information assets ofbusinesses and individuals at risk. but despite the presence of such risks,many organizations do not undertake adequate information security efforts, whether those efforts involve cryptography or any other tool. thissection explores some of the reasons for this behavior.lack of security awareness (and/or need)most people who use electronic communications behave as thoughthey regard their electronic communications as confidential. even thoughthey may know in some sense that their communications are vulnerableto compromise, they fail to take precautions to prevent breaches in communications security. even criminals aware that they may be the subjectsof wiretaps have been overheard by law enforcement officials to say,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure67òthis call is probably being wiretapped, but . . . ,ó after which they go onto discuss incriminating topics.23the impetus for thinking seriously about security is usually an eventthat is widely publicized and significant in impact.24 an example ofresponding to publicized problems is the recent demand for encryption ofcellular telephone communications. in the past several years, the publichas been made aware of a number of instances in which traffic carriedover cellular telephones was monitored by unauthorized parties (appendix j). in addition, cellular telephone companies have suffered enormousfinancial losses as the result of òcloning,ó an illegal practice in which theunencrypted id numbers of cellular telephones are recorded off the airand placed into cloned units, thereby allowing the owner of the clonedunit to masquerade as the legitimate user.25 even though many userstoday are aware of such practices and have altered their behavior somewhat (e.g., by avoiding discussion of sensitive information over cellulartelephone lines), more secure systems such as gsm (the european standard for mobile telephones) have gained only a minimal foothold in theu.s. market.a second area in which people have become more sensitive to theneed for information security is in international commerce. many international business users are concerned that their international businesscommunications are being monitored, and indeed such concerns motivate a considerable amount of todayõs demand for secure communications.it is true that the content of the vast majority of telephone communications in the united states (e.g., making a dinner date, taking an ordi23a case in point is that the officers charged in the rodney king beating used theirelectronic communications system as though it were a private telephone line, even thoughthey had been warned that all traffic over that system was recorded. in 1992, rodney kingwas beaten by members of the los angeles police department. a number of transcripts ofpolice radio conversations describing the incident were introduced as evidence at the trial.had they been fully cognizant at the moment of the fact that all conversations were beingrecorded as a matter of department policy, the police officers in question most likely wouldnot have said what they did (personal communication, sara kiesler, carnegie mellon university, 1993).24it is widely believed that only a few percent of computer breakins are detected. see,for example, jane bird, òhunting down the hackers,ó management today, july, 1994, p. 64(reports that 1% of attacks are detected); bob brewin, òinfo warfare goes on attack,ó federal computer week, volume 9(31), october 23, 1995, p. 1 (reports 2% detection); and garyanthes, òhackers try new tacks,ó computerworld, january 30, 1995, p. 12 (reports 5%detection).25see, for example, bryan miller, òweb of cellular phone fraud widens,ó new york times,july 20, 1995, p. c1; and george james, ò3 men accused of stealing cellular phone idnumbers,ó new york times, october 19, 1995, p. b3.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68cryptographyõs role in securing the information societynary business call) and data communications (e.g., transferring a file fromone computer to another, sending an email message) is simply not valuable enough to attract the interest of most eavesdroppers. moreover,most communications links for pointtopoint communications in theunited states are hard wired (e.g., fiberoptic cable) rather than wireless(e.g., microwave); hardwired links are much more secure than wirelesslinks.26 in some instances, compromises of information security do notdirectly damage the interests of the persons involved. for example, anindividual whose credit card number is improperly used by another party(who may have stolen his wallet or eavesdropped on a conversation) isprotected by a legal cap on the liability for which he is responsible.other barriers influencing demand for cryptographyeven when a user is aware that communications security is threatened and wishes to take action to forestall the threat, a number of practical considerations can affect the decision to use cryptographic protection.these considerations include the following:¥lack of critical mass. a secure telephone is not of much use if onlyone person has it. ensuring that communications are secure requirescollective actionñsome critical mass of interoperable devices is necessaryin order to stimulate demand for secure communications. to date, such acritical mass has not yet been achieved.¥uncertainties over government policy. policy often has an impact ondemand. a number of government policy decisions on cryptographyhave introduced uncertainty, fear, and doubt into the marketplace andhave made it difficult for potential users to plan for the future. seeing thecontroversy surrounding policy in this area, potential vendors are reluctant to bring to market products that support security, and potential usersare reluctant to consider products for security that may become obsoletein the future in an unstable legal and regulatory environment.¥lack of a supporting infrastructure. the mere availability of devicesis not necessarily sufficient. for some applications such as secure interpersonal communications, a national or international infrastructure formanaging and exchanging keys could be necessary. without such an26a major u.s. manufacturer reported to the committee that in the late 1980s, it wasalerted by the u.s. government that its microwave communications were vulnerable. inresponse, this manufacturer took steps to increase the capacity of its terrestrial communications links, thereby reducing its dependence on microwave communications. a similarsituation was faced by ibm in the 1970s. see william broad, òevading the soviet ear atglen cove,ó science, volume 217(3), 1982, pp. 910911.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure69infrastructure, encryption may remain a niche feature that is usable onlythrough ad hoc methods replicating some of the functions that an infrastructure would provide and for which demand would thus be limited.section 2.5 describes some infrastructure issues in greater detail.¥high cost. to date, hardwarebased cryptographic security hasbeen relatively expensive, in part because of the high cost of standaloneproducts made in relatively small numbers. a user that initially deploysa system without security features and subsequently wants to add themcan be faced with a very high cost barrier, and consequently there is alimited market for addon security products.on the other hand, the marginal cost of implementing cryptographiccapabilities in software at the outset is rapidly becoming a minor part ofthe overall cost, and so cryptographic capabilities are likely to appear inall manner and types of integrated software products where there mightbe a need.¥reduced performance. the implementation of cryptographic functions often consumes computational resources (e.g., time, memory). insome cases, excessive consumption of resources makes encryption tooslow or forces the user to purchase additional memory. for example, ifencrypting the communications link over which a conversation is carrieddelays that conversation by more than a few tenths of a second, users maywell choose not to use the encryption capability.¥a generally insecure environment. a given network or operatingsystem may be so inherently insecure that the addition of cryptographiccapabilities would do little to improve overall security. moreover, retrofitting security measures atop an inherently insecure system is generallydifficult.¥usability. a productõs usability is a critical factor in its marketacceptability. products with encryption capabilities that are available foruse but are in fact unused do not increase information security. suchproducts may be purchased but not used for the encryption they providebecause such use is too inconvenient in practice, or they may not be purchased at all because the capabilities they provide are not aligned wellwith the needs of their users. in general, the need to undertake even amodest amount of extra work or to tolerate even a modest inconveniencefor cryptographic protection that is not directly related to the primaryfunction of the device is likely to discourage the use of such protection.27when cryptographic features are well integrated in a way that does not27for example, experience with current secure telephones such as the stuiii suggeststhat users of such phones may be tempted, because of the need to contact many people, touse them in a nonsecure mode more often than not.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70cryptographyõs role in securing the information societydemand casebycase user intervention, i.e., when such capabilities can beinvoked transparently to the average user, demand may well increase.¥lack of independent certification or evaluation of products. certificationof a productõs quality is often sought by potential buyers who lack thetechnical expertise to evaluate product quality or who are trying to support certain required levels of security (e.g., as the result of bank regulations). many potential users are also unable to detect failures in theoperation of such products.28 with one exception discussed in chapter 6,independent certification for products with integrated encryption capabilities is not available, leading to market uncertainty about such products.¥electronic commerce. an environment in which secure communications were an essential requirement would do much to increase the demand for cryptographic security.29 however, the demand for secure communications is currently nascent.¥uncertainties arising from intellectual property issues. many of thealgorithms that are useful in cryptography (especially publickey cryptography) are protected by patents. some vendors are confused by thefear, uncertainty, and doubt caused by existing legal arguments amongpatent holders. moreover, even when a patent on a particular algorithmis undisputed, many users may resist its use because they do not wish topay the royalties.30¥lack of interoperability and standards. for cryptographic devices tobe useful, they must be interoperable. in some instances, the implementation of cryptography can affect the compatibility of systems that mayhave interoperated even though they did not conform strictly tointeroperability standards. in other instances, the specific cryptographicalgorithm used is yet another function that must be standardized in orderfor two products to interoperate. nevertheless, an algorithm is only onepiece of a cryptographic device, and so two devices that implement the28even users who do buy security products may still be unsatisfied with them. forexample, in two consecutive surveys in 1993 and 1994, a group of users reported spendingmore and being less satisfied with the security products they were buying. see dave powell,òannual infosecurity industry survey,ó infosecurity news, march/april, 1995, pp. 2027.29at&t plans to take a nontechnological approach to solving some of the security problems associated with retail internet commerce. at&t has announced that it will insure itscredit card customers against unauthorized charges, as long as those customers were usingat&tõs service to connect to the internet. this action was taken on the theory that the realissue for consumers is the fear of unauthorized charges, rather than fears that confidentialdata per se would be compromised. see thomas weber, òat&t will insure its cardcustomers on its web service,ó wall street journal, february 7, 1996, p. b5.30see, for example, james bennett, òthe key to universal encryption,ó strategic investment, december 20, 1995, pp. 1213.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure71same cryptographic algorithm may still not interoperate.31 only whentwo devices conform fully to a single interoperability standard (e.g., a standard that would specify how keys are to be exchanged, the formatting ofthe various data streams, the algorithms to be used for encryption anddecryption, and so on) can they be expected to interoperate seamlessly.an approach gaining favor among product developers is protocolnegotiation,32 which calls for two devices or products to mutually negotiate the protocol that they will use to exchange information. for example,the calling device may query the receiving device to determine the rightprotocol to use. such an approach frees a device from having to conformto a single standard and also facilitates the upgrading of standards in abackwardcompatible manner.¥the heterogeneity of the communications infrastructure. communications are ubiquitous, but they are implemented through a patchwork ofsystems and technologies and communications protocols rather than according to a single integrated design. in some instances, they do notconform completely to the standards that would enable full interoperability. in other instances, interoperability is achieved by intermediate conversion from one data format to another. the result can be thattransmission of encrypted data across interfaces interferes with achievingconnectivity among disparate systems. under these circumstances, users31consider the data encryption standard (des) as an example. des is a symmetricencryption algorithm, first published in 1975 by the u.s. government, that specifies a uniqueand welldefined transformation when given a specific 56bit key and a block of text, butthe various details of operation within which des is implemented can lead to incompatibilities with other systems that include des, with standalone devices incorporating des,and even with softwareimplemented des.specifically, how the information is prepared prior to being encrypted (e.g., how it isblocked into chunks) and after the encryption (how the encrypted data is modulated on thecommunications line) will affect the interoperability of communications devices that mayboth use des. in addition, key management may not be identical for desbased devicesdeveloped independently. desbased systems for file encryption generally require a usergenerated password to generate the appropriate 56bit des key, but since the des standarddoes not specify how this aspect of key management is to be performed, the same passwordused on two independently developed desbased systems may not result in the same 56bitkey. for these and similar reasons, independently developed desbased systems cannotnecessarily be expected to interoperate.32transmitting a digital bit stream requires that the hardware carrying that stream beable to interpret it. interpretation means that regardless of the content of the communications (e.g., voice, pictures), the hardware must know what part of the bit stream representsinformation useful to the ultimate receiver and what part represents information useful tothe carrier. a communications protocol is an agreedupon convention about how to interpret any given bit stream and includes the specification of any encryption algorithm thatmay be used as part of that protocol.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72cryptographyõs role in securing the information societymay be faced with a choice of using unencrypted communications or notbeing able to communicate with a particular other party at all.332.4.2 the supply side of the cryptography marketthe supply of products with encryption capabilities is inherently related to the demand for them. cryptographic products result from decisions made by potential vendors and users as well as standards determined by industry and/or government. use depends on availability aswell as other important factors such as user motivation, relevant learningcurves, and other nontechnical issues. as a general rule, the availabilityof products to users depends on decisions made by vendors to build ornot to build them, and all of the considerations faced by vendors of alltypes of products are relevant to products with encryption capabilities.in addition to user demand, vendors need to consider the followingissues before deciding to develop and market a product with encryptioncapabilities:¥accessibility of the basic knowledge underlying cryptography. giventhat various books, technical articles, and government standards on thesubject of cryptography have been published widely over the past 20years, the basic knowledge needed to design and implement cryptographic systems that can frustrate the best attempts of anyone (includinggovernment intelligence agencies) to penetrate them is available to government and nongovernment agencies and parties both here and abroad.for example, because a complete description of des is available worldwide, it is relatively easy for anyone to develop and implement an encryption system that involves multiple uses of des to achieve much stronger security than that provided by des alone.¥the skill to implement basic knowledge of cryptography. a productwith encryption capabilities involves much more than a cryptographicalgorithm. an algorithm must be implemented in a system, and manydesign decisions affect the quality of a product even if its algorithm ismathematically sound. indeed, efforts by multiple parties to developproducts with encryption capabilities based on the same algorithm couldresult in a variety of manufactured products with varying levels of quality and resistance to attack.33an analogous example is the fact that two internet users may find it very difficult to useemail to transport a binary file between them, because the email systems on either endmay well implement standards for handling binary files differently, even though they mayconform to all relevant standards for carrying ascii text.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure73for example, although cryptographic protocols are not part and parcel of a cryptographic algorithm per se, these protocols specify how critical aspects of a product will operate. thus, weaknesses in cryptographicprotocolsñsuch as a key generation protocol specifying how to generateand exchange a specific encryption key for a given message to be passedbetween two parties or a key distribution protocol specifying how keysare to be distributed to users of a given productñcan compromise theconfidentiality that a real product actually provides, even though thecryptographic algorithm and its implementation are flawless.34¥the skill to integrate the cryptography into a usable product. even aproduct that implements a strong cryptographic algorithm in a competent manner is not valuable if the product is unusable in other ways. forintegrated products with encryption capabilities, the noncryptographicfunctions of the product are central, because the primary purpose of anintegrated product is to provide some useful capability to the user (e.g.,word processing, database management, communications) that does notinvolve cryptography per se; if cryptography interferes with this primaryfunctionality, it detracts from the productõs value.in this area, u.s. software vendors and system integrators have distinct strengths,35 even though engineering talent and cryptographic expertise are not limited to the united states. for example, foreign vendorsdo not market integrated products with encryption capabilities that aresold as massmarket software, whereas many such u.s. products are available.36¥the cost of developing, maintaining, and upgrading an economically viable product with encryption capabilities. the technical aspects of good encryption are increasingly well understood. as a result, the incremental34an incident that demonstrates the importance of the nonalgorithm aspects of a productis the failure of the keygeneration process for the netscape navigator web browser thatwas discovered in 1995; a faulty random number generation used in the generation of keyswould enable an intruder exploiting this flaw to limit a bruteforce search to a much smallernumber of keys than would generally be required by the 40bit key length used in thisproduct. see john markoff, òsecurity flaw is discovered in software used in shopping,ónew york times, september 19, 1995, p. a1. a detailed discussion of protocol failures can befound in gustavus simmons, òcryptanalysis and protocol failures,ó communications of theacm, volume 37(11), 1994, pp. 5665.35computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, keepingthe u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integration, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1992.36for example, the department of commerce and the national security agency found nogeneralpurpose software products with encryption capability from nonu.s. manufacturers. see department of commerce and national security agency, a study of the international market for computer software with encryption, released january 11, 1996, p. iii9.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycost of designing a software product so that it can provide cryptographicfunctionality to end users is relatively small. as cost barriers to the inclusion of cryptographic functionality are reduced dramatically, the longterm likelihood increases that most products that process digital information will include some kinds of cryptographic functionality.¥the suitability of hardware vs. software as a medium in which toimplement a product with encryption capabilities. the duplication anddistribution costs for software are very low compared to those for hardware, and yet, trade secrets embedded in proprietary hardware are easierto keep than those included in software. moreover, software cryptographic functions are more easily disabled.¥nonmarket considerations and export controls. vendors may withhold or alter their products at government request. for example, a welldocumented instance is the fact that at&t voluntarily deferred the introduction of its 3600 secure telephone unit (stu) at the behest ofgovernment (see appendix e on the history of current cryptographypolicy and chapter 6 on government influence). export controls alsoaffect decisions to make products available even for domestic use, asdescribed in chapter 4.2.5 infrastructure for widespreaduse of cryptographythe widespread use of cryptography requires a support infrastructure that can service organizational or individual user needs with regardto cryptographic keys.2.5.1 key management infrastructurein general, to enable use of cryptography across an enterprise, theremust be a mechanism that:¥periodically supplies all participating locations with keys (typically designated for use during a given calendar or time periodñthecryptoperiod) for either stored materials or communications; or¥permits any given location to generate keys for itself as needed(e.g., to protect stored files); or¥can securely generate and transmit keys among communicatingparties (e.g., for data transmissions, telephone conversations).in the most general case, any given mechanism will have to performall three functions. with symmetric systems, the movement of keys fromplace to place obviously must be done securely and with a level of protection adequate to counter the threats of concern to the using parties. whatcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure75ever the distribution system, it clearly must protect the keys with appropriate safeguards and must be prepared to identify and authenticate thesource. the overall task of securely assuring the availability of keys forsymmetric applications is often called key management.if all secure communications take place within the same corporationor among locations under a common line of authority, key management isan internal or possibly a joint obligation. for parties that communicateoccasionally or across organizational boundaries, mutual arrangementsmust be formulated for managing keys. one possibility might be a separate trusted entity whose line of business could be to supply keys ofspecified length and format, on demand and for a fee.with asymmetric systems, the private keys are usually selfgenerated, but they may also be generated from a central source, such as acorporate security office. in all cases, however, the handling of privatekeys is the same for symmetric and asymmetric systems; they must beguarded with the highest levels of security. although public keys neednot be kept secret, their integrity and association with a given user areextremely important and should also be supported with extremely robustmeasures.the costs of a key management infrastructure for national use are notknown at this time. one benchmark figure is that the cost of the defensedepartment infrastructure needed to generate and distribute keys for approximately 320,000 stuiii telephone users is somewhere in the range of$10 million to $13 million per year.372.5.2 certificate infrastructuresthe association between key information (such as the name of a person and the related public key) and an individual or organization is anextremely important aspect of a cryptographic system. that is, it is undesirable for one person to be able to impersonate another. to guard againstimpersonation, two general types of solutions have emerged: an organizationcentric approach consisting of certificate authorities and a usercentric approach consisting of a web of trust.a certificate authority serves to validate information that is associated with a known individual or organization. certificate authorities canexist within a single organization, across multiple related organizations,or across society in general. any number of certificate authorities cancoexist, and they may or may not have agreements for crosscertification,37william crowell, deputy director, national security agency, personal communication,april 1996.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76cryptographyõs role in securing the information societywhereby if one authority certifies a given person, then another authoritywill accept that certification within its own structure. certificate authority hierarchies are defined in the internet rfcs 14211424, the x.509 standard, and other emerging commercial standards, such as that proposedby mastercard/visa. a number of private certificate authorities, such asverisign, have also begun operation to service secure massmarket software products, such as the netscape navigator web browser.among personal acquaintances validation of public keys can bepassed along from person to person or organization to organization, thuscreating a web of trust in which the entire ensemble is considered to betrusted based on many individual instances of trust. such a chain of trustcan be established between immediate parties, or from one party to asecond to establish the credentials of a third. this approach has beenmade popular by the pretty good privacy (pgp) software product; allusers maintain their own òkeyring,ó which holds the public keys of everyone with whom they want to communicate.importantly, it should be noted that both the certificate authorityapproach and the web of trust approach replicate the pattern of trust thatalready exists among participating parties in societal and business activities. in a sense, the certificate infrastructure for cryptography simplyformalizes and makes explicit what society and its institutions are alreadyaccustomed to.at some point, banks, corporations, and other organizations alreadygenerally trusted by society will start to issue certificates. at that time,individuals especially may begin to feel more comfortable about the cryptographic undergirding of societyõs electronic infrastructure, at whichpoint the webs of trust can be expected to evolve according to individualchoices and market forces. however, it should be noted that differentcertificates will be used for different functions, and it is unlikely that asingle universal certificate infrastructure will satisfy all societal and business needs. for example, because an infrastructure designed to supportelectronic commerce and banking may do no more than identify validpurchasers, it may not be useful for providing interpersonal communication or corporate access control.certificate authorities already exist within some businesses, especiallythose that have moved vigorously into an electronic way of life. generally, there is no sense of a need for a legal framework to establish relationships among organizations, each of which operates its own certificatefunction. arrangements exist for them to crosscertify one another; ingeneral, the individual(s) authorizing the arrangement will be a seniorofficer of the corporation, and the decision will be based on the existenceof other legal agreements already in place, notably, contracts that definethe relationships and obligations among organizations.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography: roles, market, and infrastructure77for the general business world in which any individual or organization wishes to conduct a transaction with any other individual or organization, such as the sale of a house, a formal certificate infrastructure hasyet to be created. there is not even one to support just a digital signatureapplication within government. hence, it remains to be seen how, in thegeneral case, individuals and organizations will make the transition to anelectronic society.certificate authorities currently operate within the framework of contractual law. that is, if some problem arises as the result of improperactions on the part of the certification authority, its subscribers will haveto pursue a civil complaint. as certificate authorities grow in size andservice a greater part of society, it will probably be necessary to regulatetheir actions under law, much like those of any major societal institutions.38 it is interesting to observe that the legal and operational environment that will have to exist for certificate organizations involves the sameset of issues that are pertinent to escrow organizations (as discussed inchapter 5).2.6 recapcryptography provides important capabilities that can help deal withthe vulnerabilities of electronic information. cryptography can help toassure the integrity of data, to authenticate the identity of specific parties,to prevent individuals from plausibly denying that they have signedsomething, and to preserve the confidentiality of information that mayhave improperly come into the possession of unauthorized parties. atthe same time, cryptography is not a silver bullet, and many technical andhuman factors other than cryptography can improve or detract from information security. in order to preserve information security, attentionmust be given to all of these factors. moreover, people can use cryptography only to the extent that it is incorporated into real products and systems; unimplemented cryptographic algorithms cannot contribute to information security. many factors other than raw mathematical knowledgecontribute to the supply of and demand for products with cryptographicfunctionality. most importantly, the following aspects influence the demand for cryptographic functions in products:¥critical mass in the marketplace,38shimshon berkovits et al., public key infrastructure study: final report, national institute of standards and technology, gaithersburg, md., april 1994. performed under contract to mitre corporation, this study is summarized in appendix h.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78cryptographyõs role in securing the information society¥government policy,¥supporting infrastructure,¥cost,¥performance,¥overall security environment,¥usability,¥quality certification and evaluation, and¥interoperability standards.finally, any largescale use of cryptography, with or without keyescrow (discussed later in chapter 5), depends on the existence of a substantial supporting infrastructure, the deployment of which raises a different set of problems and issues.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.793needs for access to encryptedinformationinformation protected for confidentiality (i.e., encrypted information)is stored or communicated for later use by certain parties with the authorization of the original protector. however, it may happen for variouslegitimate and lawfully authorized reasons that other parties may need torecover this information as well. this chapter discusses needs for accessto encrypted information under exceptional circumstances for legitimateand lawfully authorized purposes from the perspectives of businesses,individuals, law enforcement, and national security. businesses and individuals may want access to encrypted data or communications for theirown purposes and thus may cooperate in using products to facilitate suchaccess, while law enforcement and national security authorities may wantaccess to the encrypted data or communications of criminals and partieshostile to the united states.3.1 terminologyit is useful to conceptualize data communications and data storageusing the language of transactions. for example, one individual maytelephone another; the participants in the transaction are usually referredto as the calling party and the called party. or, a person makes a purchase; the participants are called the buyer and seller. or, a sender mailssomething to the recipient. adopting this construct, consider communications in which the first party (party a) sends a message and the secondparty (party b) receives it. òpartyó does not necessarily imply a person; acryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyòpartyó can be a computer system, a communication system, a softwareprocess. in the case of data storage, party a stores the data, while party bretrieves it. note that party a and party b can be the same party (as is thecase when an individual stores a file for his or her own later use).under some circumstances, a third party may be authorized for access to data stored or being communicated. for example, law enforcement authorities may be granted legal authorization to obtain surreptitious access to a telephone conversation or a stored data file or recordwithout the knowledge of parties a or b. the employer of party a mayhave the legal right to read all data files for which party a is responsibleor to monitor all communications in which party a participates. party amight inadvertently lose access to a data file and wish to recover thataccess.in cases when the data involved is unencrypted, the proceduresneeded to obtain access can be as simple as identifying the relevant filename or as complex as seeking a court order for legal authorization. butwhen the data involved is encrypted, the procedures needed to obtainaccess will require the possession of certain critical pieces of information,such as the relevant cryptographic keys.thirdparty access has many twists and turns. when it is necessaryfor clarity of exposition or meaning, this report uses the phrase òexceptional accessó to stress that the situation is not one that was includedwithin the intended bounds of the original transaction, but is an unusualsubsequent event. exceptional access refers to situations in which anauthorized party needs and can obtain the plaintext of encrypted data (forstorage or communications). the word òexceptionaló is used in contrastto the word òroutineó and connotes something unusual about the circumstances under which access is required.exceptional access can be divided into three generic categories:¥government exceptional access refers to the case in which government has a need for access to information under specific circumstancesauthorized by law. for example, a person might store data files that lawenforcement authorities need to prosecute or investigate a crime. alternatively, two people may be communicating with each other in the planning or commission of a serious crime. government exceptional accessthus refers to the governmentõs need to obtain the relevant informationunder circumstances authorized by law, and requires a court order (foraccess to voice or data communications) or a subpoena or search warrant(for access to stored records). government exceptional access is the focusof section 3.2. the related signals intelligence need is discussed insection 3.3.¥employer (or corporate) exceptional access refers to the case in whichcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information81an employer (i.e., the corporate employer) has the legal right to access toinformation encrypted by an employee. if an employee who has encrypted a file is indisposed on a certain day, for example, the companymay need exceptional access to the contents of the file. alternatively, anemployee may engage in communications whose content the companymay have a legitimate need to know (e.g., the employee may be leakingproprietary information). employer exceptional access would then referto the companyõs requirement to obtain the key necessary to obtain thecontents of the file or communications, and may require the interventionof another institutional entity. employer or corporate exceptional accessis the focus of section 3.5.¥enduser exceptional access refers to the case in which the partiesprimarily intended to have access to plaintext have lost the means toobtain such access. for example, a single user may have stored a file forlater retrieval, but encrypted it to ensure that no other party would haveaccess to it while it was in storage. however, the user might also lose orforget the key used to encrypt that file. enduser exceptional access refersto such a userõs requirement to obtain the proper key, and may requirethat the individual who has lost a key prove his identify to a party holding the backup key and verify his authorization to obtain a duplicate copyof his key. enduser exceptional access is also discussed in section 3.5.the need for exceptional access when the information stored or communicated is encrypted has led to an examination of a concept genericallyknown as escrowed encryption (the subject of chapter 5), which, looselyspeaking, uses agents other than the parties participating in the communication or data storage to hold copies of or otherwise have access torelevant cryptographic keys òin escrowó so that needs for enduser, corporate, and government exceptional access can be met; these agents arecalled escrow agents.3.2 law enforcement: investigationand prosecutionobtaining information (both evidence and intelligence) has always beena central element in the conduct of law enforcement investigations andprosecutions. accordingly, criminals have always wished to protect theinformation relevant to their activities from law enforcement authorities.3.2.1 the value of access to information for law enforcementmany criminals keep records related to their activities; such recordscan be critical to the investigation and prosecution of criminal activity.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 3.1examples of the utility of wiretaping¥ the el rukn gang in chicago, acting as a surrogate for the libyan governmentand in support of terrorism, planned to shoot down a commercial airliner within theunited states using a stolen military weapon. this act of terrorism was preventedthrough the use of telephone wiretaps.¥ the 1988 òill windó public corruption and defense department fraud investigation relied heavily on courtordered telephone wiretaps. to date, this investigation has resulted in the conviction of 65 individuals and more than a quarter of abillion dollars in fines, restitutions, and recoveries.¥ numerous drug trafficking and money laundering investigations, such as theòpolar capó and òpizza connectionó cases, utilized extensive telephone wiretaps inthe successful prosecution of largescale national and international drug traffickingorganizations. òpolar capó resulted in the arrest of 33 subjects and the recovery of$50 million in assets seized. additionally, in a 1992 miami raid, which directlyresulted from wiretaps, agents confiscated 15,000 pounds of cocaine and arrested 22subjects.¥ the investigation of convicted spy aldrich ames relied heavily on wiretapsordered under foreign intelligence surveillance act authority.¥ in a 1990 òsexual exploitation of childrenó investigation, the fbi relied heavily on wiretaps to prevent violent individuals from abducting, torturing, and murdering a child in order to make a òsnuff murderó film.source: federal bureau of investigation.for example, criminals engaged in whitecollar crimes such as fraud oftenleave paper trails that detail fraudulent activities; drug dealers often keepaccounting records of clients, dropoffs, supplies, and income. reconstruction of these paper trails is often a critical element in building a caseagainst these individuals. the searchandseizure authority of law enforcement to obtain paper records is used in a large fraction of criminalcases.as for communications, law enforcement officials believe that wiretapping is a crucial source of information that could not be obtained inany other way or obtained only at high risk (box 3.1). for example, thefederal bureau of investigation (fbi) has testified that[w]ithout law enforcementõs ability to effectively execute court ordersfor electronic surveillance, the country would be unable to protect itselfagainst foreign threats, terrorism, espionage, violent crime, drug trafficking, kidnapping, and other crimes. we may be unable to intercept aterrorist before he sets off a devastating bomb; unable to thwart a forcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information83eign spy before he can steal secrets that endanger the entire country; andunable to arrest drug traffickers smuggling in huge amounts of drugsthat will cause widespread violence and death. courtapproved electronic surveillance is of immense value, and often is the only way toprevent or solve the most serious crimes facing todayõs society.1criminals often discuss their past criminal activity and plans for future criminal activity with other parties. obtaining òinside informationóon such activities is often a central element of building a case against theperpetrators. a defendant who describes in his own words how he committed a crime or the extent to which he was involved in it gives prosecutors a powerful weapon that juries tend to perceive as fair.2other methods of obtaining òinside informationó have significantrisks associated with them:¥informants are often used to provide inside information. however, the credibility of informants is often challenged in court, either because the informants have shady records themselves or because they mayhave made a deal with prosecutors by agreeing to serve as informants inreturn for more lenient treatment.3 by contrast, challenges to evidenceobtained through wiretaps are based far more frequently on their admissibility in court rather than their intrinsic credibility. informants may alsobe difficult to find when a criminal group is small in size.¥surreptitiously planted listening devices are also used to obtaininside information. however, they generally obtain only one side of aconversation (use of a speakerphone presents an exception). further,since listening devices require the use of an agent to plant them, installation of such devices is both highly intrusive (arguably more so than wiretapping) for the subject of the device and risky for the planting agent.requests for the use of such devices are subject to the same judicial oversight and review as wiretaps.1statement of james k. kallstrom, special agent in charge, special operations division,new york field division, federal bureau of investigation, on òsecurity issues in computers and communications,ó before the subcommittee on technology, environment, andaviation of the committee on science, space, and technology, u.s. house of representatives, may 3, 1994.2for example, see edward walsh, òreynolds guilty on all counts,ó washington post,august 23, 1995, p. 1.3see, for example, sharon walsh, òwhistleblower quandary: will testimony fly?,ó washington post, august 23, 1995, p. f3; richard perezpena, òan informerõs double life: blowscome from 2 sides,ó new york times, october 15, 1995, p. 35; joseph p. fried, òundermining a bombtrial witness,ó new york times, april 9, 1995, p. 42; and stephen labaton, òtheprice can be high for talk thatõs cheap,ó new york times, week in review, april 2, 1995,p. 3.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythis discussion is not intended to suggest that wiretaps are a perfectsource of information and always useful to law enforcement. an important difficulty in using wiretaps is that context is often difficult for listeners to establish when they are monitoring a telephone conversation thatassumes shared knowledge between the communicators.4because of the legal framework regulating wiretaps, and the fact thatcommunications are by definition transient whereas records endure, wiretapping is used in far fewer criminal cases than is seizure of records.although the potential problems of denying law enforcement access tocommunications has been the focus of most of the public debate, encryption of data files in a way that denies law enforcement authorities accessto data files relevant to criminal activity arguably presents a much largerthreat to their capabilities.3.2.2 the legal framework governing surveillancean evolving legal framework governs the authority of governmentauthorities to undertake surveillance of communications that take placewithin the united states or that involve u.s. persons. surveillance withinthe united states is authorized only for certain legislatively specified purposes: the enforcement of certain criminal statutes and the collection offoreign intelligence. a more extended description of this framework (withfootnoted references) is contained in appendix d.domestic communications surveillancefor domestic law enforcement purposescommunications surveillance can involve surveillance for trafficanalysis and/or surveillance for content; these separate activities are governed by different laws and regulations. traffic analysis, a technique thatestablishes patterns of connections and communications, is performedwith the aid of pen registers that record the numbers dialed from a targettelephone, and trapandtrace devices that identify the numbers of telephones from which calls are placed to the target telephone. orders for the4indeed, in some instances, wiretap evidence has been used to exculpate defendants. see,for example, peter marks, òwhen the best defense is the prosecutionõs own tapes,ó newyork times, june 30, 1995, p. d20. according to roger shuy, professor of linguistics atgeorgetown university, there are many difficulties in ascribing meaning to particular utterances that may be captured on tape recordings of conversations. see roger shuy, languagecrimes, blackwell publishers, cambridge, mass., 1993. shuyõs book is mostly focused ontapes made by òwiresó carried by informants or òbugsó placed near a subject, but the basicprinciple is the same.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information85use of these devices may be requested by any federal attorney and grantedby any federal district judge or magistrate, and are granted on a more orless pro forma basis.surveillance of communications for content for purposes of domesticlaw enforcement is governed by title 18, u.s. code, sections 25102521,concerning òwire and electronic communications interceptions and interception of all communications,ó generally known as title iii. these sections of the u.s. code govern the use of listening devices (usually knownas òbugsó); wiretaps of communications involving human speech (calledòoral communicationsó in title iii) carried over a wire or wirelike cable,including optical fiber; and other forms of electronically transmitted communication, including various forms of data, text, and video that may becommunicated between or among people as well as computers or communications devices. under title iii, only certain federal crimes may beinvestigated (e.g., murder, kidnapping, child molestation, racketeering,narcotics offenses) through the interception of oral communications. inaddition, 37 states have passed laws that are similar to title iii, but theyinclude such additional restrictions as allowing only a fixed number ofinterceptions per year (connecticut) or only for drugrelated crimes (california). state wiretaps account for the majority of wiretaps in the unitedstates.surveillance of oral communications governed under title iii in general requires a court order (i.e., a warrant) granted at the discretion of ajudge.5 because electronic surveillance of oral communications is bothinherently intrusive and clandestine, the standards for granting a warrantfor such surveillance are more stringent than those required by the fourthamendment. these additional requirements are specified in title iii andare enforced by criminal and civil penalties applicable to law enforcementofficials or private citizens, and by a statutory exclusionary rule that violations of the central features of requirements may lead to suppression ofevidence in a later trial, even if such evidence meets the relevant fourthamendment test.because of the resources required, the administrative requirementsfor the application procedure, and the legal requirement that investigators exhaust other means of obtaining information, wiretaps are not oftenused. approximately 1,000 orders (both federal and state) are authorizedyearly (a number small compared to the number of felonies investigated,5emergency intercepts may be performed without a warrant in certain circumstances,such as physical danger to a person or conspiracy against the national security. there hasbeen òvirtually no useó of the emergency provision, and its constitutionality has not beentested in court (wayne r. lafave and jerold h. israel, criminal procedure, west publishingcompany, st. paul, minn., 1992, p. 254).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyeven if such felonies are limited to those specified in title iii as eligible forinvestigation with wiretaps).6 about 2,500 conversations are interceptedper order, and the total number of conversations intercepted is a verysmall fraction of the annual telephone traffic in the united states.surveillance of nonvoice communications, including fax and electronic communications, is also governed by title iii.7 the standard forobtaining an intercept order for electronic communications is less stringent than that for intercepting voice communications. for example, anyfederal felony may be investigated through electronic interception. inaddition, the statutory exclusionary rule of title iii for oral and wirecommunications does not apply to electronic communications.despite the legal framework outlined above, it is nevertheless possible that unauthorized or unlawful surveillance, whether undertaken byrogue law enforcement officials or overzealous private investigators, occurs. concerns over such activity are often expressed by critics of thecurrent administration policy, and they focus on two scenarios:¥with current telephone technology, it is sometimes technically possible for individuals (e.g., private investigators, criminals, rogue law enforcement personnel) to undertake wiretaps on their own initiative (e.g.,by placing alligator clips on the proper terminals in the telephone box ofan apartment building). such wiretaps would subject the personnel involved to title iii criminal penalties, but detection of such wiretaps mightwell be difficult. on the other hand, it is highly unlikely that such aperson could obtain the cooperation of major telephone service providerswithout a valid warrant or court order, and so these wiretaps would haveto be conducted relatively close to the targetõs telephone, and not in atelephone switching office.¥information obtained through a wiretap in violation of title iii can6some analysts critical of the u.s. government position on wiretaps have suggested thatthe actual distribution of crimes investigated under title iii intercept or surveillance ordersmay be somewhat inconsistent with government claims of the high value of such orders.(see, for example, testimony of david b. kopel, cato institute, òhearings on wiretappingand other terrorism proposals,ó committee on the judiciary, u.s. senate, may 24, 1995;also available online at http://www.cato.org/ct5245.html.) for example, table d.3 inappendix d indicates that no cases involving arson, explosives, or weapons were investigated using title iii wiretaps in 1988. the majority of title iii orders have involved drugand gambling crimes.7note that when there is no reasonable expectation of privacy, law enforcement officialsare not required to undertake any special procedure to monitor such communications. forexample, a law enforcement official participating in an online òcható group is not requiredto identify himself as such, nor must he obtain any special permission at all to monitor thetraffic in question. however, as a matter of policy, the fbi does not systematically monitorelectronic forums such as internet relay chats.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information87be suppressed in court, but such evidence may still be useful in the courseof an investigation. specifically, such evidence may cue investigatorsregarding specific areas that would be particularly fruitful to investigate,and if the illegal wiretap is never discovered, a wiretap that provides nocourtadmissible evidence may still prove pivotal to an investigation.8(even if it is discovered, different judges apply the doctrine of discardingòthe fruit of the poisonous treeó with different amounts of rigor.)the extent to which these and similar scenarios actually occur is hardto determine. information provided by the fbi to the committee indicatesa total of 187 incidents of various types (including indictments/complaints and convictions/pretrial diversions) involving charges of illegalelectronic surveillance (whether subsequently confirmed or not) over thepast 5 fiscal years (1990 through 1994).9domestic communications surveillance for foreign intelligence purposesthe statute governing interception of electronic communications forpurposes of protecting national security is known as the foreign intelligence surveillance act (fisa), which has been codified as sections 1801 to1811 in title 18 of the u.s. code. passed in 1978, fisa was an attempt tobalance fourth amendment rights against the constitutional responsibility of the executive branch to maintain national security. fisa is relevantonly to communications occurring at least partly within the united states(wholly, in the case of radio communications), although listening stationsused by investigating officers may be located elsewhere, and fisa surveillance may be performed only against foreign powers or their agents. interception of communications, when the communications occur entirely outside the united states, whether or not the participants include u.s. persons,is not governed by fisa, title iii, or any other statute. however, when au.s. person is outside the united states, executive order 12333 governsany communications intercepts targeted against such individuals.8such concerns are raised by reports of police misconduct as described in chapter 1.9the committee recognizes the existence of controversy over the question of whethersuch reports should be taken at face value. for example, critics of the u.s. government whobelieve that law enforcement authorities are capable of systematically abusing wiretap authority argue that law enforcement authorities would not be expected to report figures thatreflected such abuse. alternatively, it is also possible that cases of improper wiretaps are infact more numerous than reported and have simply not come to the attention of the relevant authorities. the committee discussed such matters and concluded that it had noreason to believe that the information it received on this subject from law enforcementauthorities was in any way misleading.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe basic framework of fisa is similar to that of title iii, with certainimportant differences, among which are the following:¥the purpose of fisa surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligenceinformation, defined in terms of u.s. national security, including defenseagainst attack, sabotage, terrorism, and clandestine intelligence activities,among others. the targeted communications need not relate to any crimeor be relevant as evidence in court proceedings.¥in most instances, a fisa surveillance application requires a warrant based on probable cause that foreign intelligence information will becollected.10 surveillance of a u.s. person (defined as a u.s. citizen, u.s.corporation or association, or legal resident alien) also requires probablecause showing that the person is acting as a foreign agent. political andother activities protected by the first amendment may not serve as thebasis for treating a u.s. person as a foreign agent.¥targets of fisa surveillance might never be notified that communications have been intercepted.since 1979, there have been an average of over 500 fisa orders peryear. in 1992, 484 were issued. other information about fisa interceptsis classified.3.2.3 the nature of the surveillance needs of law enforcementin cooperation with the national technical investigators association,the fbi has articulated a set of requirements for its electronic surveillanceneeds (box 3.2). of course, access to surveillance that does not meet all ofthese requirements is not necessarily useless. for example, surveillancethat does not meet the transparency requirement may still be quite usefulin certain cases (e.g., if the subjects rationalize the lack of transparency asòstatic on the lineó). the basic point is that these requirements constitutea set of continuous metrics by which the quality of a surveillance capability can be assessed, rather than a list that defines what is or is not usefulsurveillance.of these requirements, the realtime requirement is perhaps the mostdemanding. the fbi has noted that10surveillance may take place without a court order for up to 1 year if the attorneygeneral certifies that there is very little likelihood of intercepting communications involving u.s. persons and that the effort will target facilities used exclusively by foreign powers.under limited circumstances, emergency surveillance may be performed before a warrantis obtained (clifford s. fishman, wiretapping and eavesdropping: cumulative supplement, clarkboardman callaghan, deerfield, ill., november 1994, sections 361, 366).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information89box 3.2law enforcement requirements for the surveillance ofelectronic communications¥ prompt and expeditious access both to the contents of the electronic communications and òsetupó information necessary to identify the calling and called parties¥ realtime, fulltime monitoring capability for intercepts. such capability isparticularly important in an operational context, in which conversations among either criminal conspirators (e.g., regarding a decision to take some terrorist action) orcriminals and innocent third parties (e.g., regarding a purchase order for explosivesfrom a legitimate dealer) may have immediate significance¥ delivery of intercepted communications to specified monitoring facilities¥ transparent access to the communications, i.e., access that is undetectable toall parties to the communications (except to the monitoring parties) and implementation of safeguards to restrict access to intercept information¥ verification that the intercepted communications are associated with the intercept subject¥ capabilities for some number of simultaneous intercepts to be determinedthrough a cooperative industry/law enforcement effort¥ reliability of the services supporting the intercept at the same (or higher) levelof the reliability of the communication services provided to the intercept subject¥ a quality of service for the intercept that complies with the performancestandards of the service providerssource: law enforcement requirements for the surveillance of electronic communications, federal bureau of investigation in cooperation with the national technical investigators association, june 1994.[s]ome encryption products put at risk efforts by federal, state and locallaw enforcement agencies to obtain the contents of intercepted communications by precluding realtime decryption. realtime decryption isoften essential so that law enforcement can rapidly respond to criminalactivity and, in many instances, prevent serious and lifethreateningcriminal acts.1111statement of james k. kallstrom, special agent in charge, special operations division,new york field division, federal bureau of investigation, on òsecurity issues in computers and communications,ó before the subcommittee on technology, environment, andaviation of the committee on science, space, and technology, u.s. house of representatives, may 3, 1994. an illustrative example is an instance in which the fbi was wiretappingpolice officers who were allegedly guarding a drug shipment. during that time, the fbioverheard a conversation between the police chief and several other police officials that thefbi believes indicated a plot to murder a certain individual who had previously filed apolice brutality complaint against the chief. (however, the fbi was unable to decode thepolice chiefõs òstreet slang and police jargonó in time to prevent the murder.) see paulkeegan, òthe thinnest blue line,ó new york times magazine, march 31, 1996, pp. 3235.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyrealtime surveillance is generally less important for crimes that areprosecuted or investigated than for crimes that are prevented because ofthe time scales involved. prosecutions and investigations take place onthe time scales of days or more, whereas prevention may take place on thetime scale of hours. in some instances, the longer time scale is relevant:because title iii warrants can be issued only when òprobable causeó exists that a crime has been committed, the actual criminal act is committedbefore the warrant is issued, and thus prevention is no longer an issue. inother instances, information obtained under a valid title iii warrant issued to investigate a specific criminal act can be used to prevent a subsequent criminal act, in which case the shorter time scale may be relevant.the situation is similar under fisa, in which warrants need not necessarily be obtained in connection with any criminal activity. a good exampleis terrorism cases, in which it is quite possible that realtime surveillancecould provide actionable information useful in thwarting an imminentterrorist act.3.2.4 the impact of cryptography and new media on lawenforcement (stored and communicated data)cryptography can affect information collection by law enforcementofficials in a number of ways. however, for perspective, it is important tokeep in mind a broader contextñnamely that advanced information technologies (of which cryptography is only one element) have potential impacts across many different dimensions of law enforcement; box 3.3 provides some discussion of this point.encrypted communicationsas far as the committee has been able to determine, criminal use ofdigitally encrypted voice communications has not presented a significantproblem to law enforcement to date.12 on rare occasions, law enforcement officials conducting a wiretap have encountered òunknown signalsóthat could be encrypted traffic or simply a data stream that was unrecognizable to the intercept equipment. (for example, a highspeed fax transmission might be transported on a particular circuit; a monitoring agent12in this regard, it is important to distinguish between òvoice scramblersó and encryptedvoice communications. voice scramblers are a relatively old and widely available technology for concealing the contents of a voice communication; they transform the analog waveform of a voice and have nothing to do with encryption per se. true encryption is atransformation of digitally represented data. voice scramblers have been used by criminalsfor many years, whereas devices for digital encryption remain rare.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information91might be unable to distinguish between the signal of the fax and an encrypted voice signal with the equipment available to him.)the lack of criminal use of encryption in voice communications mostlikely reflects the lack of use of encryption by the general public. moreover, files are more easily encrypted than communications, simply because the use of encrypted communications presumes an equally sophisticated partner, whereas only one individual must be knowledgeable toencrypt files. as a general rule, criminals are most likely to use what isavailable to the general public, and the encryption available to and usableby the public has to date been minimal. at the same time, sophisticatedand wealthy criminals (e.g., those associated with drug cartels) are muchmore likely to have access to and to use cryptography.13in data communications, one of the first publicized instances of lawenforcement use of a title iii intercept order to monitor a suspectõs electronic mail occurred in december 1995, when the customer of an onlineservice provider was the subject of surveillance during a criminal investigation.14 email is used for communications; a message is composed atone host, sent over a communications link, and stored at another host.two opportunities exist to obtain the contents of an email messageñthefirst while the message is in transit over the communications link, and thesecond while it is resident on the receiving host. from a technical perspective, it is much easier to obtain the message from the receiving host, andthis is what happened in the december 1995 instance. (appendix d contains more detail on how electronic communications are treated under titleiii.)federal law enforcement authorities believe that encryption of communications (whether voice or data) will be a significant problem in thefuture. fbi director louis freeh has argued that òunless the issue ofencryption is resolved soon, criminal conversations over the telephoneand other communications devices will become indecipherable by lawenforcement. this, as much as any issue, jeopardizes the public safetyand national security of this country. drug cartels, terrorists, and kidnappers will use telephones and other communications media with impunity13for example, police raids in colombia on offices of the cali cartel resulted in the seizureof advanced communications devices, including radios that distort voices, videophones toprovide visual authentication of callersõ identities, and devices for scrambling computermodem transmissions. the colombian defense minister was quoted as saying that the ciahad told him that the technological sophistication of the cali cartel was about equal to thatof the kgb at the time of the soviet unionõs collapse. see james brooke, òcrackdown hascali drug cartel on the run,ó new york times, june 27, 1995, p. a1.14see gautam naik, òu.s., using email tap, charges three with operating cellularfraud ring,ó wall street journal, january 2, 1996, p. b16.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 3.3how noncryptography applications of information technologycould benefit law enforcementas acknowledged in the main text, encryption in ubiquitous use would createcertain difficulties for law enforcement. nevertheless, it is important to place intocontext the overall impact on law enforcement of the digital information technologies that enable encryption and other capabilities that are not the primary subject ofthis report. chapter 2 suggested how encryption capabilities can be a positive forcefor more effective law enforcement (e.g., secure police communications). but information technology is increasingly ubiquitous and could appear in a variety of otherapplications less obvious than encryption. for example:¥ video technology has become increasingly inexpensive. thus, it is easy toimagine police cruisers with video cameras that are activated upon request whenpolice are responding to an emergency call. monitoring those cameras at policeheadquarters would provide a method for obtaining timely information regarding theneed of the responding officers for backup. equipping individual police officers witheven smaller video cameras attached to their uniforms and recording such transmissions would provide objective evidence to corroborate (or refute) an officerõs description of what he saw at a crime scene.¥ the number of users of cellular telephones and widearea wireless communications services will grow rapidly. as such technologies enable private citizens toact as responsible eyes and ears that observe and report emergencies in progress, lawenforcement officials will be able to respond more quickly. (see, for example, chana schoenberger, òthe pocketsize protector; feeling safe, not stylish, with cellularphones,ó washington post, august 29, 1995, p. b5.)¥ electronically mediated sting operations help to preserve cover stories of lawenforcement officials. for example, the cybersnare sting operation resulted in thearrest of six individuals who allegedly stole cellular telephone numbers en masseknowing that their conversations are immune from our most valued investigative technique.ó15 in addition, the initial draft of the digital telephony bill called for telephone service providers to deliver the plaintextof any encrypted communications they carried, a provision that wasdropped in later drafts of the bill.1615see the prepared statement of louis j. freeh, director, federal bureau of investigation,for the federal drug law enforcement hearing before the house judiciary committee,subcommittee on crime, u.s. house of representatives, march 30, 1995.16the final bill provides that òa telecommunications carrier shall not be responsible fordecrypting, or ensuring the governmentõs ability to decrypt, any communication encryptedby a subscriber or customer, unless the encryption was provided by the carrier and thecarrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt the communication.ócryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information93encrypted data filesencryption by criminals of computerbased records that relate to theircriminal activity is likely to pose a significant problem for law enforcement in the future. fbi director freeh has noted publicly17 two instancesin which encrypted files have already posed a problem for law enforcement authorities: a terrorist case in the philippines involving a plan toblow up a u.s. airliner as well as a plan to assassinate the pope in late1994,18 and the òinnocent imagesó child pornography case of 1995 infrom major companies, resulting in millions of dollars of industry losses. cybersnarewas based on an underground bulletin board that appealed to cellular telephone andcredit card thieves. messages were posted offering for sale cellular telephone òcloningó equipment and stolen cellular telephone numbers, and included contact telephone numbers that were traced to the individuals in question. (see gautam naik,òsecret service agents arrest six hackers in cellularphone sting in cyberspace,ówall street journal, september 12, 1995, p. b6.)¥ the locations of automobiles over a metropolitan area could be tracked automatically, either passively or actively. an active technique might rely on a coded beaconthat would localize the position of the automobile on which it was mounted. a passivetechnique might rely on automatic scanning for license plates that were mounted on theroofs of cars. as an investigative technique, the ability to track the location of a particularautomobile over a period of time could be particularly important.even today, information technology enables law enforcement officials to conduct instant background checks for handgun purchases and arrest records when aperson is stopped for a traffic violation. retail merchants guard against fraud byusing information technology to check driving records when cars are rented andcredit checks for big purchases. the department of the treasury uses sophisticatedinformation technology to detect suspicious patterns that might indicate largescalemoney laundering by organized crime.all such possibilities involve important social as well as technical issues. forexample, the first two examples featured above seem relatively benign, while the lasttwo raise serious entrapment and privacy issues. even the òinstant backgroundchecksó of gun buyers have generated controversy. the mention of these applications (potential and actual) is not meant as endorsement, recommendation, or evensuggestion; they do, however, place into better context the potentialities of information technology in some overall sense to improve the capabilities of law enforcementwhile at the same time illustrating that concerns about excessive government powerare not limited to the issue of cryptography.17speech of fbi director louis freeh, before the international cryptography institute1995 conference, washington, d.c., september 21, 1995.18a general discussion of this case is found in phillip shenon, òworld trade centersuspect linked to plan to blow up 2 planes,ó new york times, march 26, 1995, p. 37.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94cryptographyõs role in securing the information society19a general discussion of the innocent images case is found in kara swisher, òonlinechild pornography charged as 12 are arrested,ó washington post, september 14, 1995, p. 1.20one note on terminology: in the signals intelligence community, the term òaccessó isused to refer to obtaining the desired signals, whether those signals are encrypted or not.this use conflicts with the usage adopted in this report, in which òaccessó generally meansobtaining the information contained in a signal (or message or file).which encrypted images stood in the way of grand jury access procedures.19 furthermore, director freeh told the committee that the use ofstored records in criminal prosecutions and investigations was much morefrequent than the use of wiretaps.the problem of encrypted data files is similar to the case in which acriminal keeps books or records in a code or a language that renders themunusable to anyone elseñin both instances, the cooperation of the criminal (or someone else with access to the key) is necessary to decipher therecords. the physical records as well as any recorded version of the key,if such a record exists, are available through a number of standard legalmechanisms, including physical search warrants and subpoenas. on theother hand, while the nature of the problem itself is the same in bothinstances, the ease and convenience of electronic encryption, especially ifperformed automatically, may increase the frequency with which encryption is encountered and/or the difficulties faced by law enforcement incryptanalyzing the material in question without the cooperation of thecriminal.finally, the problem of exceptional access to stored encrypted information is more easily solved than the problem of exceptional access toencrypted communications. the reason is that for file decryption, thetime constraints are generally less stringent. a file may have existed formany days or weeks or even years, and the time within which decryptionis necessary (e.g., to build a criminal case) is measured on the time scale ofinvestigatory activities; by contrast, the relevant time scale in the case ofdecrypting communications may be the time scale of operations, whichmight be as short as minutes or hours.3.3 national security and signals intelligence20cryptography is a twoedged sword for u.s. national security interests. cryptography is important in maintaining the security of u.s. classified information (appendix i), and the u.s. government has developedits own cryptographic systems to meet these needs. at the same time, theuse of cryptography by foreign adversaries also hinders u.s. acquisitioncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information95of communications intelligence. this section discusses the latter. (appendix f contains a short primer on intelligence.)3.3.1 the value of signals intelligence21signals intelligence (sigint) is a critically important arm of u.s.intelligence, along with imagery intelligence (imint) and intelligenceinformation collected directly by people, i.e., human intelligence(humint). sigint also provides timely tipoff and guidance to imintand humint collectors and is, in turn, tipped off by them. as in the caseof law enforcement, the information contained in a communications channel treated by an opponent as secure is likely to be free of intentionaldeception.the committee has received both classified and unclassified assessments of the current value of sigint and finds that the level of reportingreflects a continuing capability to produce both tactical and strategic information on a wide range of topics of national intelligence interest.sigint production is responding to the priorities established by presidential decision directive 35. as publicly described by president billclinton in remarks made to the staff of the cia and intelligence community, the priorities are as follows:¥òfirst, the intelligence need of our military during an operation . . . ,¥second, political, economic and military intelligence about countries hostile to the united states. we must also compile allsource information on major political and economic powers with weapons of massdestruction who are potentially hostile to us,¥third, intelligence about specific transnational threats to our security, such as weapons proliferation, terrorism, drug trafficking, organizedcrime, illicit trade practices and environmental issues of great gravity.ó22sigint is one valuable component of the overall u.s. intelligencecapability. it makes important contributions to ensure an informed, alert,and secure environment for u.s. war fighters and policy makers.21this report deals only with the communications intelligence (comint) aspects ofsigint; see appendix f for a discussion of electronic intelligence (elint) and its relationship to comint.22office of the press secretary, the white house, òremarks by the president to staff ofthe cia and intelligence community,ó central intelligence agency, mclean, va., july 14,1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96cryptographyõs role in securing the information societysigint support of military operationssigint is important to both tactical and strategic intelligence. tactical intelligence provides operational support to forces in the field, whetherthese forces are performing military missions or international law enforcement missions (e.g., as in drug eradication raids in latin americaconducted in cooperation with local authorities). the tactical dimensionswere most recently demonstrated in the gulf war through a skillfullyorchestrated interaction of sigint, imint, and humint that demonstrated the unequaled power of u.s. intelligence. sigint produced timelycommand and control intelligence and specific signal information to support electronic warfare; imint provided precise locating information topermit precision bombing, together with humint; sigint and imintprovided the field commands with an unprecedented degree of battlefield awareness.history also demonstrates many instances in which sigint hasproven decisive in the conduct of tactical military operations. these instances are more easily identified now because the passage of time hasmade the information less sensitive.¥the american naval victory at the battle of midway and the destruction of japanese merchant shipping resulted, in part, from admiral c.w.nimitzõs willingness to trust the sigint information he received from hisintelligence staff. general george marshall wrote that as a result of thissigint information, òwe were able to concentrate our limited forces tomeet [the japanese] naval advance on midway when otherwise we almostcertainly would have been some 3,000 miles out of place.ó23¥the shootdown in april 1943 of the commanderinchief of thejapanese navy, admiral isoroku yamamoto, was the direct result of asignals intercept that provided his detailed itinerary for a visit to thejapanese front lines.24¥the u.s. navy was able to compromise the operational code usedby german uboats in the atlantic in 1944, with the result that largenumbers of such boats were sunk.25¥allied intercepts of german army traffic were instrumental in thedefense of the anzio perimeter in italy in february 1944, a defense thatsome analysts believe was a turning point in the italian campaign; theseintercepts provided advance knowledge of the german timing, direction,23a good discussion of these topics is given in david kahn, the codebreakers, macmillan,new york, 1967, pp. 561573 (midway) and pp. 593594 (merchant shipping).24see kahn, the codebreakers, 1967, pp. 595601.25kahn, the codebreakers, 1967, pp. 504507.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information97and weight of assault, and enabled allied generals to concentrate theirresources in the appropriate places.26while these examples are 50 years old, the nature of warfare is not sodifferent today as to invalidate the utility of successful sigint. a primary difference between then and now is that the speed of warfare hasincreased substantially, placing a higher premium on realtime or nearrealtime intercepts. since the end of world war ii, sigint has providedtactical support to every military operation involving u.s. forces.other types of tactical intelligence to which sigint can contributeinclude indications and warning efforts (detecting an adversaryõs preparations to undertake armed hostilities); target identification, location, andprioritization (what targets should be attacked, where they are, and howimportant they are); damage assessment (how much damage an attackedtarget sustained); and learning the enemyõs rules of engagement (underwhat circumstances an adversary is allowed to engage friendly forces).sigint support of strategic intelligencestrategic (or national) intelligence is intended to provide analyticalsupport to senior policy makers rather than field commanders. in thisrole, strategic or national intelligence serves foreign policy, national security, and national economic objectives. strategic intelligence focuses onforeign political and economic events and trends, as well as on strategicmilitary concerns such as plans, doctrine, scientific and technical resources, weapon system capabilities, and nuclear program development.history also demonstrates the importance of sigint in a diplomatic,counterintelligence, and foreign policy context:¥in the negotiations following world war i over a treaty to limit thetonnage of capital ships (the washington conference on naval arms limitations), the u.s. state department was able to read japanese diplomatictraffic instructing its diplomats. one particular decoded intercept provided the bottom line in the japanese position, information that was useful in gaining japanese concessions.27¥recently, director of central intelligence john deutch unveiled thesocalled venona material, decrypted soviet intelligence service messages of the mid1940s that revealed soviet espionage against the u.s.26see ralph bennett, ultra and mediterranean strategy, william morrow and company,new york, 1989, pp. 265269.27see kahn, the codebreakers, 1967, pp. 358359.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyatomic program.28 intelligence about the cuban missile crisis has beenreleased. although primarily a story about u2 photography, the role ofsigint is included as well.¥decrypted intercepts of allied communications in the final monthsof world war ii played a major role in assisting the united states toachieve its goals at the conference called to decide on the united nationscharter. american policy makers knew the negotiating positions of nearlyall of the participating nations and thus were able to control the debate toa considerable degree.29¥during the cold war, sigint provided information about adversary military capabilities, weapons production, command and control,force structure and operational planning, weapons testing, and activitiesof missile forces and civil defense.in peacetime as in combat, each of the intelligence disciplines cancontribute critical information in support of national policy. former director of central intelligence admiral stansfield turner has pointed outthat ò[e]lectronic intercepts may be even more useful [than human agents]in discerning intentions. for instance, if a foreign official writes aboutplans in a message and the united states intercepts it, or if he discusses itand we record it with a listening device, those verbatim intercepts arelikely to be more reliable than secondhand reports from an agent.ó30 healso noted that òas we increase emphasis on securing economic intelligence, we will have to spy on the more developed countriesñour alliesand friends with whom we compete economicallyñbut to whom we turnfirst for political and military assistance in a crisis. this means that ratherthan instinctively reaching for human, onsite spying, the united stateswill want to look to those impersonal technical systems, primarily satellite photography and intercepts.ó31today, the united states conducts the largest sigint operation in theworld in support of information relevant to conventional military threats;the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; terrorism; enforcement28center for cryptologic history, national security agency, introductory history ofvenona and guide to the translations, fort george g. meade, md., undated. venonamaterial is also available from the web site of the national security agency at http://www.nsa.gov:8080/docs/venona/venona.html.29stephen schlesinger, òcryptanalysis for peacetime: codebreaking and the birth andstructure of the united nations,ó cryptologia, volume 19(3), july 1995, pp. 217235.30stansfield turner, òintelligence for a new world order,ó foreign affairs, fall 1991, pp.150166.31turner, òintelligence for a new world order,ó 1991, pp. 150166.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information99of international sanctions; protection of u.s. economic and trade interests;and political and economic developments abroad.¥u.s. intelligence has been used to uncover unfair trade practices(as determined by u.s. law and custom) of other nations whose industriescompete with u.s. businesses, and has helped the u.s. government toensure the preservation of a level economic playing field. according tothe national security agency (nsa), the economic benefits of sigintcontributions to u.s. industry taken as a whole have totaled tens of billions of dollars over the last several years.¥in sanctions monitoring and enforcement, intelligence intercepts ofserbian communications are reported to have been the first indication foru.s. authorities that an f16 pilot enforcing a nofly zone over serbia andshot down in june 1995 was in fact alive,32 and an important element inhis rescue. if the pilot had indeed been captured, u.s. options in serbiacould have been greatly constrained.¥sigint that has been made public or that has been tacitly acknowledged includes information about the shootdown of the korean airlinerkal 007 on september 1, 1983, and the bombing of la belle discothequein west berlin ordered by libya in april 1986.¥in foreign policy, accurate and timely intelligence has been, andremains, vital to u.s. efforts to avert conflicts between nations.¥in september 1988, president ronald reagan made the decision todisclose nsa decrypts of iraqi military communications òto prove that,despite their denials, iraqi armed forces had used poison gas against thekurds.ó33the information provided by sigint has helped to produce information on weapons proliferation, providing indications of violations of treaties or embargo requirements. sigint has collected information on international terrorism and foreign drug trafficking, thereby assisting in thedetection of drug shipments intended for delivery to the united states.similarly, such information will continue to be a source of importanteconomic intelligence.in conducting these intelligencegathering operations, a wide varietyof sources may be targeted, including the communications of governments, nongovernment institutions, and individuals. for example, banking is an international enterprise, and the u.s. government may need to32daniel williams, òôiõm ready to get the hell out of here,õó washington post, july 9,1995, p. a1.33 christopher andrew, for the presidentõs eyes only, harpercollins, new york, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyknow about flows of money for purposes of counterterrorism or sanctionsmonitoring.although the value of sigint to military operations and to law enforcement is generally unquestioned, senior decision makers have a widerange of opinions on the value of strategic and/or political intelligence.some decision makers are voracious consumers of intelligence reports.they believe that the reports they receive provide advance notice of another partyõs plans and intentions, and that their own decisions are betterfor having such information. these decision makers find that almost noamount of information is too much and that any given piece of information has the potential to be helpful.to illustrate the value of sigint to some senior policy makers, it ishelpful to recall president clintonõs remarks to the intelligence community on july 14, 1995, at the cia: he said that òin recent months alone youwarned us when iraq massed its troops against the kuwaiti border. youprovided vital support to our peacekeeping and humanitarian missionsin haiti and rwanda. you helped to strike a blow at a colombian drugcartel. you uncovered bribes that would have cheated american companies out of billions of dollars.ó on a previous occasion, thenpresidentgeorge bush gave his evaluation of sigint when he said that ò. . . overthe years iõve come to appreciate more and more the full value of sigint.as president and commanderinchief, i can assure you, signals intelligence is a prime factor in the decision making process by which we chartthe course of this nationõs foreign affairs.ó34some policy makers, generally less senior than the president, havestated that while intelligence reports are occasionally helpful, they do notin general add much to their decisionmaking ability because they contribute to information overload, are not sufficiently timely in the sensethat the information is revealed shortly in any event, lack necessary contextsetting information, or do not provide much information beyond thatavailable from open sources. even among the members of the committeewho have served in senior government positions, this range of opinion isrepresented.35the perceived value of strategic sigint (as with many other types ofintelligence) depends largely on the judgment and position of the particu34public papers of the presidents, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., 1991,as quoted by andrew in for the presidentõs eyes only, 1995, p. 526.35for an opensource report on the value of intelligence as perceived by different policymakers, see david e. sanger, òemerging role for the c.i.a.: economic spy,ó new yorktimes, october 15, 1995, p. 1; and david e. sanger, òwhen spies look out for the almightybuck,ó new york times, october 22, 1995, p. 4.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information101lar individuals whom the intelligence community is serving. these individuals change over time as administrations come and go, but intelligence capabilities are built up over a time scale longer than the electioncycle. the result is that the intelligence community gears itself to servethose decision makers who will demand the most from it, and is loath tosurrender sources and/or capabilities that may prove useful to decisionmakers.since the benefits of strategic intelligence are so subjective, formalcostbenefit analysis cannot be used to justify a given level of support forintelligence. rather, intelligence tends to be supported on a òlevelofeffortó basis, that is, a political judgment about what is òreasonable,ógiven other defense and nondefense pressures on the overall nationalbudget.3.3.2 the impact of cryptography on signals intelligencecryptography poses a threat to sigint for two separate but relatedreasons:¥strong cryptography can prevent any given message from beingread or understood. strong cryptography used primarily by foreign governments with the discipline to use those products on a regular and consistent basis presents the united states with a formidable challenge. someencrypted traffic regularly intercepted by the united states is simply undecipherable by any known means.¥even weak cryptography, if practiced on a widespread basis byforeign governments or other entities, increases the cost of exploitationdramatically.36 when most messages that are intercepted are unencrypted, the cost to determine whether an individual message is interesting is quite low. however, if most intercepted messages are encrypted,each one has to be cryptanalyzed individually, because the interceptordoes not know if it is interesting or not.37according to administration officials who testified to the committee,36this point is echoed in susan landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts: issues in u.s.crypto policy, 1994, p. 25.37for example, assume that 1 out of every 1,000 messages is interesting and that the costof intercepting a message is x and the cost of decrypting a message is y. thus, eachinteresting message is acquired at a cost of 1,000 x + y. however, if every message isencrypted, the cost of each interesting message is 1,000 (x + y), which is approximately1,000 y larger. in other words, the cryptanalyst must do 1,000 times more work for eachinteresting message.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe acquisition and proper use of cryptography by a foreign adversarycould impair the national security interests of the united states in a number of ways:¥cryptography used by adversaries on a wide scale would significantly increase the cost and difficulty of intelligence gathering across thefull range of u.s. national security interests.¥cryptography used by governments and foreign companies canincrease an adversaryõs capability to conceal the development of missiledelivery systems and weapons of mass destruction.¥cryptography can improve the ability of an adversary to maintainthe secrecy of its military operations to the detriment of u.s. or alliedmilitary forces that might be similarly engaged.the above comments suggest that the deployment of strong cryptography that is widely used will diminish the capabilities of those responsible for sigint. today, there is a noticeable trend toward better andcheaper encryption that is steadily closing the window of exploitation ofunencrypted communications. the growth of strong encryption will reduce the availability of such intelligence. using capabilities and techniques developed during the cold war, the sigint system will continueits efforts to collect against countries and other entities newly hostile tothe united states. many governments and parties in those nations, however, will be potential customers for advanced cryptography as it becomes available on world markets. in the absence of improved cryptanalytic methods, cooperative arrangements with foreign governments,and new ways of approaching the information collection problem, it islikely that losses in traditional sigint capability would result in a diminished effectiveness of the u.s. intelligence community.3.4 similarities in and differences between foreignpolicy/national security and law enforcementneeds for communications monitoringit is instructive to consider the similarities in and differences betweennational security and law enforcement needs for communications monitoring.3.4.1 similarities¥secrecy. both foreign policy and law enforcement authorities regard surreptitiously intercepted communications as a more reliable sourcethan information produced through other means. surveillance targetscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information103usually believe (however falsely) that their communications are private;therefore, eavesdropping must be surreptitious and the secrecy of monitoring maintained. thus, the identity and/or nature of specific sigintsources are generally very sensitive pieces of information, and are divulged only for good cause.¥timeliness. for support of tactical operations, nearrealtime information may be needed (e.g., when a crime or terrorist operation is imminent, when hostile forces are about to be engaged).¥resources available to targets. many parties targeted for electronicsurveillance for foreign policy reasons or by law enforcement authoritieslack the resources to develop their own security products, and are mostlikely to use what they can purchase on the commercial market.¥allocation of resources for collection. the size of the budget allocatedto law enforcement and to the u.s. intelligence community is not unlimited. available resources constrain both the amount of surveillance lawenforcement officials can undertake and the ability of the u.s. sigintsystem to respond to the full range of national intelligence requirementslevied upon it.ñelectronic surveillance, although in many cases critical, is only oneof the tools available to u.s. law enforcement. because it is manpowerintensive, it is a tool used sparingly; thus, it represents a relatively smallpercentage of the total investment. the average cost of a wiretap order is$57,000 (see appendix d) or approximately onehalf of a fulltimeequivalent agentyear.ñthe u.s. sigint system is a major contributor to the overall u.s.intelligence collection capability and represents a correspondingly largepercentage of the foreign intelligence budget. although large, the u.s.system is by no means funded to òvacuum cleanó the worldõs communications. it is sized to gather the most potentially lucrative foreign signalsand targeted very selectively to collect and analyze only those communications most likely to yield information relating to highpriority intelligence needs.¥perceptions of the problem. the volume of electronic traffic and theuse of encryption are both expected to grow, but how the growth of onewill compare to that of the other is unclear at present. if the overallgrowth in the volume of unencrypted electronic traffic lags the growth inthe use of cryptography, those conducting surveillance for law enforcement or foreign policy reasons may perceive a loss in access because thefraction of intercepts available to them will decrease, even if the absoluteamount of information intercepted has increased as the result of largervolumes of information. of course, if the communicating parties takespecial care to encrypt their sensitive communications, the absoluteamount of useful information intercepted may decrease as well.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104cryptographyõs role in securing the information society3.4.2 differences¥protection of sources. while the distinction is not hard and fast, lawenforcement authorities conducting an electronic surveillance are generally seeking specific items of evidence that relate to a criminal act and thatcan be presented in open court, which implies that the source of suchinformation (i.e., the wiretap) will be revealed (and possibly challengedfor legal validity). by contrast, national security authorities are usuallyseeking a body of intelligence information over a longer period of timeand are therefore far more concerned with preserving the secrecy ofsources and methods.¥definition of interests. there is a consensus, expressed in law, aboutthe specific types of domestic crimes that may be investigated through theuse of wiretapping. even internationally, there is some degree of consensus about what activities are criminal; the existence of this consensusenables a considerable amount of law enforcement cooperation on a variety of matters. national security interests are defined differently and aresubject to refinement in a changing world, and security interests oftenvary from nation to nation. however, a community of interest amongnato allies and between the united states and the major nations of thefree world makes possible fruitful intelligence relationships, even thoughthe united states may at times target a nation that is both ally and competitor.¥volume of potentially relevant communications. the volume of communications of interest to law enforcement authorities is small comparedto the volume of interest to national security authorities.¥legal framework. domestic law enforcement authorities are boundby constitutional protections and legislation that limit their ability to conduct electronic surveillance. national security authorities operate underfar fewer legal constraints in monitoring the communications of foreignparties located outside the united states.¥perceptions of vulnerability to surveillance. parties targeted by national security authorities are far more likely to take steps to protect theircommunications than are most criminals.3.5 business and individual needs for exceptionalaccess to protected informationas noted above in section 3.1, an employer may need access to datathat has been encrypted by an employee. corporations that use cryptography for confidentiality must always be concerned with the risk thatkeys will be lost, corrupted, required in some emergency situation, or becryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information105otherwise unavailable, and they have a valid interest in defending theirinterests in the face of these eventualities.38cryptography can present problems for companies attempting to satisfy their legitimate business interests in access to stored and communicated information:¥stored data. for entirely legitimate business reasons, an employeemight encrypt business records, but due to circumstances such as vacationor sick leave, the employer might need to read the contents of these recordswithout the employeeõs immediate assistance. then again, an employeemight simply forget the relevant password to an encrypted file, or an employee might maliciously refuse to provide the key (e.g., if he has a grudgeagainst his employer), or might keep records that are related to improperactivities but encrypt them to keep them private; a business undertaking anaudit to uncover or investigate these activities might well need to readthese records without the assistance of the employee. for example, in adispute over alleged wrongdoing of his superiors, a washington, d.c.,financial analyst changed the password on the cityõs computer and refusedto share it.39 in another incident, the former chief financial officer of aninsurance company, golden eagle group ltd., installed a password knownonly to himself and froze out operations. he demanded a personal computer that he claimed was his, his final paycheck, a letter of reference, and a$100 feeñpresumably for revealing the password.40 while technical fixesfor these problems are relatively easy, they do demonstrate the existence ofmotivation to undertake such actions. furthermore, it is poor managementpractice that allows a single employee to control critical data, but that issueis beyond the scope of this study.¥communications. a number of corporations provided input to thecommittee indicating that for entirely legitimate business reasons (e.g.,for resolution of a dispute between the corporation and a customer), anemployer might need to learn about the content of an employeeõs communications. alternatively, an employee might use company communications facilities as a means for conducting improper activities (e.g., leakingcompanyconfidential information, stealing corporate assets, engaging in38while users may lose or corrupt keys used for user authentication, the proceduresneeded in this event are different than if the keys in question are for encryption. forexample, a lost authentication key creates a need to revoke the key, so that another party thatcomes into possession of the authentication key cannot impersonate the original owner. bycontrast, an encryption key that is lost creates a need to recover the key.39peter g. neumann, computerrelated risks, addisonwesley, new york, 1995, p. 154.40neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 154.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106cryptographyõs role in securing the information societykickback or fraud schemes, inappropriately favoring one supplier overanother). a business undertaking an audit to uncover or investigate theseactivities might well need to monitor these communications without theconsent of the employee (box 3.4)41 but would be unable to do so if thecommunications were encrypted. in other instances, a company mightwish to assist law enforcement officials in investigating informationcrimes against it42 but would not be able to do so if it could not obtainaccess to unsanctioned employeeencrypted files or communications.many, though certainly not all, businesses require prospective employeesto agree as a condition of employment that their communications aresubject to employer monitoring under various circumstances.43it is a generally held view among businesses that provisions for corporate exceptional access to stored data are more important than suchprovisions for communications.44 for individuals, the distinction is even41for example, employees with internet access may spend so much time on nonworkrelated internet activities that their productivity is impaired. concerns about such problems have led some companies to monitor the internet activities of their employees, andspawned products that covertly monitor and record internet use. see laurie flynn, òfinding online distractions, employers strive to keep workers in line,ó new york times, november 6, 1995, p. d5.42a number of examples of such cooperation can be found in peter schweizer, friendlyspies, atlantic monthly press, new york, 1993.43the legal ramifications of employer access to onthejob communications of employeesare interesting, though outside the scope of this report. for example, a company employeemay communicate with another company employee using cryptography that denies employer access to the content of those communications; such use may be contrary to explicitcompany policy. may an employee who has violated company policy in this manner bedischarged legally? in general, employer access to onthejob communications raises manyissues of ethics and privacy, even if such access is explicitly permitted by contract or policy.44this distinction becomes somewhat fuzzy when considering technologies such as email that serve the purpose of communications but that also involve data storage. greaterclarity is possible if one distinguishes between the electronic bits of a message in transit(e.g., on a wire) and the same bits that are at rest (e.g., in a file). with email, the message issent and then stored; thus, email can be regarded as a stored communication. thesecomments suggest that a need for exceptional access to email is much more similar to thatfor storage than for communications, because it is much more likely that a need will arise toread an email message after it has been stored than while it is in transit. a likely scenarioof exceptional access to email is that a user may receive email encrypted with a public keyfor which he no longer has the corresponding private key (that would enable him to decrypt incoming messages). while this user could in principle contact the senders and inform them of a new public key, an alternative would be to develop a system that wouldpermit him to obtain exceptional access without requiring such actions.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information107box 3.4examples of business needs for exceptional access tocommunications¥ a major fortune 1000 corporation was the subject of various articles in therelevant trade press. these articles described conditions within the corporation (e.g.,employee morale) that were based on information supplied by employees of thiscorporation acting in an unauthorized manner and contrary to company policy;moreover, these articles were regarded by corporate management as being highlyembarrassing to the company. the employees responsible were identified through areview of tapes of all their telephone conversations in the period immediately preceding publication of the damaging articles, and were summarily dismissed. as acondition of employment, these employees had given their employer permission torecord their telephone calls.¥ executives at a major fortune 1000 corporation had made certain accommodations in settling the accounts of a particular client that, while legal, materiallydistorted an accounting audit of the books of that client. a review of the telephoneconversations in the relevant period indicated that these executives had done soknowingly, and they were dismissed. as a condition of employment, these executives had given their employer permission to record their telephone calls.¥ attempting to resolve a dispute about the specific terms of a contract to sell oilat a particular price, a multinational oil company needed to obtain all relevantrecords. given the fact that oil prices fluctuate significantly on a minutebyminutebasis, most such trades are conducted and agreed to by telephone. all such calls arerecorded, in accordance with contracts signed by traders as a condition of employment. review of these voice records provided sufficient information to resolve thedispute.¥ a multinational company was notified by a law enforcement agency in nation a regarding its suspicions that an employee of the company was committingfraud against the company. this employee was a national of nation b. the company began an investigation of this individual in cooperation with law enforcementauthorities in nation b, and in due course, legal authorization for a wiretap on thisindividual using company facilities was obtained. the company cooperated withthese law enforcement authorities in the installation of the wiretap.source: anonymous testimony to the committee to study national cryptographypolicy.sharper. private individuals as well as businesses have a need to retrieveencrypted data that is stored and for which they may have lost or forgotten the key. for example, a person may have lost the key to an encryptedwill or financial statement and wish to retrieve the data. however, it ismuch more difficult to imagine circumstances under which a personmight have a legitimate need for the realtime monitoring of communications.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108cryptographyõs role in securing the information society3.6 other types of exceptional accessto protected informationthe discussion of exceptional access above involves only the questionof encryption for confidentiality. while it is possible to imagine legitimate needs for exceptional access to encrypted data (for purposes of ensuring secrecy), it is nearly impossible to imagine a legitimate need forexceptional access to cryptography used for the purposes of user authentication, data integrity, or nonrepudiation. in a business context, thesecryptographic capabilities implement or support longstanding legal precepts that are essential to the conduct of commerce.¥without unforgeable digital signatures, the concept of a bindingcontract is seriously weakened.¥without trusted digitally notarized documents, questions of timeprecedence might not be legally resolvable.¥without unforgeable integrity checks, the notion of a certifiablyaccurate and authentic copy of digital documents is empty.¥without strong authentication and unquestionable nonrepudiation, the analog of registered delivery in postal systems is open to suspicion.45with exceptional access to the cryptography implementing such features or to the private keys associated with them, the legal protection thatsuch features are intended to provide might well be called into question.at a minimum, there would likely be a questioning of the validity orintegrity of the protective safeguards, and there might be grounds forlegal challenge. for example, a businessperson might have to demonstrate to the satisfaction of a court or jury that he has properly and adequately protected the private keys used to digitally sign his contracts.it is conceivable that the government, for national security purposes,might seek exceptional access to such capabilities for offensive information warfare (see chapter 2); however, public policy should not promotethese capabilities, because such access could well undermine public confidence in such cryptographic mechanisms.45in fact, digital signatures and nonrepudiation provide a stronger guarantee than doesregistered delivery; the former can be used to assure the delivery of the contents of anòenvelope,ó whereas postal registered delivery can only be used to assure the delivery ofthe envelope.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.needs for access to encrypted information1093.7 recapin general, cryptography for confidentiality involves a party undertaking an encryption (to protect information by generating ciphertext fromplaintext) and a party authorized by the encryptor to decrypt theciphertext and thus recover the original plaintext. in the case of information that is communicated, these parties are in general different individuals. in the case of information that is stored, the first party and the secondparty are in general the same individual. however, circumstances canand do arise in which third parties (i.e., decrypting parties that are notoriginally authorized or intended by the encrypting party to recover theinformation involved) may need access to such information. these needsfor exceptional access to encrypted information may arise from businesses,individuals, law enforcement, and national security, and these needs aredifferent depending on the parties in question. encryption that renderssuch information confidential threatens the ability of these third parties toobtain the necessary access.how the needs for confidentiality and exceptional access are reconciled in a policy context is the subject of part ii.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iipolicy instrumentsto the best of the committeeõs knowledge, the goals of u.s. cryptographypolicy have not been explicitly formalized and articulated within the government.however, senior government officials have indicated that u.s. cryptographypolicy seeks to promote the following objectives:¥deployment of encryption adequate and strong enough to protect electronic commerce that may be transacted on the future information infrastructure;¥development and adoption of global (rather than national) standards andsolutions;¥widespread deployment of products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality that enable legal access for law enforcement and national securitypurposes; and¥avoidance of the development of de facto cryptography standards (eitherdomestically or globally) that do not permit access for law enforcement andnational security purposes, thus ensuring that the use of such products remainsrelatively limited.many analysts believe that these goals are irreconcilable. to the extent thatthis is so, the u.s. government is thus faced with a policy problem requiring acompromise among these goals that is tolerable, though by assumption not idealwith respect to any individual goal. such has always been the case with manyissues that generate social controversyñbalancing product safety against theundesirability of burdensome regulation on product vendors, public health againstthe rights of individuals to refuse medical treatment, and so on.111cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyas of this writing, u.s. cryptography policy is still evolving, and the particular laws, regulations, and other levers that government uses to influencebehavior and policy are under review or are being developed.chapter 4 is devoted to the subject of export controls, which dominate industry concerns about national cryptography policy. many senior executives in theinformation technology industry perceive these controls as a major limitation ontheir ability to export products with encryption capabilities. furthermore, because exports of products with encryption capabilities are governed by the regimeapplied to technologies associated with munitions, reflecting the importance ofcryptography to national security, they are generally subject to more stringentcontrols than are exports of other computerrelated technologies.chapter 5 addresses the subject of escrowed encryption. escrowed encryption is a form of encryption intended to provide strong protection for legitimateuses but also to permit exceptional access by government officials, by corporateemployers, or by end users under specified circumstances. since 1993, the clintonadministration has aggressively promoted escrowed encryption as a basic pillarof national cryptography policy. public concerns about escrowed encryptionhave focused on the possibilities for failure in the mechanisms intended to preventimproper access to encrypted information, leading to losses of confidentiality.chapter 6 addresses a variety of other aspects of national cryptography policyand public concerns that these aspects have raised.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls1131134export controlsexport controls on cryptography and related technical data have beena pillar of national cryptography policy for many years. increasingly,they have generated controversy because they pit the needs of nationalsecurity to conduct signals intelligence against the information securityneeds of legitimate u.s. businesses and the markets of u.s. manufacturerswhose products might meet these needs. chapter 4 describes the currentstate of export controls on cryptography and issues that these controlsraise, including their effectiveness in achieving their stated objectives;negative effects that the export control regime has on u.s. businesses andu.s. vendors of information technology that must be weighed against thepositive effects of reducing the use of cryptography abroad; the mismatchbetween vendor and government perceptions of export controls; and various other aspects of the export control process as it is experienced bythose subject to it.4.1 brief description of current export controlsmany advanced industrialized nations maintain controls on exportsof cryptography, including the united states. the discussion below focuses on u.s. export controls; appendix g addresses foreign export control regimes on cryptography.4.1.1 the rationale for export controlson the basis of discussion with senior government officials and itsown deliberations, the committee believes that the current u.s. exportcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycontrol regime on products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality is intended to serve two primary purposes:¥to delay the spread of strong cryptographic capabilities and theuse of those capabilities throughout the world. senior intelligence officials recognize that in the long run, the ability of intelligence agencies toengage in signals intelligence will inevitably diminish due to a variety oftechnological trends, including the greater use of cryptography.1¥to give the u.s. government a tool for monitoring and influencingthe commercial development of cryptography. since any u.s. vendorthat wishes to export a product with encryption capabilities for confidentiality must approach the u.s. government for permission to do so, theexport license approval process is an opportunity for the u.s. governmentto learn in detail about the capabilities of such products. moreover, theresults of the license approval process have influenced the cryptographythat is available on the international market.4.1.2 general description2authority to regulate imports and exports of products with cryptographic capabilities to and from the united states derives from two itemsof legislation: the arms export control act (aeca) of 1949 (intended toregulate munitions) and the export administration act (eaa; intendedto regulate socalled dualuse products3). the aeca is the legislativebasis for the international traffic in arms regulations (itar), in whichthe u.s. munitions list (usml) is defined and specified. items on theusml are regarded for purposes of import and export as munitions, andthe itar are administered by the department of state. the eaa is thelegislative basis for the export administration regulations (ear), which1although the committee came to this conclusion on its own, it is consistent with that ofthe office of technology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., september 1994.2two references that provide detailed descriptions of the u.s. export control regime forproducts with encryption capability are a memorandum by fred greguras of the law firmfenwick & west (palo alto, calif.), dated march 6, 1995, and titled òupdate on currentstatus of u.s. export administration regulations on softwareó (available at http://www.batnet.com:80/oikoumene/sftwareeu.html), and a paper by ira rubinstein, òexport controls on encryption software,ó in coping with u.s. export controls 1994, commercial law &practice course handbook series no. a733, practicing law institute, october 18, 1995.the greguras memorandum focuses primarily on the requirements of products controlledby the commerce control list, while the rubinstein paper focuses primarily on how tomove a product from the munitions list to the commerce control list.3a dualuse item is one that has both military and civilian applications.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls115define dualuse items on a list known as the commerce control list(ccl);4 the ear are administered by the department of commerce. theeaa lapsed in 1994 but has been continued under executive order sincethat time. both the aeca and the eaa specify sanctions that can beapplied in the event that recipients of goods exported from the unitedstates fail to comply with all relevant requirements, such as agreements torefrain from reexport (box 4.1).at present, products with encryption capabilities can be importedinto the united states without restriction, although the president doeshave statutory authority to regulate such imports if appropriate. exportsare a different matter. any export of an item covered by the usmlrequires a specific affirmative decision by the state departmentõs officeof defense trade controls, a process that can be timeconsuming andcumbersome from the perspective of the vendor and prospective foreignpurchaser.the itar regulate and control exports of all òcryptographic systems,equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software with the capability of maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of information or information systemsó; in addition, they regulate informationabout cryptography but not implemented in a product in a categoryknown as òtechnical data.ó5until 1983, usml controls were maintained on all cryptography products. however, since that time, a number of relaxations in these controlshave been implemented (box 4.2), although many critics contend thatsuch relaxation has lagged significantly behind the evolving marketplace.today, the itar provide a number of certain categorical exemptions thatallow for products in those categories to be regulated as dualuse itemsand controlled exclusively by the ccl. for products that do not fall intothese categories and for which there is some question about whether it isthe usml or the ccl that governs their export, the itar also provide fora procedure known as commodity jurisdiction,6 under which potentialexporters can obtain judgments from the state department about whichlist governs a specific product. a product granted commodity jurisdiction to the ccl falls under the control of the ear and the department ofcommerce. note that commodity jurisdiction to the ccl is generallygranted for products with encryption capabilities using 40bit keys regardless of the algorithm used, although these decisions are made on a4the ccl is also commonly known as the commodity control list.5however, encryption products intended for domestic canadian use in general do notrequire export licenses.6commodity jurisdiction is also often known by its acronym, cj.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.1enforcing compliance with enduse agreementsin general, a u.s. munitions list (usml) license is granted to a u.s. exporter forthe shipping of a product, technical data, or service covered by the usml to a particular foreign recipient for a set of specified end uses and subject to a number ofconditions (e.g., restrictions on reexport to another nation, nontransfer to a thirdparty). the full range of itar sanctions is available against the u.s. exporter and theforeign recipient outside the united states.the itar specify that as a condition of receiving a usml license, the u.s. exporter must include in the contract with the foreign recipient language that binds therecipient to abide by all appropriate enduse restrictions. furthermore, the u.s.exporter that does not take reasonable steps to enforce the contract is subject to itarcriminal and civil sanctions. but how can enduse restrictions be enforced for aforeign recipient?a number of sanctions are available to enforce the compliance of foreign recipients of usml items exported from the united states. the primary sanctions available are the criminal and civil liabilities established by the arms export control act(aeca); the foreign recipient can face civil and/or criminal charges in u.s. federalcourts for violating the aeca. although different u.s. courts have different views onextraterritoriality claims asserted for u.s. law, a criminal conviction or a successfulcivil lawsuit could result in the imposition of criminal penalties on individuals involved and/or seizure of any u.s. assets of the foreign recipient. (when there are nou.s. assets, recovering fines or damages can be highly problematic, although someinternational agreements and treaties provide for cooperation in such cases.) whether an individual could be forced to return to the united states for incarcerationwould depend on the existence of an appropriate extradition treaty between theunited states and the foreign nation to whose jurisdiction the individual is subject.a second avenue of enforcement is that the foreign recipient found to be in violation can be denied all further exports from the united states. in addition, theforeign violator can be denied permission to compete for contracts with the u.s.government. from time to time, proposals are made to apply sanctions against violators that would deny privileges for them to export products to the united states,though such proposals often create political controversy.a third mechanism of enforcement may proceed through diplomatic channels.depending on the nation to whose jurisdiction the foreign recipient is subject, theu.s. government may well approach the government of that nation to seek its assistance in persuading or forcing the recipient to abide by the relevant enduse restrictions.a fourth mechanism of enforcement is the sales contract between the u.s. exporter and the foreign recipient, which provides a mechanism for civil action againstthe foreign recipient. a foreign buyer who violates the enduse restrictions is inbreach of contract with the u.s. exporter, who may then sue for damages incurred bythe u.s. company. depending on the language of the contract, the suit may becarried out in u.s. or foreign courts; alternatively, the firms may submit to bindingarbitration.the operation of these enforcement mechanisms can be cumbersome, uncertain,and slow. but they exist, and they are used. thus, while some analysts believe thatthey do not provide sufficient protection for u.s. national security interests, othersdefend them as a reasonable but not perfect attempt at defending those interests.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls117box 4.2licensing relaxations on cryptography: a short historyprior to 1983, all cryptography exports required individual licenses from the statedepartment. since then, a number of changes have been proposed and mostlyimplemented.yearchange1983distribution licenses established allowing exports to multiple users under asingle license1987nonconfidentiality products moved to department of commerce (doc) ona casebycase basis1990international traffic in arms regulations amendedñall nonconfidentialityproducts under doc jurisdiction1990massmarket generalpurpose software with encryption for confidentiality moved to doc on casebycase basis1992software publishers association agreement providing for 40bit rc2/rc4based products under doc jurisdiction1993massmarket hardware products with encryption capabilities moved to docon casebycase basis1994reforms to expedite license processing at department of state1995proposal to move to doc software products with 64bit cryptography forconfidentiality with òproperly escrowedó keys1996òpersonal useó exemption finalizedsource: national security agency.productbyproduct basis. in addition, when a casebycase export licensing decision results in ccl jurisdiction for a software product, it is usuallyonly the object code, which cannot be modified easily, that is transferred;the source code of the product (embedding the identical functionality butmore easily modified) generally remains on the usml.as described in box 4.3, key differences between the usml and theccl have the effect that items on the ccl enjoy more liberal exportconsideration than items on the usml. (this report uses the term òliberalexport considerationó to mean treatment under the ccl.) most importantly, a product controlled by the ccl is reviewed only once by the u.s.government, thus drastically simplifying the marketing and sale of theproduct overseas.the most important of these explicit categorical exemptions to theusml for cryptography are described in box 4.4. in addition, the currentexport control regime provides for an individual casebycase review ofusml licensing applications for products that do not fall under the jurisdiction of the ccl. under current practice, usml licenses to acquire andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.3important differences between the u.s. munitions list and the commerce control listitems are included on the usml if the item is òinherently militaryin characteró; the end use is irrelevant in such a determination.broad categories of product are included.decisions about export can take as long as necessary.export licenses can be denied on very general grounds (e.g., theexport would be against the u.s. national interest).for items on commerce control list (ccl)department of commerce may limit exports only to the extent thatthey would make òa significant contribution to the military potential of any other country which would prove detrimental to thenational security of the united statesó or òwhere necessary to further significantly the foreign policy of the united states.ó the history of the export administration act strongly suggests that its national security purpose is to deny dualuse items to countries ofcommunist bloc nations, nations of concern with respect to proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and other rogue nations.performance parameters rather than broad categories define includeditems.decisions about export must be completed within 120 days.export licenses can be denied only on very specific grounds (e.g., highlikelihood of diversion to proscribed nations).for items on u.s. munitions list (usml)department of state has broad leeway to take national securityconsiderations into account in licensing decisions; indeed,national security and foreign policy considerations are thedriving force behind the arms export control act.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls1191bulk licenses authorize multiple shipments without requiring individual approval. distribution licenses authorize multipleshipments to a foreign distributor. in each case, recordkeeping requirements are imposed on the vendor. in practice, adistribution license shifts the burden of export restrictions from vendor to distributor. under a distribution license, enforcement ofrestrictions on end use and on destination nations and postshipment recordkeeping requirements are the responsibility of thedistributor; vendors need not seek an individual license for each specific shipment.2even if an item is controlled by the ccl, u.s. exporters are not allowed to ship such an item if the exporter knows that it willbe used directly in the production of weapons of mass destruction or ballistic missiles by a certain group of nations. moreover,u.s. exports from the ccl are prohibited entirely to companies and individuals on a list of òspecially designated nationalsódesignated as agents of cuba, libya, iraq, north korea, or yugoslavia or to a list of companies and individuals on the bureau ofexport administrationõs table of denial orders (including some located in the united states and europe).individually validated licenses are generally required, althoughdistribution and bulk licenses are possible .1prior government approval is needed for export.licensing decisions are not subject to judicial review.foreign availability may or may not be a consideration in grantinga license at the discretion of the state department.items included on the usml are not subject to periodic review.a shipperõs export declaration (sed) is required in all instances.general licenses are often issued, although general licenses do notconvey blanket authority for export.2prior government approval is generally not needed for export.licensing decisions are subject to judicial review by a federal judge oran administrative law judge.foreign availability of items that are substantially equivalent is, bylaw, a consideration in a licensing decision.items included on the ccl must be reviewed periodically.a sed may be required, unless exemption from the requirement isgranted under the export administration regulations.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.4categorical exemptions on the usml for products incorporatingcryptography and informal practices governing licensingcategorical exemptionsthe international traffic in arms regulations (itar) provide for a number ofcategorical exemptions, including:¥ massmarket software products that use 40bit key lengths with the rc2 or rc4algorithm for confidentiality.1¥ products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality (of any strength) thatare specifically intended for use only in banking or money transactions. products inthis category may have encryption of arbitrary strength.¥ products that are limited in cryptographic functionality to providing capabilities for user authentication, access control, and data integrity.products in these categories are automatically granted commodity jurisdiction to thecommerce control list (ccl).informal noncodified exemptionsthe current export control regime provides for an individual casebycase reviewof u.s. munitions list (usml) licensing applications for products that do not fallunder the jurisdiction of the ccl. under current practice, certain categories of firmswill generally be granted a usml license through the individual review process toacquire and export for their own use products with encryption capabilities strongerthan that provided by 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption:2¥ a u.s.controlled firm (i.e., a u.s. firm operating abroad, a u.s.controlledforeign firm, or a foreign subsidiary of a u.s. firm);¥ banks and financial institutions (including stock brokerages and insurancecompanies), whether u.s.controlled or owned or foreignowned, if the productsinvolved are intended for use in internal communications and communications withother banks even if these communications are not limited strictly to banking or money transactions.1the rc2 and rc4 algorithms are symmetrickey encryption algorithms developed by rsa data security inc. (rsadsi). they are both proprietary algorithms, and manufacturers of products using these algorithms must enter into alicensing arrangement with rsadsi. rc2 and rc4 are also trademarks ownedby rsadsi, although both algorithms have appeared on the internet. a product with capabilities for confidentiality will be automatically granted commodity jurisdiction to the ccl if it meets a certain set of requirements, themost important of which are the following:a. the software includes encryption for data confidentiality and uses therc4 and/or rc2 algorithms with a key space of 40 bits.b. if both rc4 and rc2 are used in the same software, their functionalitymust be separate; that is, no data can be operated on by both routines.c. the software must not allow the alteration of the data encryption mechanism and its associated key spaces by the user or by any other program.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls121export for internal use products with encryption capabilities stronger thanthat provided by 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption (hereafter in this chaptercalled òstrong encryptionó7) are generally granted to u.s.controlled firms(i.e., u.s. firms operating abroad, u.s.controlled foreign firms, or foreignsubsidiaries of a u.s. firm). in addition, banks and financial institutions(including stock brokerages and insurance companies), whether u.s.controlled or owned or foreignowned, are generally granted usml licensesfor strong encryption for use in internal communications and communications with other banks even if these communications are not limitedstrictly to banking or money transactions.in september 1994, the administration promulgated regulations thatprovided for u.s. vendors to distribute approved products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality directly from the united states to foreign customers without using a foreign distributor and without prior7how much stronger than 40bit rc2/rc4 is unspecified. products incorporating the 56bit des algorithm are often approved for these informal exemptions, and at times evenproducts using larger key sizes have been approved. but the key size is not unlimited, asmay be the case under the explicit categorical exemptions specified in the itar.d. the key exchange used in the data encryption must be based on either apublickey algorithm with a key space less than or equal to a 512bit modulusand/or a symmetrical algorithm with a key space less than or equal to 64 bits.e. the software must not allow the alteration of the key managementmechanism and its associated key space by the user or any other program.to ensure that the software has properly implemented the approved encryption algorithm(s), the state department requires that the product pass a òvectortest,ó in which the vendor receives test data (the vector) and a random keyfrom the state department, encrypts the vector with the product using the keyprovided, and returns the result to the state department; if the productcomputed result is identical to the known correct answer, the product automatically qualifies for jurisdiction under the ccl.note that the specific technical requirements described in this footnote arenot contained in the federal register; rather, they were described in a statedepartment document, any change in which is not subject to an official procedure for public comment. (these conditions were first published in òdefense trade news,ó volume 3(4), october 1992, pp. 1115. òdefense tradenewsó is a newsletter published by the office of defense trade controls at thedepartment of state.)2see footnote 7 in the main text of this chapter.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122cryptographyõs role in securing the information societystate department approval for each export.8 it also announced plans tofinalize a òpersonal use exemptionó to allow licensefree temporary exports of products with encryption capabilities when intended for personal use; a final rule on the personal use exemption was announced inearly 1996 and is discussed below in section 4.3.2. lastly, it announced anumber of actions intended to streamline the export control process toprovide more rapid turnaround for certain òpreapprovedó products. in august 1995, the administration announced a proposal to liberalize export controls on software products with encryption capabilities forconfidentiality that use algorithms with a key space of 64 or fewer bits,provided that the key(s) required to decrypt messages and files are òproperly escrowedó; such products would be transferred to the ccl. however, since an understanding of this proposal requires some backgroundin escrowed encryption, discussion of it is deferred to chapter 5.4.1.3 discussion of current licensing practicescategorical exemptionsthe categorical exemptions described in box 4.4 raise a number ofissues:¥in the case of the 40bit limitation, the committee was unable tofind a specific analytical basis for this figure. most likely, it was the resultof a set of compromises that were politically driven by all of the partiesinvolved.9 however, whatever the basis for this key size, recent success8prior to this rule, almost every encryption export required an individual license. onlythose exports covered by a distribution arrangement could be shipped without an individual license. this distribution arrangement required a u.s. vendor of products withcryptographic capabilities to export to a foreign distributor that could then resell them tomultiple end users. the distribution arrangement had to be approved by the state department and included some specific language. under the new rule, a u.s. vendor without aforeign distributor can essentially act as his own distributor, and avoid having to obtain aseparate license for each sale. exporters are required to submit a proposed arrangementidentifying, among other things, specific items to be shipped, proposed end users and enduse, and countries to which the items are destined. upon approval of the arrangement,exporters are permitted to ship the specified products directly to end users in the approvedcountries based on a single license. see bureau of politicalmilitary affairs, department ofstate, òamendment to the international traffic in arms regulations,ó federal register, september 2, 1994.9it is worth noting a common argument among many nongovernment observers that anylevel of encryption that qualifies for export (e.g., that qualifies for control by the ccl, orthat is granted an export license under the usml) must be easily defeatable by nsa, or elsecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls123ful demonstrations of the ability to undertake bruteforce cryptanalysison messages encrypted with a 40bit key (box 4.5) have led to a widespread perception that such key sizes are inadequate for meaningful information security.¥in the case of products intended for use only in banking or moneytransactions, the exemption results from the recognition by national security authorities that the integrity of the worldõs financial system is worthprotecting with high levels of cryptographic security. given the primacyof the u.s. banking community in international financial markets, such aconclusion makes eminent sense. furthermore, at the time this exemption was promulgated, the financial community was the primary customer for products with encryption capabilities.this rationale for protecting banking and money transactions naturally calls attention to the possibilities inherent in a world of electroniccommerce, in which routine communications will be increasingly likelyto include information related to financial transactions. banks (and retailshops, manufacturers, suppliers, end customers, and so on) will engage insuch communications across national borders. in a future world of electronic commerce, connections among nonfinancial institutions may become as important as the banking networks are today. at least one vendor has been granted authority to use strong encryption in softwareintended for export that would support international electronic commerce(though under the terms of the license, strong encryption applies only toa small portion of the transaction message).10¥in the case of products useful only for user authentication, accesscontrol, and data integrity, the exemption resulted from a judgment thatthe benefits of more easily available technology for these purposes outweigh whatever costs there might be to such availability. thus, in principle, these nonconfidentiality products from u.s. vendors should beavailable overseas without significant restriction.in practice, however, this is not entirely the case. export restrictionson confidentiality have some òspilloveró effects that reduce somewhatnsa would not allow it to leave the country. the subtext of this argument is that such alevel of encryption is per force inadequate. of course, taken to its logical conclusion, thisargument renders impossible any agreement between national security authorities and vendors and users regarding acceptable levels of encryption for export.10òexport approved for software to aid commerce on internet,ó new york times, may 8,1995, p. d7.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe availability of products that are intended primarily for authentication.11another spillover effect arises from a desire among vendors and users to build and use products that integrate multiple cryptographic capabilities (for confidentiality and for authentication/integrity) with generalbox 4.5successful challenges to 40bit encryptionin the summer of 1995, a message encoded with the 40bit rc4 algorithm wassuccessfully decrypted without prior knowledge of the key by damien doligez of theinria organization in france. the message in question was a record of an actualsubmission of form data that was sent to netscapeõs electronic shop order form inòsecureó mode (including a fictitious name and address). the challenge was posedto break the encryption and recover the name and address information entered in theform and sent securely to netscape. breaking the encryption was accomplished bya bruteforce search on a network of about 120 workstations and a few parallelcomputers at inria, ecole polytechnique, and ens. the key was found after scanning a little more than half the key space in 8 days, and the message was successfullydecrypted. doligez noted that many people have access to the amount of computingpower that he used, and concluded that the exportable secure sockets layer protocol is not strong enough to resist the attempts of amateurs to decrypt a òsecureómessage.in january 1996, a massachusetts institute of technology undergraduate studentused a single $83,000 graphics computer to perform the same task in 8 days. testingkeys at an average rate of more than 830,000 keys per second, the program runningon this computer would take 15 days to test every key.11for example, kerberos is an application designed to enhance operating system securityby providing strong cryptographic authentication of users (and hence strong access controlfor system resources). as a secondary feature, kerberos was designed with the capabilityto provide confidentiality, both as a subroutine library (called by application programmers)and as a set of user programs run by users (e.g., the remotelogin program offers an optionto encrypt the network connection involved). typically, kerberos is distributed in theunited states in source code through the internet to increase its usability on a wide range ofplatforms, to accommodate diverse user needs, and to increase maintainability; source codedistribution is a common practice on the internet.only a small amount of kerberos code is used to support userinvocable confidentiality.however, in order to prevent running afoul of export regulations, most sites from whichkerberos is available strip out all of the cryptographic source code, including the desmodule used as the cryptographic engine to support both the authentication and the confidentiality features and every system call to the module for either authentication or confidentiality purposes.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls125purpose functionality. in many instances, it is possible for cryptographyfor authentication/integrity and cryptography for confidentiality to drawon the same algorithm. export control regulations may require that avendor weaken or even eliminate the encryption capabilities of a productthat also provides authentication/integrity capabilities, with all of theconsequent costs for users and vendors (as described in section 4.3).such spillover effects suggest that government actions that discourage capabilities for confidentiality may also have some negative impacton the development and use of products with authentication/integritycapabilities even if there is no direct prohibition or restriction on export ofproducts with capabilities only for the latter.informal noncodified practicesas described above, it is current practice to grant usml licenses forexports of strong cryptography to firms in a number of categories described in box 4.4. however, the fact that this practice is not explicitlycodified contributes to a sense of uncertainty among vendors and usersabout the process and in practice leads to unnecessary delays in licenseprocessing.in addition, there is uncertainty about whether or not a given foreigncompany is òcontrolledó by a u.s. firm. specifically, vendors often do notknow (and cannot find out in advance) whether a proposed sale to aparticular foreign company falls under the protection of this unstatedexemption. as a practical rule, the u.s. government has a specific set ofthus, export controls on confidentiality have inhibited the use of kerberos for its intended authentication purposes. however, because no one (to the committeeõs knowledge)has actually obtained a formal decision on the status of a sourcecode version of kerberoswithout confidentiality capabilities but with authentication capabilities, it is an open question whether such a version would qualify for commodity jurisdiction to the ccl under theauthentication exception.a second example was provided in testimony to the committee from a company thathad eliminated all cryptographic capabilities from a certain product because of its perceptions of the export control hurdles to be overcome. the capabilities eliminated includedthose for authentication. while it can be argued that the company was simply ignorant ofthe exemptions in the itar for products providing authentication capabilities, the factremains that much of the vendor community is either not familiar with the exemptions ordoes not believe that they represent true òfasttrackó or òautomaticó exceptions.note: the committee appreciates john gilmoreõs assistance in correcting the informationprovided about kerberos in the prepublication version of this report.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyguidelines that are used to make this determination.12 but these rulesrequire considerable interpretation and thus do not provide clear guidance for u.s. vendors.a third issue that arises with current practice is that the lines betweenòforeignó and òu.s.ó companies are blurring in an era of transnationalcorporations, ad hoc strategic alliances, and close cooperation betweensuppliers and customers of all types. for example, u.s. companies oftenteam with foreign companies in global or international ventures. it wouldbe desirable for u.s. products with encryption capabilities to be used byboth partners to conduct business related to such alliances without requiring a specific export licensing decision.13in some instances, usml licenses have granted u.s. companies theauthority to use strong encryption rather freely (e.g., in the case of a u.s.company with worldwide suppliers). but these licenses are still the resultof a lengthy casebycase review whose outcome is uncertain.finally, the state department and nsa explicitly assert control overproducts without any cryptographic capability at all but developed withòsockets,ó or, more formally, cryptographic applications programming12under defense department guidelines for determining foreign ownership, control, orinfluence (foci), a u.s. company is considered under foci òwhenever a foreign interesthas the power, direct or indirect, whether or not exercised, and whether or not exercisablethrough the ownership of the u.s. companyõs securities, by contractual arrangements orother means, to direct or decide matters affecting the management or operations of thatcompany in a manner which may result in unauthorized access to classified information ormay affect adversely the performance of classified contracts.ó a foci determination for agiven company is made on the basis of a number of factors, including whether a foreignperson occupies a controlling or dominant minority position and the identification of immediate, intermediate, and ultimate parent organizations. (see department of defense,national industrial security program operating manual, dod5220.22m, january 1995, pp. 231 to 232.) according to itar regulation 122.2, òownershipó means that more than 50percent of the outstanding voting securities of the firm are owned by one or more foreignpersons. òcontroló means that one or more foreign persons have the authority or ability toestablish or direct the general policies or daytoday operations of the firm. control ispresumed to exist where foreign persons own 25 percent or more of the outstanding votingsecurities if no u.s. persons control an equal or larger percentage. the standards for controlspecified in 22 cfr 60.2(c) also provide guidance in determining whether control in factexists. defense department form 4415, august 1990, requires answers to 11 questions inorder for the defense department to make a foci determination for any given company.13in one instance reported to the committee, a major multinational company with customer support offices in china experienced a breakin in which chinese nationals apparently copied paper documents and computer files. file encryption would have mitigatedthe impact associated with this òbag job.ó thencurrent export restrictions hampered deployment of encryption to this site because the site was owned by a foreign (chinese)company rather than a u.s.controlled company and therefore not easily covered underthencurrent practice.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls127interfaces into which a user can insert his own cryptography. such products are regarded as having an inherent cryptographic capability (although such capability is latent rather than manifest) and as such arecontrolled by the usml, even though the text of the itar does not mention these items explicitly.14 in general, vendors and users understandthis to be the practice and do not challenge it, but they dislike the fact thatit is not explicit.4.2 effectiveness of export controlson cryptographyone of the most contentious points in the debate over export controlson cryptography concerns their effectiveness in delaying the spread ofstrong cryptographic capabilities and the use of those capabilities throughout the world. supporters of the current export control regime believethat these controls have been effective, and they point to the fact thatencryption is not yet in widespread commercial use abroad and that asignificant fraction of the traffic intercepted globally is unencrypted. further, they argue that u.s. products with encryption capabilities dominatethe international market to an extent that impeding the distribution ofu.s. products necessarily affects worldwide usage.critics of current policy assert that export controls have not beeneffective in limiting the availability of cryptography abroad. for example,based on its ongoing survey of cryptography products worldwide (a studywidely cited by critics of current policy), trusted information systemsinc. has noted that[w]e have now identified 1181 products worldwide [as of march 30,1996], and weõre continuing to learn about new products, both domesticand foreign, on a daily basis. weõve also obtained numerous productsfrom abroad and are examining these products to assess their functionality and security. the survey results show that cryptography is indeedwidespread throughout the world. export controls outside of the u.s.14specifically, the itar place on the usml òcryptographic devices, software, and components specifically designed or modified therefor, including: cryptographic (including keymanagement) systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components orsoftware with the capability of maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of information orinformation systems.ó note that these categories do not explicitly mention systems without cryptography but with the capability of accepting òpluginó cryptography.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyappear to be less restrictive. the quality of foreign products seems to becomparable to that of u.s. products.15furthermore, critics of u.s. export controls argue that sources otherthan u.s. commercial vendors (specifically foreign vendors, the inhouseexpertise of foreign users, internet software downloads, and pirated u.s.software) are capable of providing very good cryptography that is usableby motivated foreign users.in assessing the arguments of both supporters and critics of the current export control regime, it is important to keep in mind that the ultimate goal of export controls on cryptography is to keep strong cryptography out of the hands of potential targets of signals intelligence. set againstthis goal, the committee believes that the arguments of both supportersand critics have merit but require qualification.the supporters of the current export regime are right in asserting thatu.s. export controls have had a nontrivial impact in retarding the use ofcryptography worldwide. this argument is based on three linked factors:¥u.s. export controls on cryptography have clearly limited the saleof u.s. products with encryption capabilities in foreign markets; indeed,it is this fact that drives the primary objection of u.s. information technology vendors to the current export control regime on cryptography.¥very few foreign vendors offer integrated products with encryption capabilities.16 u.s. information technology products enjoy a veryhigh reputation for quality and usability, and u.s. information technology vendors, especially those in the massmarket software arena, havemarketing and distribution skills that are as yet unparalleled by theirforeign counterparts. as a result, foreign vendors have yet to fill the voidleft by an absence of u.s. products.¥u.s. information technology products account for a large fractionof global sales. for example, a recent u.s. international trade commission staff report points out that over half of all world sales in information15available online from the tis home page, http://www.tis.com; at the time of its presentation to the committee, tis had identified 450 such products available from foreignnations. testimony on this topic was first presented by steven walker, president of trustedinformation systems, to the house committee on foreign affairs, subcommittee on economic policy, trade, and environment, on october 12, 1993. tis briefed the study committee on december 15, 1994, and july 19, 1995. the survey mentioned in testimony to thecommittee continues, and regularly updated figures can be found on the tis web page(http://www.tis.com/cryptosurvey).16the department of commerce and the national security agency found no generalpurpose software products with encryption capability from nonu.s. manufacturers. seedepartment of commerce and national security agency, a study of the international marketfor computer software with encryption, released january 11, 1996, p. iii9.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls129technology come from the united states.17 actions that impede the flowof u.s. products to foreign consumers are bound to have significant effects on the rate at which those products are purchased and used.on the other hand, it is also true that some foreign targets of interestto the u.s. government today use encryption that is for all practical purposes unbreakable; major powers tend to use òhomegrownó cryptography that they procure on the same basis that the united states procurescryptography for its own use, and export controls on u.s. products clearlycannot prevent these powers from using such cryptography.furthermore, the fact that cryptography is not being widely usedabroad does not necessarily imply that export controls are effectiveñorwill be in the near futureñin restraining the use of cryptography by thosewho desire the protection it can provide. the fact is that cryptography isnot used widely either in the united states or abroad, and so it is unclearwhether it is the lack of information security consciousness described inchapter 2 or the u.s. export control regime for cryptography that is responsible for such nonuse; most probably, it is some combination ofthese two factors.critics of the current export regime are right in asserting that foreignsuppliers of cryptography are many and varied, that software productswith encryption capabilities are quite easily available through the internet(probably hundreds of thousands of individuals have the technical skillneeded to download such products), and that cryptography does posespecial difficulties for national authorities wishing to control such technology (box 4.6). yet, most products with encryption capabilities available on the internet are not integrated products; using securityspecificproducts is generally less convenient than using integrated products (asdescribed in chapter 2), and because such products are used less often,their existence and availability pose less of a threat to the collection ofsignals intelligence.furthermore, internet products are, as a general rule, minimally supported and do not have the backing of reputable and established vendors.18 users who download software from the internet may or may not17office of industries, u.s. international trade commission, global competitiveness of theu.s. computer software and service industries, staff research study #21, washington, d.c.,june 1995, executive summary.18whether major vendors will continue to avoid the internet as a distribution mediumremains to be seen. even today, a number of important products, including adobeõs acrobat reader, microsoftõs word viewer and internet assistant, and the netscape navigatorare distributed through the internet. some vendors make products freely available in limited functionality versions as an incentive for users to obtain fullfeatured versions; othersmake software products freely available to all takers in order to stimulate demand for otherproducts from that vendor for which customers pay.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.6difficulties in controlling cryptographyhardware products with encryption capabilities can be controlled on approximately the same basis as traditional munitions. but software products with encryption capabilities are a different matter. a floppy disk containing programs involvingcryptography is visually indistinguishable from one containing any other type of program or data files. furthermore, software products with encryption capabilities canbe transported electronically, with little respect for physical barriers or nationalboundaries, over telephone lines and the internet with considerable ease. cryptographic algorithms, also controlled by the international traffic in arms regulationsas òtechnical data,ó represent pure knowledge that can be transported over nationalborders inside the heads of people or via letter.as is true for all other software products, software products with encryption capabilities are infinitely reproducible at low cost and with perfect fidelity; hence, a controlled item can be replicated at a large number of points. this fact explains howvast amounts of software piracy can occur both domestically and abroad. in principle, one software product with encryption capabilities taken abroad can serve as theseed for an unlimited number of reproductions that can find their way to hostileparties. finally, it can be argued that the rogue nations that pose the most importanttargets for u.s. signals intelligence collection are also the least likely to refrain frompirating u.s. software.know exactly what code the product contains and may not have the capability to test it to ensure that it functions as described.19 corporate customers, the primary driver for largescale deployment of products, areunlikely to rely on products that are not sold and supported by reputablevendors, and it is products with a large installed base (i.e., those createdby major software vendors) that would be more likely to have the highquality encryption that poses a threat to signals intelligence. table 4.1indicates the primary differences between commercial products andòfreewareó available on the internet.the committeeõs brief survey of product literature describing foreignstandalone securityspecific products with encryption capabilities (box4.7) also indicated many implementations that were unsound from a security standpoint, even taking for granted the mathematical strength ofthe algorithms involved and the proper implementation of the indicatedalgorithms.20 the committee has no reason to believe that the standalone19indeed, the lack of quality control for internetavailable software provides an opportunity for those objecting to the proliferation of good products with encryption capability toflood the market with their own products anonymously or pseudonymously; such products may include features that grant clandestine access with little effort.20the committeeõs analysis of foreign standalone products for cryptography was basedon material provided to the committee by tis, which tis had collected through its survey.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls131table 4.1key differences between commercial products andòfreewareóproducts frommajorcommercialòfreewareóvendorsproductsstake in reputation of product offererhigherlowerscale of operationlargersmallercost of distributionhigherlowersupport for productsgreaterlesserrole of profitmaking motivegreaterlesserability to integrate cryptography into usefulgreaterlesserand sophisticated generalpurpose softwarevulnerability to regulatory and legal constraintshigherlowerlikelihood of market òstaying poweróhigherlowerlikelihood of wide distribution and usehigherlowerfinancial liability for poor product performancehigherlowercost of entry into marketshigherlowernote: all of the characterizations listed are tendencies rather than absolutes and arerelative (i.e., determined by comparing products from major commercial vendors to òfreewareó products).securityspecific products with encryption capabilities made by u.s. vendors are on average better at providing security,21 although the largethis material was limited to product brochures and manuals that the committee believesput the best possible face on a productõs quality. thus, the committeeõs identification ofsecurity defects in these products is plausibly regarded as a minimum estimate of theirweaknessesñmore extensive testing (e.g., involving disassembly) would be likely to revealadditional weaknesses, since implementation defects would not be written up in a productbrochure. moreover, the availability of a product brochure does not ensure the availabilityof the corresponding product; tis has brochures for all of the 800plus products identifiedin its survey, but due to limited resources, it has been able to obtain physical versions (e.g.,a disk, a circuit board) of fewer than 10 percent of the products described in those brochures.21an òamateuró review of encryption for confidentiality built into several popular u.s.massmarket software programs noted that the encryption facilities did not provide particularly good protection. the person who reviewed these programs was not skilled incryptography but was competent in his understanding of programming and how themacintosh manages files. by using a few commonly available programming tools (a filecompare program, a òdebuggeró that allows the user to trace the flow of how a programexecutes, and a òdisassembleró that turns object code into source code that can be examined), the reviewer was able to access in less than two hours the òprotectedó files generatedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.7a partial survey of foreign encryption products on the tis survey¥ a british product manual notes that òa key can be any word, phrase, or numberfrom 1 to 78 characters in length, though for security purposes keys shorter than sixcharacters are not recommended.ó only alphanumeric characters are used in thekey, and alpha characters do not distinguish between upper and lower case. whilethe longer pass phrases can produce keys with the full 56 bits of uncertainty [changing òcanó to òdoó would require more extensive tests], passwords of even 6 characters are woefully inadequate. it is dangerous to allow users to enter such keys, muchless the singlecharacter keys allowed by this product.¥ one british product is a des implementation that recommends cipher blockchaining but uses electronic codebook (ecb) mode as the default. the use of ecb asthe default is dangerous because ecb is less secure than cipher block chaining.¥ a danish product uses des with an 8character key, but limits each characterto alphanumeric and punctuation symbols. hence the key is less than a full 56 bitslong. with this restriction, many users are likely to use only upper or lower casealpha characters, resulting in a key less than 40 bits long.¥ a foreign product uses the feal algorithm as well as a proprietary algorithm.aside from the question of algorithm strength, the key is 1 to 8 characters long anddoes not distinguish between upper and lower case. the result is a ridiculously shortkey, a problem that is compounded by the recommendation in the manual to use a6 to 8letter artificial word as the key (e.g., it suggests that for the name bill, òbillbumó might be used as the key).¥ a product from new zealand uses des plus a publickey system similar torsa, but based on lucas functions. the publickey portion limits the key size to1,024 bits, but does not seem to have a lower bound, a potentially dangerous situation. the des key can be 1 to 24 characters in length. if the key is 1 to 8 characters,established software vendors in the united states do have reputations forproviding relatively high quality in their products for features unrelatedto security.22 without an acceptable product certification service, mostusers have no reliable way of determining the quality of any given product for themselves.by four out of eight programs. see gene steinbert, òfalse security,ó macworld, november 1995, pp. 118121.one wellpublicized cryptographic security flaw found in the netscape corporationõsnavigator web browser is discussed in footnote 34 in chapter 2. because of a second flaw,netscape navigator could also enable a sophisticated user to damage information stored onthe host computer to which navigator is connected. (see jared sandberg, ònetscape software for cruising internet is found to have another security flaw,ó wall street journal,september 25, 1995, p. b12.)22in addition, a product with a large installed base is subject to a greater degree of criticalexamination than is a product with a small installed base, and hence flaws in the former aremore likely to be noticed and fixed. large installed bases are more characteristic of products produced by established vendors than of freeware or shareware products.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls133then single des is used; otherwise triple des is used. the lack of a lower bound onkey length is dangerous.¥ an israeli product uses des or quick, a proprietary algorithm. the minimumkey length is user selectable between 0 and 8 characters. allowing such small lowerbounds on key length is dangerous. the product also has a òsuperpasswordó supplied by the vendor, another potentially dangerous situation. this product is available both in hardware and in software.¥ a german hardware product has usersettable sboxes, and the key can beentered either as 8 characters or 16 hexadecimal characters to yield a true 64bit key(which will be reduced by the algorithm to 56 bits). the use of 16 hexadecimalcharacter keys will result in higher security, but if the key can also be entered as 8alphanumeric characters, many users are likely to do so, thus severely reducing thesecurity level. userselectable sboxes can have advantages (if they are unknown toa cryptanalyst) and disadvantages (if they are poorly chosen and either are known toor can be guessed by a cryptanalyst). on balance, the danger is arguably greaterthan the advantage.¥ a british product recommends one master key per organization so that filescan be shared across personal computers. this practice is very dangerous.to summarize, the defects in these products are related to poor key managementpractices, because they either employ or allow poor key management that wouldenable a determined and knowledgeable adversary to penetrate with relative easethe security they offer. as noted in section 4.2 of the text, u.s. products are notnecessarily more secure.source: committee examination and synthesis of materials provided bytrusted information systems inc.as a general rule, a potential user of cryptography faces the choice ofbuying commercially available products with encryption capabilities onthe open market (perhaps custommade, perhaps produced for a massmarket) or developing and deploying those products independently. thearguments discussed above suggest that global dissemination of knowledge about cryptography makes independent development an option,but the problems of implementing knowledge as a usable and secureproduct drive many potential users to seek products available from reputable vendors. in general, the greater the resources available to potentialusers and the larger the stakes involved, the more likely they are to attempt to develop their own cryptographic resources. thus, large corporations and first world governments are, in general, more likely thansmall corporations and third world governments to develop their owncryptographic implementations.finally, the text of the itar seems to allow a number of entirely legalactions that could have results that the current export control regime iscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyintended to prevent (box 4.8). for example, rsa data security inc. hasannounced a partnership with the chinese government to fund an effortby chinese government scientists to develop new encryption software.this software may be able to provide a higher degree of confidentialitythan software that qualifies today for liberal export consideration underthe ccl.234.3 the impact of export controls on u.s.information technology vendorsu.s. export controls have a number of interrelated effects on the economic health of u.s. vendors and on the level of cryptographic protectionavailable to u.s. firms operating domestically. (the impact of foreign import controls on u.s. vendors is discussed in chapter 6 and appendix g.)4.3.1 de facto restrictions on thedomestic availability of cryptographycurrent law and policy place no formal restrictions whatever on products with encryption capabilities that may be sold or used in the unitedstates. in principle, the domestic market can already obtain any type ofcryptography it wants. for standalone securityspecific products, thisprinciple is true in practice as well. but the largest markets are not for23see don clark, òchina, u.s. firm challenge u.s. on encryptionsoftware exports,ówall street journal, february 8, 1996, p. a10.box 4.8circumventions of the itarcurrent export controls on cryptography can apparently be circumvented in anumber of entirely legal and/or hardtodetect ways. for example:¥ a u.s. company can develop a product without encryption capabilities andthen sell the source code of the product to a friendly foreign company that incorporates additional source code for encryption into the product for resale from thatforeign country (assuming that that country has no (or weaker) export controls oncryptography).¥ a u.s. company possessing products with encryption capabilities can bebought by a foreign company; in general, no attempt is made to recover those products.¥ a u.s. company can work with legally independent counterparts abroad thatcan incorporate cryptographic knowledge available worldwide into products.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls135standalone securityspecific products, but rather for integrated productswith encryption capabilities.for integrated products with encryption capabilities, export controlsdo have an effect on domestic availability. for example:¥the netscape communications corporation distributes a versionof netscape navigator over the internet and sells a version as shrinkwrapped software. because the internet version can be downloaded fromabroad, its encryption capabilities are limited to those that will allow forliberal export consideration; the shrinkwrapped version is under no suchlimitation and in fact is capable of much higher levels of encryption.24because it is so much more convenient to obtain, the internet version ofnetscape navigator is much more widely deployed in the united statesthan is the shrinkwrapped version, with all of the consequences for information security that its weaker encryption capability implies.¥the microsoft corporation recently received permission to shipwindows nt version 4, a product that incorporates a cryptographic applications programming interface approved by the u.s. government forcommodity jurisdiction to the ccl. however, this product is beingshipped worldwide with a cryptographic module that provides encryption capabilities using 40bit rc4.25 while domestic users may replace thedefault module with one providing stronger encryption capabilities, manywill not, and the result is a weaker encryption capability for those users.¥a major u.s. software vendor distributes its major product inmodular form in such a way that the end user can assemble a systemconfiguration in accordance with local needs. however, since the fullrange of usml export controls on encryption is applied to modular products into which cryptographic modules may be inserted, this vendor hasnot been able to find a sensible business approach to distributing theproduct in such a way that it would qualify for liberal export consideration. the result has been that the encryption capabilities provided todomestic users of this product are much less than they would otherwisebe in the absence of export controls.what factors underlie the choices made by vendors that result in the24 the shrinkwrapped version of netscape navigator sold within the united states andcanada supports several different levels of encryption, including 40bit rc4, 128bit rc4,56bit des, and tripledes. the default for a domestic client communicating with a domestic server is 128bit rc4 (jeff weinstein, netscape communications corporation, mountainview, calif., personal communication, february 1996).25see jason pontin, òmicrosoft encryption api to debut in nt workstation beta,óinfoworld, january 29, 1996, p. 25.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyoutcomes described above? at one level, the examples above are simplythe result of market decisions and preferences. at a sufficiently high levelof domestic market demand, u.s. vendors would find it profitable andappropriate to develop products for the domestic market alone. similarly, given a sufficiently large business opportunity in a foreign country(or countries) that called for a product significantly different from thatused by domestic users, vendors would be willing to develop a customized version of a product that would meet export control requirements.furthermore, many other manufacturers of exportable products mustcope with a myriad of different requirements for export to different nations (e.g., differing national standards for power, safety, and electromagnetic interference), as well as differing languages in which to write errormessages or user manuals. from this perspective, export controls aresimply one more cost of doing business outside the united states.on the other hand, the fact that export controls are an additional costof doing business outside the united states is not an advantage for u.s.companies planning to export products. a vendor incurs less expenseand lower effort for a single version of a product produced for both domestic and foreign markets than it does when multiple versions are involved. while the actual cost of developing two different versions of aproduct with different key lengths and different algorithms is relativelysmall, a much larger part of the expense associated with multiple versionsrelates to marketing, manufacture, support, and maintenance of multipleproduct versions after the initial sale has been made.26since a vendor may be unable to export a given product with encryption capabilities to foreign markets, domestic market opportunities mustbe that much greater to warrant a domesticonly version. (given thatabout half of all sales of u.s. information technology vendors are made toforeign customers,27 the loss of foreign markets can be quite damaging toa u.s. vendor.) when they are not, vendors have every incentive todevelop products with encryption capabilities that would easily qualify26note that development and support concerns are even more significant when a givenproduct is intended for crossplatform use (i.e., for use in different computing environments such as windows, mac os, unix, and so on), as is the case for many highendsoftware products (such as database retrieval systems): when a product is intended for useon 50 different platforms, multiplying by a factor of two the effort required on the part ofthe vendor entails much more of an effort by the vendor than if the product were intendedfor use on only one platform.27see footnote 17.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls137for liberal export consideration. as a result, the domestic availability ofproducts with strong encryption capability is diminished. while a sufficiently high level of domestic market demand would make it profitablefor u.s. vendors to develop products for the domestic market alone, theòsufficientlyó qualifier is a strong one indeed, given the realities of themarket into which vendors must sell and compete, and one infrequentlymet in practice.users are also affected by an export control regime that forces foreignand domestic parties in communication with each other to use encryptionsystems based on different algorithms and/or key lengths. in particular,an adversary attempting to steal information will seek out the weakestpoint. if that weakest point is abroad because of the weak cryptographyallowed for liberal export, then that is where the attack will be. in businesses with worldwide network connections, it is critical that securitymeasures be taken abroad, even if key information repositories and centers of activity are located in the continental united states. put differently, the use of weak cryptography abroad means that sensitive information communicated by u.s. businesses to foreign parties faces a greaterrisk of compromise abroad because stronger cryptography integrated intou.s. information technology is not easily available abroad.finally, the export licensing process can have a significant impact onhow a product is developed. for example, until recently, products developed to permit the user to substitute easily his own cryptography modulewere subject to the usml and the itar.28 one vendor pointed out to thecommittee that its systems were designed to be assembled òout of theboxó by end users in a modular fashion, depending on their needs andcomputing environment. this vendor believed that such systems wouldbe unlikely to obtain liberal export consideration, because of the likelihood that a foreign user would be able to replace an òexportapprovedócryptography module with a cryptography module that would not passexport review. under these circumstances, the sensible thing from theexport control perspective would be to deny exportability for the modu28note, however, that the use of objectoriented software technology can in general facilitate the use of applications programming interfaces that provide òhooksó to modules of theuserõs choosing. a number of vendors have developed or are developing generalpurposeapplications programming interfaces that will allow the insertion of a module to do almostanything. since these programming interfaces are not specialized for cryptography, butinstead enable many useful functions (e.g., file compression, backups), it is very difficult toargue the basis on which applications incorporating these interfaces should be denied export licenses simply because they could be used to support encryption.a further discussion of recent developments involving cryptography modules and cryptographic applications programming interfaces is contained in chapter 7.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138cryptographyõs role in securing the information societylarized product even if its capabilities did fall within the òsafe harboróprovisions for products with encryption capabilities.the considerations above led the committee to conclude that u.s.export controls have had a negative impact on the cryptographic strengthof many integrated products with encryption capabilities available in theunited states.29 export controls tend to drive major vendors to a òlowestcommon denominatoró cryptographic solution that will pass export review as well as sell in the united states. the committee also believes thatexport controls have had some impact on the availability of cryptographicauthentication capabilities around the world. export controls distort theglobal market for cryptography, and the product decisions of vendorsthat might be made in one way in the absence of export controls may wellbe made another way in their presence.some of the reasons for this vendor choice are explored in section4.3.2.4.3.2 regulatory uncertainty related to export controlsa critical factor that differentiates the costs of complying with exportcontrols from other costs of doing business abroad is the unpredictabilityof the export control licensing process. (other dimensions of uncertaintyfor vendors not related to export controls are discussed in chapter 6.) acompany must face the possibility that despite its best efforts, a usmlexport license or a commodity jurisdiction to the ccl will not be grantedfor a product. uncertainties about the decisions that will emerge from theexport control regime force vendors into very conservative planning scenarios. in estimating benefits and costs, corporate planners must takeinto account the additional costs that could be incurred in developing twolargely independent versions of the same product or limit the size of thepotential market to u.s. purchasers. when such planning requirementsare imposed, the number of product offerings possible is necessarily reduced.usml licensing is particularly unpredictable, because the reasonsthat a license is denied in any given instance are not necessarily madeavailable to the applicant; in some cases, the rationale for specific licensing decisions is based on considerations that are highly classified and bylaw cannot be made available to an uncleared applicant. since such ration29a similar conclusion was reached by the fbi, whose testimony to the committee notedthat òthe use of export controls may well have slowed the speed, proliferation, and volumeof encryption products sold in the u.s.ó (written statement, òfbi input to the nrcõs national cryptographic study committee,ó received december 1, 1995).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls139ales cannot be discussed openly, an atmosphere of considerable uncertainty pervades the development process for vendors seeking to developproducts for overseas markets. furthermore, there is no independent adjudicating forum to which a negative licensing decision can be appealed.since usml licensing is undertaken on a casebycase basis, it requires the exercise of judgment on the part of the regulatory authorities.a judgmentbased approach has the disadvantage that it requires a considerable degree of trust between the regulated and the regulator.30 tothe extent that an individual regulated party believes that the regulator isacting in the best interests of the entire regulated community, it is naturalthat it would be more willing to accept the legitimacy of the process thatled to a given result. however, in instances in which those who areregulated do not trust the regulator, the judgments of the regulator aremuch more likely to be seen as arbitrary and capricious.31this situation currently characterizes the relationship between cryptography vendors/users and national security authorities responsible forimplementing the u.s. export control regime for cryptography. in inputreceived by the committee, virtually all industry representatives, fromlarge to small companies, testified about the unpredictability of the process. from the vendor point of view, the resulting uncertainty inhibitsproduct development and allows negative decisions on export to be rendered by unknown forces and/or government agencies with neither explanation nor a reasonable possibility of appeal.the need to stay far away from the vague boundaries of what mightor might not be acceptable is clearly an inhibitor of technological progressand development. vendor concerns are exacerbated in those instances inwhich export control authorities are unwilling to provide a specific reason for the denial of an export license or any assurance that a similarly butnot identically configured product with encryption capabilities wouldpass export review. even worse from the vendor perspective, productparameters are not the only determinant of whether a licensing decision30in contrast to a judgmentbased approach, a claritybased approach would start fromthe premise that regulations and laws should be as clear as possible, so that a party thatmay be affected knows with a high degree of certainty what is and is not permitted orproscribed. the downside of a claritybased approach is that affected parties tend to goòright up to the lineó of what is prohibited and may seek ways to òdesign aroundó anystated limitations. furthermore, a claritybased approach would require the specification,in advance, of all acts that are prohibited, even when it may not be possible to define inadvance all acts that would be undesirable.31for example, critics of the uncertainty engendered by the export regime point out thatuncertainty is helpful to policy makers who wish to retain flexibility to modify policy without the work or publicity required for a formal regulatory change.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140cryptographyõs role in securing the information societywill be favorable except in a very limited and narrow range of cryptographic functionality.the uncertainty described above is not limited to new and inexperienced vendors encountering the u.s. export control regime for the firsttime; large and sophisticated institutions with international connectionshave also encountered difficulties with the current export control regime.for example, a representative from a major u.s. bank with many international branches reported that export controls affect internally developedbank software with encryption capabilities; a u.s. citizen who works onbank software with encryption capabilities in england may òtaintó thatsoftware so that it falls under u.s. export control guidelines. thus, despite the fact that the current export control regime treats banks and otherfinancial institutions relatively liberally, major banks have still struggledunder its limitations.the situation is worse for smaller companies. while large companieshave experience and legal staffs that help them to cope with the exportcontrol regime, small companies do not. new work on information technology often begins in garageshop operations, and the export controlregime can be particularly daunting to a firm with neither the legal expertise nor the contacts to facilitate compliance of a product with all of theappropriate regulations. these companies in particular are the ones mostlikely to decide in the end to avoid entirely the inclusion of cryptographicfeatures due to concern about running afoul of the export control rules.the following three examples illustrate how the unpredictability ofthe export control licensing process has affected u.s. vendors and theirproducts.modularityas noted above, cryptographic applications programming interfacesthat are directly and easily accessible to the user are in general subject tousml licensing. however, even òclosedó interfaces that are not easilyaccessible to the user are sometimes perceived to pose a risk for the vendor. one major product vendor reported to the committee that it wasreluctant to use modular development for fear that even an internal module interface could keep a product from passing export control review.any software product that uses modular techniques to separate the basicproduct functionality from the cryptography has a welldefined interfacebetween the two. even when the software product is converted to objectcode, that interface is still present (though it is hidden from the casualuser). however, the interface cannot in general be hidden from a personwith strong technical skills, and such a person would be able to find it andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls141tamper with it in such a way that a different cryptography module couldbe used.32 a number of similar considerations apply for hardware products, in which the cryptographic capabilities might be provided by aòpluginó chip.the alternative to the use of modular techniques in the development ofintegrated products would complicate the òswapin/swapoutó of cryptographic capabilities: lines of code (if software) and wires (if hardware) thatimplemented cryptographic capabilities would be highly interwoven withlines of code and wires that implemented the primary capabilities of theproduct. on the other hand, this approach would be tantamount to thedevelopment of two largely distinct products with little overlap in the workthat was required to produce them.the nsa has spoken publicly about its willingness to discuss withvendors from the early stages of product design features and capabilitiesof proposed products with encryption capabilities for confidentiality sothat the export license approval process can be facilitated, and also itswillingness to abide by nondisclosure agreements to reassure vendorsthat their intellectual property rights will be protected.33 nonetheless, thereceipt of an export control license useful for business purposes is notguaranteed by such cooperation. for example, while decisions aboutcommodity jurisdiction often provide ccl jurisdiction for object codeand usml jurisdiction for source code (and thus need not inhibit modular product development if the product is to be distributed in object formonly), the fact remains that such decisions are part of a casebycase review whose outcome is uncertain. different vendors are willing to tolerate different levels of risk in this regard, depending on the magnitude ofthe investments involved.as a general rule, nsa does not appear willing to make agreementsin advance that will assure licenses for a product that has not yet beeninstantiated or produced. such a position is not unreasonable givennsaõs stance toward products with encryption capabilities in general,and the fact that the true capabilities of a product may depend strongly onhow it is actually implemented in hardware or software. thus, vendors32of course, such considerations obviously apply to software products with cryptographiccapabilities that are designed to be shipped in source code; not only can the cryptographicmodule be easily identified and replaced, but it can also be pulled out and adapted to otherpurposes. this point was also raised in footnote 11 of this chapter.33for example, nsa representatives made comments to this effect at the rsa data security conference in san francisco in january 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyhave no indemnification against the risk that a product might not beapproved.34the definition of exportthere is uncertainty about what specific act constitutes the òexportóof software products with encryption capabilities. it is reasonably clearthat the act of mailing to a foreign country a disk with a product withencryption capabilities on it constitutes an export of that product. but ifthat product is uploaded to an internet site located in the united statesand is later downloaded by a user located in another country, is the act ofexport the upload or the download? what precautions must be taken bythe uploader to remain on the legal side of the itar?the committee has been unable to find any formal document thatindicates answers to these questions. however, a march 1994 letter fromthe state departmentõs office of defense trade controls appears to indicate that a party could permit the posting of cryptographic software on aninternet host located in the united states if ò(a) the host system is configured so that only people originating from nodes in the united states andcanada can access the cryptographic software, or (b) if the software isplaced in a file or directory whose name changes every few minutes, andthe name of the file or directory is displayed in a publicly known andreadable file containing an explicit notice that the software is for u.s. andcanadian use only.ó35 of course, such a letter does not provide formalguidance to parties other than the intended addressee (indeed, under theitar, advisory opinions provided to a specific party with a given set ofcircumstances are not binding on the state department even with respectto that party), and so the issue remains murky.the speed of the licensing processuncertainty is also generated by a lengthy licensing process withouttime lines that allow vendors to make realistic schedules. box 4.9 describes some of the problems reported to the committee. to summarize,34although other industries also have to deal with the uncertainties of regulatory approval regarding products and services, the export control process is particularly opaque,because clear decisions and rationales for those decisions are often not forthcoming (andindeed are often classified and/or unrelated to the product per se).35letter from clyde bryant, office of defense trade controls, u.s. department of state,washington, d.c., to daniel appelman, heller, ehrman, white & mcauliffe, dated march11, 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls143box 4.9problems arising from a lengthy export licensing process¥ some foreign customers know it will take a long time to obtain a positivelicensing decision and as a consequence do not bother to approach u.s. vendors atall.¥ products to market are delayed; even when export licenses are eventuallygranted, they are often granted too late to be useful, because the area of informationtechnology is so fastmoving.¥ rapid decisions are not rendered. in one instance reported to the committee,a u.s. information technology company wanted permission to use its own software(with strong encryption capabilities) to communicate with its foreign offices. suchcases are in theory expedited because of a presumptive approval in these circumstances; this vendorõs government contacts agreed that òsuch an application wouldbe no problemó and that an approval would be a rapid òrubberstampó one, but infact, this vendor is still awaiting a license after more than a year.¥ system integrators intending to ship complete systems rather than individualproducts face particular difficulties in obtaining a speedy turnaround, because thetask for national security authorities involves an assessment of the entire system intowhich a given product (or products) with encryption capabilities will be integrated,rather than an assessment of just the products with encryption capabilities alone.¥ even vendors that manufacture cryptographic software not intended for exportare required to register with the state departmentõs office of defense trade controls,primarily òto provide the u.s. government with necessary information on who isinvolved in certain manufacturing and exporting activities.ó11international traffic in arms regulations, section 122.1 (c).the perceptions of many vendors about the excessive length of time ittakes to obtain a license reflect the time required for discussions withnsa about a product before an application is formally submitted; theprospect of facing the export control process deters some vendors entirelyfrom creating certain products. by contrast, nsa starts the clock onlywhen it receives a formal application, and in fact the usual time betweenreceipt of a formal application and rendering of a decision is relativelyshort (a few weeks). the reason that such a fast turnaround is possible isthat by the time the application is received, enough is known about theproduct involved that processing is routine because there is no need fornegotiation about how the product must be changed for a license to beapproved.in response to some of these concerns, the u.s. government has undertaken a number of reforms of the export control regime (described in section 4.1) to reduce the hassle and red tape involved in obtaining exportcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144cryptographyõs role in securing the information societylicenses.36 these reforms are important. nevertheless, the pace at whichnew information technology products develop and the increasing complexity of those products will complicate product review efforts in the future.given relatively fixed staffing, these factors will tend to increase the lengthof time needed to conduct product reviews at a time when vendors arefeeling pressures to develop and market products more rapidly.one particular reform effort that deserves discussion is the òpersonaluseó exemption. for many years, americans traveling abroad were required under the itar to obtain òtemporary export licensesó for products with encryption capabilities carried overseas for their personal use.37the complexity of the procedure for obtaining such a license was a considerable burden for u.s. businesspeople traveling abroad, and these individuals were subject to significant criminal penalties for an act that waswidely recognized to be harmless and well within the intent of the exportcontrol regime.in february 1994, the administration committed itself to promulgating regulations to support a personaluse exemption from the licensingrequirement. two years later, on february 16, 1996, the federal registercontained a notice from the department of state, bureau of politicalmilitary affairs, announcing final rule of an amendment to the itar allowingu.s. persons to temporarily export cryptographic products for personaluse without the need for an export license.38some critics of government policy have objected to the particularformulation of the recordkeeping requirement. all parties involvedñincluding senior administration officialsñhave agreed that 2 years wasfar too long a period for promulgation of so simple a rule.36for example, according to nsa, the detailing of an nsa representative to work withthe state department office of defense trade controls has resulted in a considerable reduction in the time needed to process a license.37for a description of how this process worked in practice, see matt blaze, òmy life as aninternational arms courier,ó email message circulated by matt blaze (mab@research.att.com) on january 6, 1995. a news article based on blazeõs story is contained in peter h.lewis, òbetween a hacker and a hard place: datasecurity export law puts businesses ina bind,ó new york times, april 10, 1995, p. d1.38according to the regulation, the product must not be intended for copying, demonstration, marketing, sale, reexport, or transfer of ownership or control. it must remain in thepossession of the exporting person, which includes being locked in a hotel room or safe.while in transit, it must be with the personõs accompanying baggage. exports to certaincountries are prohibitedñcurrently cuba, iran, iraq, libya, north korea, sudan, and syria.the exporter must maintain records of each temporary export for 5 years. see public notice2294, federal register, volume 61(33), february 16, 1996, pp. 61116113.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls1454.3.3 the size of the affected market for cryptographysince export controls on products with encryption capabilities constrain certain aspects of sales abroad, considerable public attention hasfocused on the size of the market that may have been affected by exportcontrols. vendors in particular raise the issue of market share with considerable force:¥òthe only effect of the export controls is to cause economic harm tous software companies that are losing market share in the global cryptography market to companies from the many countries that do not haveexport controls.ó39¥ò[the governmentõs current policy on encryption] is anticompetitive. the governmentõs encryption export policy jeopardizes the future ofthe software industry, one of the fastest growing and most successfulindustries.ó40the size of the market for products with encryption capabilities cutsacross many dimensions of cryptography policy, but since it is raisedmost often in the context of the export control debate, it is addressed inthis section.plausible arguments can be made that the market ranges from nomore than the value of the securityspecific products sold annually (i.e.,several hundred million dollars per yearña lowend estimate)41 to thetotal value of all hardware and software products that might includeencryption capabilities (many tens of billions of dollarsña highend estimate).42 the committee was unable to determine the size of the informa39jim hassert, washington connections, software publishers association, washington,d.c., chapter 9. available online at http://www.spa.org.40business software alliance, information and data security: the encryption update. available online at http://www.bsa.org.41department of commerce and national security agency, a study of the internationalmarket for computer software with encryption, released january 11, 1996, p. iii1. note, however, that this report does not arrive at this estimate independently; rather, it cites otherestimates made in the private sector.42of course, it is a matter of speculation what fraction of the information technologymarket (on the order of $193 billion in 1993; see below) might usefully possess encryptioncapabilities; good arguments can be made to suggest that this fraction is very small or verylarge. a number of information technology trade organizations have also made estimates.the software publishers association cited a survey by the national computer securityassociation that quoted a figure of $160 million in aggregate known losses in 1993 becauseof export controls; see òwritten testimony of the software publishers association to thenational research council,ó washington, d.c., july 19, 1995. in 1993, the business software alliance estimated that òapproximately $69 billion in u.s. company revenues arecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytion technology market directly affected by export controls on encryptionto within a factor of more than 100, a range of uncertainty that rendersany estimate of the market quite difficult to use as the basis for a publicpolicy decision.nevertheless, although it is not large enough to be decisive in thepolicy debate, the floor of such estimatesña few hundred million dollarsper yearñis not a trivial sum. furthermore, all trends point to growth inthis number, growth that may well be very large and nonlinear in the nearfuture. to the extent that both of these observations are valid, it is only amatter of a relatively short time before even the floor of any estimate willbe quite significant in economic terms.the next three subsections describe some of the factors that confoundthe narrowing of the large range of uncertainty in any estimate of the sizeof the market affected by export controls.defining a òlost saleóa number of vendors have pointed to specific instances of lost salesas a measure of the harm done to vendors as a result of export controls oncurrently at risk because of the inability of those companies to be able to sell world widegenerally available software with encryption capabilities employing des or other comparable strength algorithmsó; see testimony of ray ozzie, president, iris associates, on behalfof the business software alliance, òthe impact on americaõs software industry of currentu.s. government munitions export controls,ó before the economic policy, trade, and environment subcommittee, house committee on foreign affairs, washington, d.c., october 12, 1993. the computer systems policy project (cspp) estimated that in 2000, thepotential annual revenue exposure for u.s. information technology vendors would rangefrom $3 billion to $6 billion on sales of cryptographic products, including both hardwareand software; cspp also estimated $30 billion to $60 billion in potential revenue exposureon sales of associated computer systems; see william f. hagerty iv, the managementadvisory group, computer systems policy project, the growing need for cryptography: theimpact of export control policy on u.s. competitiveness, study highlights (viewgraphs),bethesda, md., december 15, 1995.the $193 billion figure is taken from department of commerce, u.s. industrial outlook,1994, and includes computers and peripherals ($62.5 billion, p. 261), packaged software($32.0 billion, p. 271), information services ($13.6 billion, p. 251), data processing andnetwork services ($46.4 billion, p. 251), and systems integration/custom programmingservices ($38.7 billion, p. 255). note that this figure does not include some other industrysectors that could, in principle, be affected by regulations regarding secure communications; in 1993, u.s. companies provided telecommunications services valued at $10.4 billionto foreign nations (p. 291) and shipped $17.5 billion (1987 dollars) in telephone equipmentworldwide (p. 303).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls147cryptography.43 national security officials believe that these figures areconsiderably overstated. administration officials and congressional staffhave expressed considerable frustration in pinning down a reliable estimate of lost sales.it is important to begin with the understanding that the concept of aòlost saleó is intrinsically soft. trying to define the term òlost salesó raisesa number of questions:¥what events count as a sale lost because of export restrictions?several possibilities illustrate the complications:ña u.s. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography, but declines because the bidrequirements are explicit and the u.s. vendor knows that the necessaryexport licenses will not be forthcoming on a time scale compatible withthe project.ña u.s. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography. in order to expedite exportlicensing, the u.s. vendor offers a bid that involves 40bit encryption(thus ignoring the bid requirements), and the bid is rejected.ña u.s. vendor is invited along with foreign vendors to bid on aforeign project that involves cryptography. a foreign vendor emerges asthe winner. the sale is certainly a lost sale, but since customers oftenmake decisions with a number of reasons in mind and may not informlosing vendors of their reasons, it is difficult to determine the relationshipof export controls to the lost sale.ñno u.s. vendor is invited to bid on a foreign project that involvescryptography. in such an instance, the potential foreign customer mayhave avoided u.s. vendors, recognizing that the cryptography wouldsubject the sale to u.s. export control scrutiny, possibly compromising43for example, in a presentation to the committee on july 19, 1995, the software publishersõ association documented several specific instances in which a u.s. company had lost asale of a product involving cryptography to a foreign firm. these instances included acompany that lost onethird of its total revenues because export controls on desbasedencryption prevented sales to a foreign firm; a company that could not sell products withencryption capability to a european company because that company resold products toclients other than financial institutions; a u.s. company whose european division estimatedat 50 percent the loss of its business among european financial institutions, defense industries, telecommunications companies, and government agencies because of inadequate keysizes; and a u.s. company that lost the sale of a desbased system to a foreign companywith a u.s. subsidiary (software publishersõ association, òpresentation on impacts of export control on encryption before the nrc national cryptography policy committee,ójuly 19, 1995).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148cryptographyõs role in securing the information society44see, for example, kara swisher, òold world, new frontier in cyberspace,ó washingtonpost, december 12, 1995, p. c1; victoria shannon, òu.s. online services fall short oninternational reach,ó washington post, april 3, 1995, washington business, p. 20. for moredetail on aol plans, see elizabeth cocoran, òamerica online to offer access in europe,ówashington post, may 19, 1995, p. f3.45see, for example, office of technology assessment, u.s. telecommunications services ineuropean markets, otatct548, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., august 1993.sensitive information or delaying contract negotiations inordinately. onthe other hand, the potential customer may have avoided u.s. vendors forother reasons, e.g., because the price of the u.s. product was too high.¥what part of a productõs value is represented by the cryptographicfunctionality that limits a productõs sales when export controls apply? asnoted in chapter 2, standalone products with encryption capabilities arequalitatively different from generalpurpose products integrated withencryption capabilities. a securityspecific standalone product providesno other functionality, and so the value of the cryptography is the entirecost of the product. but such sales account for a very small fraction ofinformation technology sales. most sales of information technology products with encryption capabilities are integrated products. many wordprocessing and spreadsheet programs may have encryption capabilities,but users do not purchase such programs for those capabilitiesñtheypurchase them to enhance their ability to work with text and numbers.integrated products intended for use in networked environments (e.g.,ògroupwareó) may well have encryption capability, but such productsare purchased primarily to serve collaboration needs rather than encryption functions. in these instances, it is the cost of the entire integratedproduct (which may not be exportable if encryption is a necessary butsecondary feature) that counts as the value lost.¥how does a vendor discover a òlost saleó? in some cases, a specificrejection counts as evidence. but in general there is no systematic way tocollect reliable data on the number or value of lost sales.¥an oftenunnoticed dimension of òlost salesó does not involveproduct sales at all, but rather services whose delivery may depend oncryptographic protection. for example, a number of u.s. online serviceproviders (e.g., america online, compuserve, prodigy) intend to offer orexpand access abroad;44 the same is true for u.s. providers of telecommunications services.45 to the extent that maintaining the security of foreigninteractions with these service providers depends on the use of strongcryptography, the ability of these companies to provide these servicesmay be compromised by export restrictions and thus sales of service potentially reduced.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls149latent vs. actual demandin considering the size of the market for cryptography, it is importantto distinguish between òactualó demand and òlatentó demand.¥actual demand reflects what users spend on products with encryption capabilities. while the value of òthe market for cryptographyó isrelatively well defined in the case of standalone securityspecific products (it is simply the value of all of the sales of such products), it is notwell defined when integrated products with encryption capabilities areinvolved. the reason is that for such products, there is no demand forcryptography per se. rather, users have a need for products that douseful things; cryptography is a feature added by designers to protectusers from outside threats to their work, but as a purely defensive capability, cryptography does not so much add functional value for the user asprotect against reductions in the value that the user sees in the product.lotus notes, for example, would not be a viable product in the communications software market without its encryption capabilities, but users buyit for the group collaboration capabilities that it provides rather than forthe encryption per se.¥latent demand (i.e., inherent demand that users do not realize orwish to acknowledge but that surfaces when a product satisfying thisdemand appears on the market) is even harder to measure or assess.recent examples include internet usage and faxes; in these instances, theunderlying technology has been available for many years, but only recently have large numbers of people been able to apply these technologiesfor useful purposes. lower prices and increasing ease of use, promptedin part by greater demand, have stimulated even more demand. to theextent that there is a latent demand for cryptography, the inclusion ofcryptographic features in integrated products might well stimulate a demand for cryptography that grows out of knowledge and practice, out oflearning by doing.determining the extent of latent demand is complicated greatly bythe fact that latent demand can be converted into actual demand on arelatively short time scale. indeed, such growth curvesñvery slowgrowth in use for a while and then a sudden explosion of demandñcharacterize many critical mass phenomena: some information technologies (e.g., networks, faxes, telephones) are valuable only if some criticalmass of people use them. once that critical mass is reached, other peoplebegin to use those technologies, and demand takes off. linear extrapolations 5 or 10 years into the future based on 5 or 10 years in the past missthis very nonlinear effect.of course, it is difficult to predict a surge in demand before it actuallyoccurs. in the case of cryptography, market analysts have been predictingcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150cryptographyõs role in securing the information societysignificantly higher demand for many years; today, growth rates are high,but demand for information security products including cryptography isnot yet ubiquitous.two important considerations bearing directly on demand are increasing system complexity and the need for interoperability. users must beable to count on a high degree of interoperability in the systems and software they purchase if they are to operate smoothly across national boundaries (as described in chapter 1). users understand that it is more difficultto make different products interoperate, even if they are provided by thesame vendor, than to use a single product. for example, the complexity ofa product generally rises as a function of the number of products withwhich it must interoperate, because a new product must interoperate withalreadydeployed products. increased complexity almost always increasesvulnerabilities in the system or network that connects those products. inaddition, more complex products tend to be more difficult to use and require greater technical skill to maintain and manage; thus, purchasers tendto shy away from such products. this reluctance, in turn, dampens demand, even if the underlying need is still present.from the supply side, vendors feel considerable pressure from usersto develop interoperable products. but greater technical skills are neededby vendors to ensure interoperability among different product versionsthan to design a single product that will be used universally, just as theyare for users involved in the operation and maintenance of these products. requirements for higher degrees of technical skill translate intosmaller talent pools from which vendors can draw and thus fewer products available that can meet purchasersõ needs for interoperability.problems relating to interoperability and system complexity, as wellas the size of the installed base, have contributed to the slow pace ofdemand to date for products with encryption capabilities.nevertheless, the committee believes it is only a matter of time until asurge occurs, at the same time acknowledging the similarity between thisprediction and other previous predictions regarding demand. this beliefis based on projections regarding the growth of networked applications4646for example, a survey by the international data corporation indicated that the installed base of users for workgroup applications (involving communications among physically separated users) is expected to grow at a rate of about 74 percent annually between1993 and 1998. see ann palermo and darby johnson, analysts, international data corporation, workgroup applications software: market review and forecast, 19931998, framingham,mass., 1993. it is true that a considerable amount of remote collaboration is done via emailwithout cryptographic protection, but workgroup applications provide much higher degrees of functionality for collaboration because they are specifically designed for that purpose. as these applications become more sophisticated (e.g., as they begin to process largeassemblies of entire documents rather than the short messages for which email is bestsuited), the demand for higher degrees of protection is likely to increase.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls151and the trends discussed in chapter 1ñincreasing demand for all kindsof information technology, increasing geographic dispersion of businessesacross international boundaries, increasing diversity of parties wishing/needing to communicate with each other, and increasing diversity in information technology applications and uses in all activities of a business.further, the committee believes that computer users the world over haveapproximately the same computing needs as domestic users, and so domestic trends in computing (including demand for more information security) will be reflected abroad, though perhaps later (probably yearslater but not decades later).market developmenta third issue in assessing the size of the market for cryptography isthe extent to which judgments should be made on the basis of todayõsmarket conditions (which are known with a higher certainty) rather thanmarkets that may be at risk tomorrow (which are known with a muchlower degree of certainty).the market for certain types of software tends to develop in a characteristic manner. in particular, the longterm success of infrastructure software (i.e., software that supports fundamental business operations suchas operating systems or groupware) depends strongly on the productõsmarket timing; once such software is integrated into the infrastructure ofthe installing organization, demands for backwardcompatibility make itdifficult for the organization to install any alternative.47 in other words,an existing software infrastructure inhibits technological change even ifbetter software might be available. it is for this reason that in somesoftware markets, major advantages accrue to the first provider of a reasonable product.these pressures complicate life for government policy makers whowould naturally prefer a more deliberate approach to policy making,because it is only during a small window of time that their decisions arerelevantñthe sooner they act, the better. the longer they wait, the higherwill be the percentage of companies that have already made their technol47many products require backwardcompatibility for marketplace acceptance. demandsfor backwardcompatibility even affect products intended for operation in a standaloneenvironmentñan institution with 2 million spreadsheet files is unlikely to be willing toswitch to a product that is incompatible with its existing database unless the product provides reasonable translation facilities for migrating to the new product. network components are even harder to change, because stations on a network must interoperate. forexample, most corporate networks have servers deployed with workstations that communicate with those servers. any change to the software for the servers must not render itimpossible for those workstations to work smoothly with the upgrade.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyogy choices, and these companies will face large changeover costs if policydecisions entail incompatible alternatives to their currently deployed infrastructure. if the initial choices of companies involve putting nonu.s.software in place, u.s. vendors fear that they will have lost huge futuremarket opportunities.484.3.4 inhibiting vendor responses to user needsin todayõs marketing environment, volume sales (licensing) to largecorporate or government customers, rather than purchases by individuals, tend to drive sales of business software products.49 since corporatecustomers have large leverage in the marketplace (because one purchasing decision can result in thousands of product sales to a single corporation), major software vendors are much more responsive to the needs ofcorporate users. of particular relevance to the export control debate arethree perceptions of corporate users:¥corporate users do not see that different levels of encryptionstrength (as indicated, for example, by the key length of foreign and domestic versions of a product) provide differential advantages. put differently, the market reality is that users perceive domesticstrength versionsas the standard and liberally exportable versions of cryptography as weak,rather than seeing liberally exportable versions of cryptography as thestandard and domesticstrength versions as stronger.¥corporate users weigh all features of a product in deciding whetheror not to buy it. thus, the absence of a feature such as strong encryptionthat is desired but not easily available because of u.s. export controlscounts as a distinct disadvantage for a u.s. product. although otherfeatures may help to compensate for this deficiency, the deficiency maypose enough of a barrier to a productõs acceptance abroad that sales aresignificantly reduced.¥corporate users see cryptographic strength as an important parameter in their assessments of the information security that productsoffer. it is true that cryptography is only one dimension of information48the deployment of lotus notes provides a good example. lotus marketing data suggests fairly consistently that once notes achieves a penetration of about 200 users in a givencompany, an explosion of demand follows, and growth occurs until notes is deployedcompanywide.49the department of commerce noted that òcivil use of softwarebased encryption willsignificantly increase in the next five years, with corporate customers dominating this newmarketplace.ó see department of commerce and national security agency, a study of theinternational market for computer software with encryption, released january 11, 1996, p. iii2.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls153security, that export controls do not affect certain approaches to increasing overall information security, and that vendors often do not addressthese other approaches. but cryptography is a visible aspect of the information security problem, and vendors feel an obligation to respond tomarket perceptions even if these perceptions may not be fully justified byan underlying technical reality. moreover, many of the information security measures that do not involve export controls are more difficult andcostly than cryptography to implement, and so it is natural for vendors tofocus their concerns on export controls on cryptography.u.s. vendors that are unable to respond in a satisfactory manner tothese perceptions have a natural disadvantage in competing against vendors that are able to respond.4.4 the impact of export controls on u.s. economicand national security interestsby affecting u.s. industries abroad that might use cryptography toprotect their information interests and u.s. vendors of a critical technology (namely, information technology), export controls have a number ofpotentially negative effects on national security that policy makers mustweigh against the positive effects of reducing the use of cryptography byhostile parties.4.4.1 direct economic harm to u.s. businesseswhile acknowledging the economic benefits to u.s. business from signals intelligence (as described in chapter 3), the committee notes that protection of the information interests of u.s. industries is also a dimension ofnational security, especially when the threats emanate from foreign sources.if the potential value of proprietary information is factored into thedebate over export controls, it dominates all other figures of merit. afigure of $280 billion to $560 billion was placed by the computer systemspolicy project on the value of future revenue opportunities as the result ofelectronic distribution and commerce and future opportunities toreengineer business processes by 2000.50 opponents of export controls oncryptography argue that if electronic channels and information systems50william f. hagerty iv, the growing need for cryptography: the impact of export controlpolicy on u.s. competitiveness, study highlights (viewgraphs), december 15, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyare perceived to be vulnerable, businesses may well be discouraged fromexploiting these opportunities, thereby placing enormous potential revenues at risk.on the other hand, it is essentially impossible to ascertain with anydegree of confidence what fraction of proprietary information would beat risk in any practical sense if businesses did move to exploit these opportunities. current estimates of industrial and economic espionage provide little guidance. the most authoritative publication on the subject todate, the annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrial espionage,51 noted that[i]n todayõs world in which a countryõs power and stature are oftenmeasured by its economic/industrial capability, foreign governmentministriesñsuch as those dealing with finance and tradeñand majorindustrial sectors are increasingly looked upon to play a more prominent role in their respective countryõs collection efforts. . . . an economic competitor steals a us companyõs proprietary business information orgovernment trade strategies, [and] foreign companies and commerciallyoriented government ministries are the main beneficiaries of us economic information. the aggregate losses that can mount as a result ofsuch efforts can reach billions of dollars per year, constituting a seriousnational security concern.the report went on to say that ò[t]here is no formal mechanism fordetermining the full qualitative and quantitative scope and impact of theloss of this targeted information. industry victims have reported the lossof hundreds of millions of dollars, lost jobs, and lost market share.óthus, even this report, backed by all of the counterintelligence effortsof the u.s. government, is unable to render a definitive estimate to withinan order of magnitude. of course, it may well be that these estimates ofloss are low, because companies are reluctant to publicize occurrences offoreign economic and industrial espionage since such publicity can adversely affect stock values, customersõ confidence, and ultimately competitiveness and market share, or also because clandestine theft of information may not be detected. furthermore, because all business trendspoint to greater volumes of electronically stored and communicated information in the future, it is clear that the potential for information compromises will growñthe value of information that could be compromisedthrough electronic channels is only going to increase.51national counterintelligence center, annual report to congress on foreign economic collection and industrial espionage, washington, d.c., july 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls15552obviously, it is impossible to predict with certainty whether export controls will stimulate the growth of significant foreign competition for u.s. information technology vendors.but the historical evidence suggests some reason for concern. for example, a 1991 report(national research council, finding common ground: u.s. export controls in a changed global environment, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991) found that òunilateralembargoes on exports [of technologies for commercial aircraft and jet engines] to numerouscountries not only make sales impossible but actually encourage foreign competitors todevelop relationships with the airlines of the embargoed countries. by the time the u.s.controls are lifted, those foreign competitors may have established a competitive advantageó (p. 22). the same report also found that for computer technology, òmarginal supplierdisadvantages can lead to significant losses in market position, and it is just such marginaldisadvantages that can be introduced by export controlsó (p. 23). an earlier study (charlesferguson, òhigh technology product life cycles, export controls, and international markets,ó in working papers of the national research council report balancing the national interest, u.s. national security export controls and global economic competition, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1987) pointed out that the emergence of strong foreigncompetition in a number of hightechnology areas appeared in close temporal proximity tothe enforcement of strong export controls in these areas for u.s. vendors. while the correlation does not prove that export controls necessarily influenced or stimulated the growth offoreign competition, the history suggests that they may have had some causal relationship.in the financial arena (not subject to export controls), u.s. financial controls associated withthe tradingwiththeenemy act may have led to the rise of the eurodollar market, a set offoreign financial institutions, markets, and instruments that eroded the monopoly held ondollardenominated instruments and dollardominated institutions by u.s. firms.the likelihood of foreign competition being stimulated for cryptography may be largerthan suggested by some of these examples, because at least in the software domain, productdevelopment and distribution are less capital intensive than in traditional manufacturingindustries; lower capital intensiveness would mean that competitors would be more likelyto emerge.finally, while it is true that some foreign nations also impose export controls on cryptography, those controls tend to be less stringent than those of the united states, as discussedin appendix g. in particular, it is more difficult to export encryption from the unitedstates to the united kingdom than the reverse, and the u.s. market is an important marketfor foreign vendors. further, it takes only one nation with weak or nonexistent controls tospawn a competitor in an industry such as software.4.4.2 damage to u.s. leadership in information technologythe strength of the u.s. information technology industry has beentaken as a given for the past few decades. but as knowledge and capitalessential to the creation of a strong information technology industry become more available around the world, such strength can no longer betaken for granted.52 if and when foreign products become widely deployed and well integrated into the computing and communications infrastructure of foreign nations, even better versions of u.s. products willbe unable to achieve significant market penetration. one example of sucha phenomenon may be the growing interest in the united states in personal communications systems based on gsm, the european standard forcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156cryptographyõs role in securing the information societydigital cellular voice communications. further, as the example ofmicrosoft vis‹vis ibm in the 1980s demonstrated, industry dominanceonce lost is quite difficult to recover in rapidly changing fields.the development of foreign competitors in the information technology industry could have a number of disadvantageous consequences fromthe standpoint of u.s. national security interests:¥foreign vendors, by assumption, will be more responsive to theirown national governments than to the u.s. government. to the extentthat foreign governments pursue objectives involving cryptography thatare different from those of the united states, u.s. interests may be adversely affected. specifically, foreign vendors could be influenced bytheir governments to offer for sale to u.s. firms products with weak orpoorly implemented cryptography. if these vendors were to gain significant market share, the information security of u.s. firms could be adversely affected. furthermore, the united states is likely to have lessinfluence and control over shipments of products with encryption capabilities between foreign nations than it has over similar u.s. products thatmight be shipped abroad; indeed, many foreign nations are perfectly willing to ship products (e.g., missile parts, nuclear reactor technology) tocertain nations in contravention to u.s. or even their own interests. in thelong run, the united states may have even less control over the productswith encryption capabilities that wind up on the market than it wouldhave if it promulgated a more moderate export control regime.¥detailed information about the workings of foreign products withencryption capabilities is much less likely to be available to the u.s. government than comparable information about similar u.s. products thatare exported. indeed, as part of the export control administration process, u.s. products with encryption capabilities intended for export areexamined thoroughly by the u.s. government; as a result, large amountsof information about u.s. products with encryption capabilities are available to it.53export controls on cryptography are not the only factor influencingthe future position of u.s. information technology vendors in the worldmarket. yet, the committee believes that these controls do pose a risk totheir future position that cannot be ignored, and that relaxation of controls will help to ensure that u.s. vendors are able to compete with foreign vendors on a more equal footing.53for example, u.s. vendors are more likely than foreign vendors to reveal the sourcecode of a program to the u.s. government (for purposes of obtaining export licenses). whileit is true that the object code of a software product can be decompiled, decompiled objectcode is always much more difficult to understand than the original source code that corresponds to it.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls1574.5 the mismatch between the perceptionsof government/national securityand those of vendorsas the committee proceeded in its study, it observed what can only becalled a disconnect between the perceptions of the national security authorities that administer the export control regulations on cryptographyand the vendors that are affected by it. this disconnect was apparent in anumber of areas:¥national security authorities asserted that export controls did notinjure the interests of u.s. vendors in the foreign sales of products withencryption capabilities. u.s. vendors asserted that export controls had asignificant negative effect on their foreign sales.¥national security authorities asserted that nearly all export licenseapplications for a product with encryption capabilities are approved.vendors told the committee that they refrained from submitting productsfor approval because they had been told on the basis of preliminary discussions that their products would not be approved for export.¥national security authorities presented data showing that the turnaround time for license decisions had been dramatically shortened (to amatter of days or a few weeks at most). vendors noted that these datatook into account only the time from the date of formal submission of anapplication to the date of decision, and did not take into account the muchgreater length of time required to negotiate product changes that wouldbe necessary to receive approval. (see section 4.3.2 for more discussion.)¥national security authorities asserted that they wished to promotegood information security for u.s. companies, pointing out the currentpractice described in section 4.1.2 that presumes the granting of usmllicenses for stronger cryptography to u.s.controlled companies and banking and financial institutions. vendors pointed to actions taken by theseauthorities to weaken the cryptographic security available for use abroad,even in business ventures in which u.s. firms had substantial interests.potential users often told the committee that even under presumptiveapproval, licenses were not forthcoming, and that for practical purposes,these noncodified categories were not useful.¥national security authorities asserted that they took into accountforeign competition and the supply of products with encryption capabilities when making decisions on export licenses for u.s. products withencryption capabilities. vendors repeatedly pointed to a substantial supply of foreign products with encryption capabilities.¥national security authorities asserted that they wished to maintainthe worldwide strength and position of the u.s. information technologyindustry. vendors argued that when they are prevented from exploitingcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytheir strengthsñsuch as being the first to develop integrated productswith strong encryption capabilitiesñtheir advantages are in fact beingeroded.the committee believes that to some extent these differences can beexplained as the result of rhetoric by parties intending to score points in apolitical debate. but the differences are not merely superficial; they reflect significantly different institutional perspectives. for example, whennational security authorities òtake into account foreign supplies of cryptography,ó they focus naturally on what is available at the time the decision is being made. on the other hand, vendors are naturally concernedabout incorporating features that will give their products a competitiveedge, even if no exactly comparable foreign products with cryptographyare available at the moment. thus, different parties focus on differentareas of concernñnational security authorities on the capabilities available today, and vendors on the capabilities that might well be availabletomorrow.nsa perceptions of vendors and users of cryptography may well beclouded by an unwillingness to speak publicly about the full extent ofvendor and user unhappiness with the current state of affairs. nationalsecurity authorities asserted that their working relationships with vendors of products with encryption capabilities are relatively harmonious.vendors contended that since they are effectively at the mercy of theexport control regulators, they have considerable incentive to suppressany public expression of dissatisfaction with the current process. a lack(or small degree) of vendor outcry against the cryptography export control regime cannot be taken as vendor support for it. more specifically,the committee received input from a number of private firms on the explicit condition of confidentiality. for example:¥companies with interests in cryptography affected by export control were reluctant to express fully their dissatisfaction with the currentrules governing export of products with encryption capabilities or howthese rules were actually implemented in practice. they were concernedthat any explicit connection between critical comments and their company might result in unfavorable treatment of a future application for anexport license for one of their products.¥companies that had significant dealings with the department ofdefense (dod) were reluctant to express fully their unhappiness withpolicy that strongly promoted classified encryption algorithms and governmentcontrolled keyescrow schemes. these companies were concerned that expressing their unhappiness fully might result in unfavorable treatment in competing for future dod business.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls159many companies have expressed dissatisfaction publicly, although avery small number of firms did express to the committee their relativecomfort with the way in which the current export control regime is managed. the committee did not conduct a systematic survey of all firmsaffected by export regulations, and it is impossible to infer the position ofa company that has not provided input on the matter.544.6 export of technical datathe rules regarding òtechnical dataó are particularly difficult to understand. a cryptographic algorithm (if described in a manner that is notmachineexecutable) is counted as technical data, whereas the same algorithm if described in machinereadable form (i.e., source or object code)counts as a product. legally, the itar regulate products with encryptioncapabilities differently than technical data related to cryptography, although the differences are relatively small in nature. for example, technical data related to cryptography enjoys an explicit exemption when distributed to u.s.controlled foreign companies, whereas products withencryption capabilities are in principle subject to a casebycase review insuch instances (although in practice, licenses for products with encryption capabilities under such circumstances are routinely granted).private citizens, academic institutions, and vendors are often unclearabout the legality of actions such as:¥discussing cryptography with a foreign citizen in the room;¥giving away software with encryption capabilities over theinternet (see section 4.8);¥shipping products with encryption capabilities to a foreign company within the united states that is controlled but not owned by a u.s.company;¥selling a u.s. company that makes products with strong encryption capabilities to a foreign company;¥selling products with encryption capabilities to foreign citizens onu.s. soil;¥teaching a course on cryptography that involves foreign graduatestudents;54the department of commerce study is the most systematic attempt to date to solicitvendorsõ input on how they have been affected by export controls, and the solicitationreceived a much smaller response than expected. see department of commerce and national security agency, a study of the international market for computer software with encryption, released january 11, 1996.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160cryptographyõs role in securing the information society¥allowing foreign citizens residing in the united states to work onthe source code of a product that uses embedded cryptography.55box 4.10 provides excerpts from the only document known to thecommittee that describes the u.s. government explanation of the regulations on technical data related to cryptography. in practice, these andother similar issues regarding technical data do not generally pose problems because these laws are for the most part difficult to enforce and infact are not generally enforced. nevertheless, the vagueness and broadnature of the regulations may well put people in jeopardy unknowingly.5655for example, one vendor argues that because foreign citizens hired by u.s. companiesbring noncontrolled knowledge back to their home countries anyway, the export controlregulations on technical data make little sense as a technique for limiting the spread ofknowledge. in addition, other vendors note that in practice the export control regulationson technical data have a much more severe impact on the employees that they may hirethan on academia, which is protected at least to some extent by presumptions of academicfreedom.56a suit filed in february 1995 seeks to bar the government from restricting publicationof cryptographic documents and software through the use of the export control laws. theplaintiff in the suit is dan bernstein, a graduate student in mathematics at the university ofcalifornia at berkeley. bernstein developed an encryption algorithm that he wishes topublish and to implement in a computer program intended for distribution, and he wantsto discuss the algorithm and program at open, public meetings. under the current exportcontrol laws, any individual or company that exports unlicensed encryption software maybe in violation of the export control laws that forbid the unlicensed export of defense articles, and any individual who discusses the mathematics of cryptographic algorithms maybe in violation of the export control laws that forbid the unlicensed export of òtechnicaldata.ó the lawsuit argues that the export control scheme as applied to encryption softwareis an òimpermissible prior restraint on speech, in violation of the first amendmentó andthat the current export control laws are vague and overbroad in denying people the right tospeak about and publish information about cryptography freely. a decision by the northern district court of california on april 15, 1996, by judge marilyn patel, denied thegovernmentõs motion to dismiss this suit, and found that for the purposes of first amendment analysis, source code should be treated as speech. the outcome of this suit is unknownat the time of this writing (spring 1996). the full text of this decision and other relateddocuments can be found at http://www.eff.org/pub/legal/cases/bernsteinvdos/legal.the constitutionality of export controls on technical data has not been determined by theu.s. supreme court. a ruling by the u.s. ninth circuit court of appeals held that theitar, when construed as òprohibiting only the exportation of technical data significantlyand directly related to specific articles on the munitions list, do not interfere with constitutionally protected speech, are not overbroad and the licensing provisions of the act are notan unconstitutional prior restraint on speech.ó (see 579 f.2d 516, u.s. vs. edler, u.s. courtof appeals, ninth circuit, july 31, 1978.) another suit filed by philip karn directly challenging the constitutionality of the itar was dismissed by the u.s. district court for thedistrict of columbia on march 22, 1996. the issue at hand was the fact that karn had beendenied ccl jurisdiction for a set of floppy diskettes containing source code for cryptographic confidentiality identical to that contained in bruce schneierõs book applied cryptography (which the state department had determined was not subject to cryptographic exportcontrols of any kind). see http://www.qualcomm.com/people/pkarn/export/index.htmlcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls161box 4.10on the export of technical data related to cryptographyòcryptologic technical data . . . refers . . . only [to] such information as isdesigned or intended to be used, or which reasonably could be expected to be givendirect application, in the design, production, manufacture, repair, overhaul, processing, engineering, development, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of items insuch categories. this interpretation includes, in addition to engineering and designdata, information designed or reasonably expected to be used to make such equipment more effective, such as encoding or enciphering techniques and systems, andcommunications or signal security techniques and guidelines, as well as other cryptographic and cryptanalytic methods and procedures. it does not include generalmathematical, engineering or statistical information, not purporting to have or reasonably expected to be given direct application to equipment in such categories. itdoes not include basic theoretical research data. it does, however, include algorithms and other procedures purporting to have advanced cryptologic application.òthe public is reminded that professional and academic presentations and informal discussions, as well as demonstrations of equipment, constituting disclosure ofcryptologic technical data to foreign nationals are prohibited without the prior approval of this office. approval is not required for publication of data within theunited states as described in section 125.11(a)(1). footnote 3 to section 125.11does not establish a prepublication review requirement.òthe interpretation set forth in this newsletter should exclude from the licensingprovisions of the itar most basic scientific data and other theoretical research information, except for information intended or reasonably expected to have a directcryptologic application. because of concerns expressed to this office that licensingprocedures for proposed disclosures of cryptologic technical data contained in professional and academic papers and oral presentations could cause burdensome delays in exchanges with foreign scientists, this office will expedite consideration as tothe application of itar to such disclosures. if requested, we will, on an expeditedbasis provide an opinion as to whether any proposed disclosure, for other than commercial purposes, of information relevant to cryptology, would require licensingunder the itar.ósource: office of munitions control, department of state, òcryptography/technical data,ó in munitions control newsletter, number 80, february 1980.(the office of munitions control is now the office of defense trade controls.)for the running story (karn is appealing this decision); this web page also contains thedistrict courtõs opinion on this lawsuit.) some scholars argue to the contrary that exportcontrols on technical data may indeed present first amendment problems, especially ifthese controls are construed in such a way that they inhibit academic discussions of cryptography with foreign nationals or prevent academic conferences on cryptography held inthe united states from inviting foreign nationals. see, for example, allen m. shinn, jr.,òfirst amendment and export laws: free speech on scientific and technical matters,ógeorge washington law review, january 1990, pp. 368403; and kenneth j. pierce, òpubliccryptography, arms export controls, and the first amendment: a need for legislation,ócornell international law journal, volume 17(19), 1984, pp. 197237.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162cryptographyõs role in securing the information society4.7 foreign policy considerationsa common perception within the vendor community is that the national security agency is the sole òpower behind the scenesó for enforcing the export control regime for cryptography. while nsa is indeedresponsible for making judgments about the national security impact ofexporting products with encryption capabilities, it is by no means theonly player in the export license application process.the department of state plays a role in the export control process thatis quite important. for example, makers of foreign policy in the u.s.government use economic sanctions as a tool for expressing u.s. concernand displeasure with the actions of other nations; such sanctions mostoften involve trade embargoes of various types. violations of humanrights by a particular nation, for example, represent a common issue thatcan trigger a move for sanctions. such sanctions are sometimes based onpresidential determinations (e.g., that the human rights record of countryx is not acceptable to the united states) undertaken in accordance withlaw; in other cases, sanctions against specific nations are determined directly by congressional legislation; in still other cases, sanctions are basedentirely on the discretionary authority of the president.the imposition of sanctions is often the result of congressional actionthat drastically limits the discretionary authority of the state department.in such a context, u.s. munitions or articles of war destined for particularoffending nations (or to the companies in such nations) are the mostpolitically sensitive, and in practice the items on the usml are the onesmost likely to be denied to the offending nations. in all such cases, thestate department must determine whether a particular item on the usmlshould or should not qualify for a usml license. a specific example ofsuch an action given to the committee in testimony involved the export ofcryptography by a u.s. bank for use in a branch located in the peopleõsrepublic of china. because of chinaõs human rights record, the department of state delayed the export, and the contract was lost to a swiss firm.the sale of cryptographic tools that are intended to protect the interests ofa u.s. company operating in a foreign nation was subject to a foreignpolicy stance that regarded such a sale as equivalent to supplying munitions to that nation.thus, even when nsa has been willing to grant an export license fora given cryptography product, the state department has sometimes denied a license because cryptography is on the usml. in such cases, nsatakes the blame for a negative decision, even when it had nothing to dowith it.critics of the present export control regime have made the argumentthat cryptography, as an item on the usml that is truly dualuse, shouldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls163not necessarily be included in such sanctions. such an argument hassome intellectual merit, but under current regulations it is impossible toseparate cryptography from the other items on the usml.4.8 technologypolicy mismatchestwo cases are often cited in the cryptography community as examplesof the mismatch between the current export control regime and the current state of cryptographic technology (box 4.11). moreover, they areoften used as evidence that the government is harassing innocent, lawabiding citizens.taken by themselves and viewed from the outside, both of the casesoutlined in box 4.11 suggest an approach to national security with evidentweaknesses. in the first instance, accepting the premise that programs forcryptography cannot appear on the internet because a foreigner mightdownload them seems to challenge directly the use of the internet as aforum for exchanging information freely even within the united states.under such logic (claim the critics), international telephone calls wouldalso have to be shut down because a u.s. person might discuss cryptography with a foreign national on the telephone. in the second instance, theinformation contained in the book (exportable) is identical to that on thedisk (not exportable). since it is the information about cryptography thatis technically at issue (the export control regulations make no mention ofthe medium in which that information is represented), it is hard to seewhy one would be exportable and the other not.on the other hand, taking the basic assumptions of the national security perspective as a given, the decisions have a certain logic that is notonly the logic of selective prosecution or enforcement.¥in the case of zimmermann, the real national security issue is notthe program itself, but rather the fact that a significant pgp user base maybe developing. two copies of a good encryption program distributedabroad pose no plausible threat to national security. but 20 million copiesmight well pose a threat. the export control regulations as written do notmention potential or actual size of the user base, and so the only remaining leverage for the u.s. government is the broad language that bringscryptography under the export control laws.¥in the case of schneier, the real national security issue relates to thenature of any scheme intended to deny capabilities to an adversary. typing the bookõs source code into the computer is an additional step that anadversary must take to implement a cryptography program and a step atwhich an adversary could make additional errors. no approach to denialcan depend on a single òsilver bulletó; instead, denial rests on the erectioncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 4.11two export control casesthe zimmermann pgp casephilip zimmermann is the author of a software program known as pgp (for prettygood privacy). pgp is a program that is used to encrypt mail messages endtoendbased on publickey cryptography. most importantly, pgp includes a system for keymanagement that enables two users who have never interacted to communicatesecurely based on a set of trusted intermediaries that certify the validity of a givenpublic key. across the internet, pgp is one of the most widely used systems forsecure email communication.zimmermann developed pgp as a òfreewareó program to be distributed via diskette. another party subsequently posted pgp to a usenet ònewsgroup.ó1 (a commercial version licensed from but not supplied by zimmermann has since emerged.)in 1993, it was determined that zimmermann was the target of a criminal investigation probing possible violations of the export control laws.2 zimmermann was careful to state that pgp was not to be used or downloaded outside the united states, butof course international connections to the internet made for easy access to copies ofpgp located within the united states. in january 1996, the u.s. department ofjustice closed its investigation of zimmermann without filing charges against him.3the bruce schneierapplied cryptography casebruce schneier wrote a book called applied cryptography4 that was well received in the cryptography community. it was also regarded as useful in a practicalsense because it contained printed on its pages source code that could be enteredinto a computer and compiled into a working cryptography program. in addition,when distributed within the united states, the book contained a floppy disk thatcontained source code identical to the code found in the book. however, whenanother party (philip karn) requested a ruling on the exportability of the book, he(karn) received permission to export the book but not the disk. this decision hasbeen greeted with considerable derision in the academic cryptography community,with comments such as òthey think that terrorists canõt type?ó expressing the generaldismay of the community.1a usenet newsgroup is in effect a mailing list to which individuals aroundthe world may subscribe. posting is thus an act of transmission to all listmembers.2john schwartz, òprivacy program: an online weapon?,ó washington post,april 3, 1995, p. a1.3elizabeth cocoran, òu.s. closes investigation in computer privacy case,ówashington post, january 12, 1996, p. a11.4bruce schneier, applied cryptography, john wiley & sons, new york, 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export controls165of multiple barriers, all of which taken together are expected to result in atleast a partial denial of a certain capability. moreover, if one begins fromthe premise that export controls on software encryption represent appropriate national policy, it is clear that allowing the export of the sourcecode to schneierõs book would set a precedent that would make it verydifficult to deny permission for the export of other similar software products with encryption capabilities. finally, the decision is consistent with ahistory of commodity jurisdiction decisions that generally maintain usmlcontrols on the source code of a product whose object code implementationof confidentiality has been granted commodity jurisdiction to the ccl.these comments are not intended to excoriate or defend the nationalsecurity analysis of these cases. but the controversy over these cases doessuggest quite strongly that the traditional national security paradigm ofexport controls on cryptography (one that is biased toward denial ratherthan approval) is stretched greatly by current technology. put differently,when the export control regime is pushed to an extreme, it appears to bemanifestly ridiculous.4.9 recapcurrent export controls on products with encryption capabilities area compromise between (1) the needs of national security to conduct signals intelligence and (2) the needs of u.s. and foreign businesses operating abroad to protect information and the needs of u.s. information technology vendors to remain competitive in markets involving products withencryption capabilities that might meet these needs. these controls havehelped to delay the spread of strong cryptographic capabilities and theuse of those capabilities throughout the world, to impede the development of standards for cryptography that would facilitate such a spread,and to give the u.s. government a tool for monitoring and influencing thecommercial development of cryptography. export controls have clearlybeen effective in limiting the foreign availability of products with strongencryption capabilities made by u.s. manufacturers, although enforcement of export controls on certain products with encryption capabilitiesappears to have created many public relations difficulties for the u.s.government, and circumventions of the current regulations appear possible. the dollar cost of limiting the availability of cryptography abroadis hard to estimate with any kind of confidence, since even the definitionof what counts as a cost is quite fuzzy. at the same time, a floor of a fewhundred million dollars per year for the market affected by export controls on encryption seems plausible, and all indications are that this figurewill only grow in the future.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166cryptographyõs role in securing the information societya second consideration is the possibility that export controls on products with encryption capabilities may well have a negative impact on u.s.national security interests by stimulating the growth of important foreigncompetitors over which the u.s. government has less influence, and possibly by damaging u.s. competitive advantages in the use and development of information technology. in addition, the export control regime isclouded by uncertainty from the vendor standpoint, and there is a profound mismatch between the perceptions of government/national security and those of vendors on the impact of the export control regime.moreover, even when a given product with encryption capabilities maybe acceptable for export on national security grounds, nonnational security considerations may play a role in licensing decisions.partly in response to expressed concerns about export controls, theexport regime has been gradually loosened since 1983. this relaxationraises the obvious question of how much farther and in what directionssuch loosening could go without significant damage to national securityinterests. this subject is addressed in chapter 7.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1675escrowed encryption andrelated issuesthis chapter describes a toolñescrowed encryptionñthat respondsto the needs described in chapter 3 for exceptional access to encryptedinformation. escrowed encryption is the basis for a number of administration proposals that seek to reconcile needs for information securityagainst the needs of law enforcement and to a lesser extent national security. as in the case of export controls, escrowed encryption generatesconsiderable controversy.5.1 what is escrowed encryption?the term òescrow,ó as used conventionally, implies that some item ofvalue (e.g., a trust deed, money, real property, other physical object) isdelivered to an independent trusted party that might be a person or anorganization (i.e., an escrow agent) for safekeeping, and is accompaniedby a set of rules provided by the parties involved in the transaction governing the actions of the escrow agent. such rules typically specify whatis to be done with the item, the schedule to be followed, and the list ofother events that have to occur. the underlying notion is that the escrowagent is a secure haven for temporary ownership or possession of theitem, is legally bound to comply with the set of rules for its disposition,functions as a disinterested extratransaction party, and bears legal liability for malfeasance or mistakes.usually, the rules stipulate that when all conditions set forth in theescrow rules have been fulfilled, the item will eventually be delivered to acryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyspecified party (e.g., possibly the original depositing party, an estate, ajudicial officer for custody, one or more individuals or organizations). inany event, the salient point is that all terms and conditions and functioning of an escrow process are, or can be, visible to the parties involved;moreover, the behavior and performance of formal escrow agents aregoverned by legally established obligations.as it applies to cryptography, the term òescrowó was introduced bythe u.s. governmentõs april 1993 clipper initiative in the context of encryption keys. prior to this time, the term òescrowó had not been widelyassociated with cryptography, although the underlying concepts had beenknown for some time (as described below). the clipper initiative promoting escrowed encryption was intended òto improve the security andprivacy of telephone communications while meeting the legitimate needsof law enforcement.ó1 in this original context, the term òescrowed encryptionó had a very specific and narrow meaning: escrowed encryptionwas a mechanism that would assure law enforcement access to the voicecommunications underlying encrypted intercepts from wiretaps.however, during 3 years of public debate and dialogue, òescrow,óòkey escrow,ó and òescrowed encryptionó have become terms with amuch broader meaning. indeed, many different schemes for òescrowedencryptionó are quite different from òescrowed encryptionó as the termwas used in the clipper initiative.as is so often the case in computerrelated matters, terminology forescrowed systems is today not clearly established and can be confusing ormisleading. while new terminology could be introduced in an effort toclarify meaning, the fact is that the present policy and public and technical dialogues all use òescrowó and òescrowed encryptionó in a very generic and broad sense. it is no longer the very precise restricted conceptembodied in the clipper initiative and described in section 5.2.1. escrowas a concept now applies not only to the initial purpose of assuring lawenforcement access to encrypted materials, but also to possible enduseror organizational requirements for a mechanism to protect against lost,corrupted, or unavailable keys. it can also mean that some process suchas authority to decrypt a header containing a session key is escrowed witha trusted party, or it can mean that a corporation is ready to cooperatewith law enforcement to access encrypted materials.1see òstatement by the press secretary, the white house, april 16, 1993,ó reprinted indavid banisar (ed.), 1994 cryptography and privacy sourcebook, part ii, electronic privacyinformation center, diane publishing, upland, pa., 1994. the name òclipperó initiallyselected as the name of this effort proved later to be a trademark whose holder relinquishedit to public use.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues169this report conforms to current usage, considering escrowed encryption as a broad concept that can be implemented in many ways; section5.3 addresses forms of escrowed encryption other than that described inthe clipper initiative. also, escrowed encryption is only one of severalapproaches to providing exceptional access to encrypted information;nonescrow approaches to providing exceptional access are discussed inchapter 7.2finally, the relationship between òstrong encryptionó and òescrowedencryptionó should be noted. as stated above, escrowed encryption refers to an approach to encryption that enables exceptional access toplaintext without requiring a third party (e.g., government acting withlegal authorization, a corporation acting in accordance with its contractual rights vis‹vis its employees, an individual who has lost an encryption key) to perform a cryptanalytic attack. at the same time, escrowedencryption can involve cryptographic algorithms that are strong or weakand keys that are long or short. some participants in the public debateappear to believe that escrowed encryption is necessarily equivalent toweak encryption, because it does not prevent third parties from havingaccess to the relevant plaintext. but this is a mischaracterization of theintent behind escrowed encryption, since all escrowed encryption schemesproposed to date are intended to provide very strong cryptographic confidentiality (strong algorithms, relatively long keys) for users against unauthorized third parties, but no confidentiality at all against third partieswho have authorized exceptional access.5.2 administration initiatives supportingescrowed encryptionsince inheriting the problem of providing law enforcement access toencrypted telephony from the outgoing bush administration in late 1992,2in the more general meaning of escrowed encryption, exceptional access refers to accessto plaintext by a party other than the originator and the recipient of encrypted communications. for the case of stored information, exceptional access may refer to access to theplaintext of an encrypted file by someone not designated by the original encryptor of thefile to decrypt it or even by persons so designated who have forgotten how to do so. seealso chapter 3.contrast the meaning of thirdparty access in the original clipper context, in whichthirdparty access refers to assured access, under proper court authorization, by law enforcement to the plaintext of an encrypted voice conversation. the clipper initiative wasintended to support a system that provided a technically convenient means to assure fulfillment of such a requirement. note that this meaning is much narrower than the use of themore general term òexceptional accessó described in the previous paragraph.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyclinton administration officials have said that as they considered the notsodistant future of information technology and information securityalong with the stated needs of law enforcement and national security foraccess to information, they saw three alternatives:3¥ to do nothing, resulting in the possible proliferation of productswith encryption capabilities that would seriously weaken, if not whollynegate, the authority to wiretap embodied in the wiretap act of 1968(title iii) and damage intelligence collection for national security andforeign policy reasons;¥ to support an approach based on weak encryption, likely resultingin poor security and cryptographic confidentiality for important personaland business information; and¥ to support an approach based on strong but escrowed encryption.if widely adopted and properly implemented, escrowed encryption couldprovide legitimate users with high degrees of assurance that their sensitive information would remain secure but nevertheless enable law enforcement and national security authorities to obtain access to escrowencrypted data in specific instances when authorized under law.moreover, the administration hoped that by meeting legitimate demandsfor better information security, escrowed encryption would dampen themarket for unescrowed encryption products that would deny access tolaw enforcement and national security authorities even when they soughtaccess for legitimate and lawfully authorized purposes.the administration chose the last, and since april 1993, the u.s. government has advanced a number of initiatives to support the insertion ofkey escrow features into products with encryption capabilities that willbecome available in the future. these include the clipper initiative andthe escrowed encryption standard, the capstone/fortezza initiative, andthe proposal to liberalize export controls on products using escrowedencryption. these initiatives raise a number of important issues that arethe focus of sections 5.3 to 5.13.5.2.1 the clipper initiative and the escrowed encryption standardas noted above, the clipper initiative was conceived as a way forproviding legal access by law enforcement authorities to encrypted tele3see, for example, statement of raymond kammer, deputy director, national institute ofstandards and technology, before the committee on the judiciary, u.s. senate, may 3,1994. available online at http://www.nist.gov/item/testimony/may94/encryp.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues171box 5.1key technical attributes of the clipper initiative1.a chipunique secret keyñthe òunit keyó or òdevice keyó or òmaster keyóñwould be embedded in the chip at the time of fabrication and could be obtained bylaw enforcement officials legally authorized to do so under title iii.2.each chipunique device key would be split into two components.3.the component parts would be deposited with and held under high securityby two trusted thirdparty escrow agents proposed to be agencies of the u.s. government. note: òthirdpartyó is used here to indicate parties other than those participating in the communication.4.a law enforcement access field (leaf) would be a required part of everytransmission. the leaf would contain (a) the current session key, encrypted with acombination of the deviceunique master key and a different but secret òfamily keyóalso permanently embedded in the chip, and (b) the chip serial number, also protected by encryption with the family key.5.law enforcement could use the information in the leaf to identify the particular device of interest, solicit its masterkey components from the two escrowagents, combine them, recover the session key, and eventually decrypt the encryptedtraffic.6.the encryption algorithm on the chip would be secret.7.the chip would be protected against reverse engineering and other attemptsto access its technical details.source: dorothy denning and miles smid, òkey escrowing today,ó ieeecommunications, volume 32(9), september 1994, pp. 5868. available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/ crypto/keyescrowingtoday.txt.phony.4 the escrowed encryption standard (ees; a federal informationprocessing standard, fips185) was promulgated in february 1994 as thekey technological component of the clipper initiative (box 5.1). specifically, the ees called for the integration of special microelectronic integrated circuit chips (called òclipper chipsó) into devices used for voicecommunications; these chips, as one part of an overall system, providevoice confidentiality for the user and exceptional access to law enforcement authorities. to provide these functions, the clipper chip was designed with a number of essential characteristics:¥ confidentiality would be provided by a classified algorithm knownas skipjack. using an 80bit key, the skipjack algorithm would offer4dorothy denning and miles smid, òkey escrowing today,ó ieee communications, volume 32(9), september 1994, pp. 5868. available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/keyescrowingtoday.txt.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyconsiderably more protection against bruteforce attacks than the 56bitdes algorithm (fips 461). the skipjack algorithm was reviewed byseveral independent experts, all with the necessary security clearances.in the course of an investigation limited by time and resources, they reported that they did not find shortcuts that would significantly reduce thetime to perform a cryptanalytic attack below what would be required bybrute force.5¥ the chip would be protected against reverse engineering and otherattempts to access its technical details.¥ the chip would be factoryprogrammed with a chipunique secretkey, the òunit keyó or òdevice key,ó6 at the time of fabrication. possessionof this key would enable one to decrypt all communications sent to andfrom the telephone unit in which the chip was integrated.¥ a law enforcement access field (leaf) would be a required part ofevery transmission and would be generated by the chip. the leaf wouldcontain two items: (a) the current session key,7 encrypted with a combination of the deviceunique unit key, and (b) the chip serial number. theentire leaf would itself be encrypted by a different but secret òfamilykeyó also permanently embedded in the chip. the family key would bethe same in all clipper chips produced by a given manufacturer; in practice, all clipper chips regardless of manufacturer are programmed todayby the mykotronx corporation with the same family key.to manage the use of the leaf, the u.s. government would undertake a number of actions:5see ernest brickell et al., skipjack review: interim report, july 28, 1993. posted to theòsci.cryptó newsgroup on august 1, 1993, by dorothy denning and available online athttp://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/skipjack.txt. reprinted in lance j.hoffman (ed.), building in big brother: the cryptographic policy debate, springerverlag,new york, 1995, pp. 119130.6the device key or unit key is used to open the encryption that protects a session key.hence, possession of the unit key allows the decryption of all messages or files encryptedwith that unit or device. òsession keyó is defined in footnote 7.7òsession,ó as in computer science, denotes a period of time during which one or morecomputerbased processes are operational and performing some function; typically two ormore of systems, end users, or software processes are involved in a session. it is analogousto a meeting among these things. for cryptography, a session is the plaintext data streamon which the cryptographic process operates. the session key is the actual key that isneeded to decrypt the resulting ciphertext. in the context of an encrypted data transmissionor telephone call, the session key is the key needed to decrypt the communications stream.for encrypted data storage, it is the key needed to decrypt the file. note that in the case ofsymmetric encryption (discussed in chapter 2), the decryption key is identical to the encryption key. since asymmetric encryption for confidentiality is efficient only for shortmessages or files, symmetric encryption is used for session encryption of telephony, datatransmissions, and data storage.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues173¥ the unit key, known at the time of manufacture and unchangeablefor the life of the chip, would be divided into two components, each ofwhich would be deposited with and held under high security by twotrusted government escrow agents located within the departments ofcommerce and treasury.¥ these escrow agents would serve as repositories for all such materials, releasing the relevant information to law enforcement authoritiesupon presentation of the unit identification and lawfully obtained courtorders.when law enforcement officials encountered a clipperencrypted conversation on a wiretap, they would use the leaf to obtain the serialnumber of the clipper chip performing the encryption and the encryptedsession key.8 upon presentation of the serial number and court authorization for the wiretap to the escrow agents, law enforcement officialscould then obtain the proper unitkey components, combine them, recover the session key, and eventually decrypt the encrypted voice communications.9 only one key would be required in order to obtain accessto both sides of the clipperencrypted conversation. the authority forlaw enforcement to approach escrow agents and request unitkey components was considered to be that granted by title iii and the foreign intelligence surveillance act (fisa).10as a fips, the ees is intended for use by the federal government andhas no legal standing outside the federal government. indeed, its use is8because the family key would be known to law enforcement officials, obtaining theunencrypted leaf would present no problems.9questions have arisen about nsa access to escrowed keys. nsa has stated for therecord to the committee that òkey escrow does not affect either the authorities or restrictions applicable to nsaõs signals intelligence activities. nsaõs access to escrowed keys willbe tied to collection against legitimate foreign intelligence targets. the key holder musthave some assurance that nsa is involved in an authorized intelligence collection activityand that the collection activity will be conducted in accordance with the appropriate restrictions.ó for a description of these restrictions, see appendix d of this report.10dorothy denning and miles smid, òkey escrowing today,ó ieee communications,volume 32(9), 1994, pp. 5868. available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/keyescrowingtoday.txt.given its initial intent to preserve law enforcementõs ability to conduct wire taps, itfollows that clipper key escrow would be conducted without the knowledge of partieswhose keys had been escrowed, and would be conducted according to a set of rules thatwould be publicly known but not changeable by the affected parties. under the requirements of title iii, the affected parties would be notified of the tapping activity at its conclusion, unless the information were to become the basis for a criminal indictment or an ongoing investigation. in the latter case, the accused would learn of the wiretaps, and hence thelaw enforcement use of escrowed keys, through court procedures.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyoptional even by federal agencies. in other words, federal agencies with arequirement for secure voice communications have a choice about whetheror not to adopt the ees for their own purposes. more importantly, the useof eescompliant devices by private parties cannot in general be compelledby executive action alone; private consumers are free to decide whether ornot to use eescompliant devices to safeguard communications and arefree to use other approaches to communications security should they sodesire.11 however, if consumers choose to use eescompliant devices,they must accept key escrow as outlined in procedures promulgated bythe government. this characteristicñthat interoperability requires acceptance of key escrowñis a design choice; a different specification couldpermit the interoperability of devices with or without features for keyescrow.the ees was developed by communications security experts from thensa, but the escrow features of the ees are intended to meet the needs oflaw enforcementñi.e., its needs for clandestine surveillance of electronicand wire communications as described in chapter 3. nsa played thisdevelopment role because of its technical expertise. eescompliant devicesare also approved for communicating classified information up to and including secret. in speaking with the committee, administration officialsdescribed the clipper initiative as more or less irrelevant to the needs ofsignals intelligence (sigint) (box 5.2).as of early 1996, at&t had sold 10,000 to 15,000 units of the suritytelephone device 3600. these include four configurations: model c,containing only the clipper chip, which has been purchased primarily byu.s. government customers; model f, containing only an at&tproprietary algorithm that is exportable; model p, containing an at&tproprietary nonexportable algorithm in addition to the exportable algorithm;and model s, with all three of the above. only units with the clipper chiphave a keyescrow feature. all the telephones are interoperableñtheynegotiate with each other to settle on a mutually available algorithm atthe beginning of a call.12 in addition, at&t and cycomm internationalhave agreed to jointly develop and market clippercompatible digitalvoice encryption attachments for motorolaõs microtac series of handheld11for example, an opinion issued by the congressional research service argues that legislation would be required to mandate the use of the clipper chip beyond federal computersystems. memorandum from the american law division, congressional research service,òcurrent legal authority to mandate adoption of ôclipper chipõ standards by privateparties,ó library of congress, washington, d.c., october 4, 1994.12at&t secure communications product literature, available online at http://www.att.com/press/0694/940613.pdb.html, and personal communication with bruce bailey, at&tsecure communications systems, greensboro, n.c., march 29, 1996.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues175box 5.2the relationship of escrowed encryption to signals intelligenceescrowed encryptionñespecially the escrowed encryption standard (ees) andthe clipper initiativeñis a tool of law enforcement more than of signals intelligence(sigint). the ees was intended primarily for domestic use, although exports of eescompliant devices have not been particularly discouraged. given that the exceptionalaccess feature of escrowed encryption has been openly announced, purchase by foreign governments for secure communications is highly unlikely.on the other hand, the u.s. government has classified the skipjack algorithm tokeep foreign adversaries from learning more about good cryptography. in addition,wide deployment and use of escrowed encryption would complicate the task ofsignals intelligence, simply because individual keys would have to be obtained oneby one for communications that might or might not be useful. (still, ees deviceswould be better for sigint than unescrowed secure telephones, in the sense thatwidely deployed secure telephones without features for exceptional access would bemuch harder to penetrate.)finally, the impact of escrowed encryption on intelligence collection abroaddepends on the specific terms of escrow agent certification. even assuming that allrelevant escrow agents are located within the united states (a question addressed atgreater length in appendix g), the specific regulations governing their behavior arerelevant. intelligence collections of digital data can proceed with few difficulties ifregulations permit escrow agents to make keys available to national security authorities on an automated basis and without the need to request keys one by one. on theother hand, if the regulations forbid wholesale access to keys (and the products inquestion do not include a òuniversal keyó that allows one key to decrypt messagesproduced by many devices), escrowed encryption would provide access primarily tospecific encrypted communications that are known to be intrinsically interesting(e.g., known to be from a particular party of interest). however, escrowed encryption without wholesale access to keys would not provide significant assistance tointelligence collections undertaken on a large scale.cellular telephones; these products are expected to be available in thesecond quarter of 1996.13 finally, at&t makes no particular secret of thefact that its surity line of secure voice communication products employsclipper chip technology, but that fact is not featured in the product literature; potential consumers would have to know enough to ask a knowledgeable sales representative.13at&t news release, òat&t, cycomm international develop digital voice encryption,ónovember 1, 1995. available online at http://www.att.com/press/1195/951101.mma.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176cryptographyõs role in securing the information society5.2.2 the capstone/fortezza initiative14the capstone/fortezza effort supports escrowed encryption for datastorage and communications, although a fips for this application has notbeen issued. specifically, the capstone chip is an integratedcircuit chipthat provides a number of encryption services for both stored computerdata and data communications. for confidentiality, the capstone chipuses the skipjack algorithm, the same algorithm that is used in the clipper chip (which is intended only for voice communications, includinglowspeed data and fax transmission across the public switched telephonenetwork, and the same mechanism to provide for key escrowing. theagents used to hold capstone keys are also identical to those for holdingclipper keysñnamely, the departments of treasury and commerce. inaddition, the capstone chip (in contrast to the clipper chip) providesservices that conform to the digital signature standard (fips186) to provide digital signatures that authenticate user identity and the secure hashstandard (fips180); the chip also implements a classified algorithm forkey exchange (usually referred to as the key exchange algorithm (kea))and a random number generator.the capstone chip is the heart of the fortezza card.15 the fortezzacard is a pccard (formerly known as a pcmcia card) intended to beplugged into any computer with a pccard expansion slot and appropriate support software; with the card in place, the host computer is able toprovide reliable user authentication and encryption for confidentialityand certify data transmission integrity in any communication with anyother computer so equipped. the fortezza card is an example of a hardware token that can be used to ensure proper authentication.16 note also14technically speaking, clipper and capstone/fortezza are not separate initiatives. thecapstone program had been under way for a number of years prior to the public announcement of the clipper chip in 1993, and the clipper chip is based entirely on technologydeveloped under the capstone program. the clipper chip was developed when the incoming clinton administration felt it had to address the problem of voice encryption. however, while clipper and capstone/fortezza are not technically separate programs, the public debate has engaged clipper to a much greater degree than it has capstone. for thisreason, this report discusses clipper and capstone/fortezza separately.15the fortezza card was previously named the tessera card; the name was changedwhen previous trademark claims on òtesseraó were discovered.16to ensure that the holder of the fortezza card is in fact the authorized holder, a personal identification number (pin) is associated with the card: only when the proper pin isentered will the fortezza card activate its various functions. while concerns have beenraised in the security literature that passwords and pins are not secure when transmittedover open communications lines, the pin used by the fortezza card is never used outsidethe confines of the userõs system. that is, the pin is never transmitted over any networklink; the sole function of the pin is to turn on the fortezza card, after which an automatedprotocol ensures secure authentication.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues177that there are other hardware pc cards that provide cryptographic functionality similar to that of fortezza but without the escrow features.17to date, the nsa has issued two major solicitations for fortezza cards,the second of which was for 750,000 cards.18 these cards will be used bythose on the defense messaging system, a communications network thatis expected to accommodate up to 2 million defense department users in2005. in addition, fortezza cards are intended to be available for privatesector use. the extent to which fortezza cards will be acceptable in thecommercial market remains to be seen, although a number of productvendors have decided to incorporate support for fortezza cards in someproducts.195.2.3 the relaxation of export controls on software products usingòproperly escrowedó 64bit encryptionas noted in chapter 4, the administration has proposed to treat software products using a 64bit encryption key as it currently treats productswith encryption capabilities that are based on a 40bit rc2 or rc4 algorithm, providing that products using this stronger encryption are òproperly escrowed.ó this change is intended to facilitate the global sale of u.s.software products with significantly stronger cryptographic protectionthan is available from u.s. products sold abroad today.to work out the details of what is meant by òproperly escrowed,ó thenational institute of standards and technology held workshops in september and december 1995 at which the administration released a number of draft criteria for export control (box 5.3). these criteria are intended to ensure that a productõs key escrow mechanism cannot be readilyaltered or bypassed so as to defeat the purposes of key escrowing. inearly 1996, the administration expressed its intent to move forward rapidly with its proposal and to finalize export criteria and make formalconforming modifications to the export regulations òsoon.ó17for example, such devices are made by cylink and telequip. see government computernews, òsecurity device is 007 in your pocket,ó august 7, 1995, p. 6.18paul constance, òdod plans to install 750,000 fortezza cards,ó government computernews, july 31, 1995, p. 1 for the solicitation.19for example, the netscape communications corporation has announced that it willsupport fortezza in the next version of its web browser, while the oracle corporation willsupport fortezza in the next version of its secure network services product. see elizabethsikorovsky, ònetscape and oracle products support fortezza card,ó federal computer week,october 23, 1995, p. 36.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.3administrationõs draft software key escrow export criterianovember 1995key escrow feature1.the key(s) required to decrypt the productõs key escrow cryptographic functionsõ ciphertext shall be accessible through a key escrow feature.2.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functions shall be inoperable untilthe key(s) is escrowed in accordance with #3.3.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functionsõ key(s) shall be escrowedwith escrow agent(s) certified by the u.s. government, or certified by foreign governments with which the u.s. government has formal agreements consistent with u.s.law enforcement and national security requirements.4.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functionsõ ciphertext shall contain,in an accessible format and with a reasonable frequency, the identity of the keyescrow agent(s) and information sufficient for the escrow agent(s) to identify the key(s)required to decrypt the ciphertext.5.the productõs key escrow feature shall allow access to the key(s) needed todecrypt the productõs ciphertext regardless of whether the product generated or received the ciphertext.6.the productõs key escrow feature shall allow for the recovery of multipledecryption keys during the period of authorized access without requiring repeatedpresentations of the access authorization to the key escrow agent(s).key length feature7.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functions shall use an unclassifiedencryption algorithm with a key length not to exceed sixtyfour (64) bits.8.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functions shall not provide the feature of multiple encryption (e.g., tripledes).interoperability feature9.the productõs key escrow cryptographic functions shall interoperate onlywith key escrow cryptographic functions in products that meet these criteria, andshall not interoperate with the cryptographic functions of a product whose key escrow encryption function has been altered, bypassed, disabled, or otherwise rendered inoperative.design, implementation, and operational assurance10.the product shall be resistant to anything that could disable or circumventthe attributes described in #1 through #9.source: national institute of standards and technology, draft software keyescrow encryption export criteria, november 6, 1995. reprinted from textavailable online at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow/criteria.txt (november1995 version; nist web page).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues1795.2.4 other federal initiatives in escrowed encryptionin addition to the initiatives described above, the administration hasannounced plans for new federal information processing standards intwo other areas:¥ fips185 will be modified to include escrowed encryption for datain both communicated and stored forms. the modified fips is expectedin late 1996; how this modification will relate to capstone/fortezza is asyet uncertain.¥ a fips for key escrow will be developed that will, among otherthings, specify performance requirements for escrow agents and for escrowed encryption products. how this relates to the existing or modifiedfips185 is also uncertain at this time.note: as this report goes to press from the prepublication version,the administration has released a draft working paper entitled òenablingprivacy, commerce, security and public safety in the global informationinfrastructureó20 that appears to call for one infrastructure for cryptography that would support both publickey authentication and keyescrowing functions.5.3 other approaches to escrowed encryptiona general concept akin to escrowed encryption has long been familiarto some institutions, notably banks, that have for years purchased information systems allowing them to retrieve the plaintext of encrypted filesor other stored information long after the immediate need for such information has passed.21 however, only since the initial announcement of theclipper initiative in april 1993 has escrowed encryption gained prominence in the public debate.denning and branstad describe a number of different approaches toimplementing an escrowed encryption scheme, all of which have been20see òenabling privacy, commerce, security and public safety in the global informationinfrastructure,ó executive office of the president, office of management and budget, washington, d.c., may 20, 1996.21an example first announced in 1994 is northern telecomõs òentrust,ó which providesfor file encryption and digital signature in a corporate network environment using rsapublickey cryptography. òentrustó allows master access by a network administrator to allusersõ encrypted files, even after a user has left the company. a product review for a recentversion of òentrustó can be found in stephen cobb, òencryption for the enterprise,ó network world, march 11, 1996, p. 57.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180cryptographyõs role in securing the information societydiscussed publicly since 1993.22 those and other different approachesvary along the dimensions discussed below:¥ number of escrow agents required to provide exceptional access. forexample, one proposal called for separation of clipper unit keys intomore than two components.23 a second proposal called for the kofnarrangement described in section 5.9.1.¥ affiliation of escrow agents. among the possibilities are governmentin the executive branch, government in the judicial branch, commercialinstitutions, product manufacturers, and customers.¥ ability of parties to obtain exceptional access. under the clipper initiative, the keyescrowing feature of the ees is available only to law enforcement authorities acting under court order; users never have access to thekeys.¥ authorities vested in escrow agents. in the usual discussion, escrowagents hold keys or components of keys. but in one proposal, escrowagents known as data recovery centers (drcs) do not hold user keys oruser key components at all. products escrowed with a drc would include in the ciphertext of a transmission or a file the relevant session keyencrypted with the public key of that drc and the identity of the drc inplaintext. upon presentation of an appropriate request (e.g., valid courtorder for law enforcement authorities, a valid request by the user of thedrcescrowed product), the drc would retrieve the encrypted sessionkey, decrypt it, and give the original session key to the authorized thirdparty, who could then recover the data encrypted with that key.24¥ hardware vs. software implementation of products.¥ partial key escrow.25 under a partial key escrow, a product withencryption capabilities could use keys of any length, except that all but acertain number of bits would be escrowed. for example, a key might be256 bits long, and 216 bits (256 40) of the key would be escrowed; 40 bits22all of these examples are taken from dorothy denning and dennis branstad, òa taxonomy of key escrow encryption,ó communications of the acm, volume 39, march 1996.23this comment was probably made during the meetings of july, august, and september1993 by the computer system security and privacy advisory board to solicit public viewson the clipper initiative. transcripts of the meetings are available from the national institute of standards and technology.24stephen t. walker et al., commercial key escrow: something for everyone now and for thefuture, report #541, trusted information systems, glenwood, md., january 1995.25adi shamir, òpartial key escrow: a new approach to software key escrow,ó summary of presentation at nist fips key escrow workshop, national institute of standardsand technology, gaithersburg, md., september 15, 1995. available online at http://reality.sgi.com/employees/chrisrcorp/pkedc.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues181would remain private. thus, decrypting ciphertext produced by thisproduct would require a 256bit work factor for those without the escrowed bits and a 40bit work factor for those individuals in possession ofthe escrowed bits. depending on the number of private bits used, thisapproach would protect users against disclosure of keys to those withoutaccess to the specialized decryption facilities required to conduct an exhaustive search against the private key (in this case, 40 bits).box 5.4 describes a number of other conceptual approaches to escrowed encryption.5.4 the impact of escrowed encryption oninformation securityin the debate over escrowed encryption, the dimension of information security that has received the largest amount of public attention hasbeen confidentiality. judgments about the impact of escrowed encryption on confidentiality depend on the point of comparison. if the point ofcomparison is taken to be the confidentiality of data available today, thenthe wide use of escrowed encryption does improve confidentiality. thereason is that most information today is entirely unprotected.consider first information in transit (communications). most communications today are unencrypted. for example, telephonic communications can be tapped in many different ways, including through alligatorclips at a junction box in the basement of an apartment house or on top ofa telephone pole, off the air when some part of a telephonic link is wireless (e.g., in a cellular call), and from the central switching office that iscarrying the call. calls made using eescompliant telephones would beprotected against such surveillance, except when surveillance parties (presumably law enforcement authorities) had obtained the necessary keysfrom escrow agents. as for information in storage, most files on mostcomputers are unencrypted. escrowed encryption applied to these fileswould protect them against threats such as casual snoops, although individuals with knowledge of the vulnerabilities of the system on whichthose files reside might still be able to access them.on the other hand, if the point of comparison is taken to be the levelof confidentiality that could be possible using unescrowed encryption,then escrowed encryption offers a lower degree of confidentiality. escrowed encryption by design introduces a system weakness (i.e., it isdeliberately designed to allow exceptional access), and so if the procedures that protect against improper use of that access somehow fail, inforcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.4nonclipper proposals for escrowed encryptionat&t cryptobackup. cryptobackup is an at&t proprietary design for a commercial or private keyescrow encryption system. the data encryption key for adocument is recovered through a backup recovery vector (brv), which is stored inthe document header. the brv contains the document key encrypted under a master public key of the escrowed agent(s). (david p. maher, òcrypto backup and keyescrow,ó communications of the acm, march 1996.)bankers trust secure key escrow encryption system (securekees). employeesof a corporation register their encryption devices (e.g., smart card) and private encryption keys with one or more commercial escrow agents selected by the corporation. (securekees product literature, certco, bankers trust company.)bell atlantic yaksha system. an online key security server generates and distributes session keys and file keys using a variant of the rsa algorithm. the servertransmits the keys to authorized parties for data recovery purposes. (ravi ganesan,òthe yaksha security system,ó communications of the acm, march 1996.)royal holloway trusted third party services. this proposed architecture for apublic key infrastructure requires that the trusted third parties associated with pairs ofcommunicating users share parameters and a secret key. (nigel jefferies, chris mitchell, and michael walker, a proposed architecture for trusted third party services,óroyal holloway, university of london, 1995.)rsa securetm. this file encryption product provides data recovery through anescrowed master public key, which can be split among up to 255 trustees using athreshold scheme. (rsa securetm, product literature from rsa data security inc.)nortel entrust. this commercial product archives usersõ private encryption keysas part of the certificate authority function and publickey infrastructure support.(warwick ford, òentrust technical overview,ó white paper, nortel secure networks,october 1994.)national semiconductor cake. this proposal combines a tis commercial keyescrow (cke) with national semiconductorõs personacardtm. (w.b. sweet, òcommercial automated key escrow (cake): an exportable strong encryption proposal,ónational semiconductor, ipower business unit, june 4, 1995.)tis commercial key escrow (cke). this is a commercial key escrow system forstored data and file transfers. data recovery is enabled through master keys held bya data recovery center. (stephen t. walker, stephen b. lipner, carl m. ellison, anddavid m. balenson, òcommercial key recovery,ó communications of the acm,march 1996.)tecsec veiltm. this commercial product provides file (and object) encryption. private key escrow is built into the key management infrastructure. (edward m.scheidt and jon l. roberts, òprivate escrow key management,ó tecsec inc., vienna,va. see also tecsec veiltm, product literature.)viacrypt pgp/be (business edition). viacrypt is a commercialized version ofpgp, the free internetdownloadable software package for encrypted communications. the business edition of viacrypt optionally enables an employer to decrypt allencrypted files or messages sent or received by an employee by carrying the sessionkey encrypted under a òcorporate access keyó in the header for the file or message.(see http://www.viacrypt.com.)source: most of these examples are taken from dorothy denning and milessmid, òkey escrowing today,ó ieee communications, volume 32(9), 1994, pp.5868. available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/keyescrowingtoday.txt.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues183mation is left unprotected.26 for example, eescompliant telephoneswould offer less confidentiality for telephonic communications than wouldtelephones that could be available with the same encryption algorithmand implementation but without the escrow feature, since such telephonescould be designed to provide communications confidentiality against alleavesdroppers, including rogue police, private investigators, or (and thisis the important point) legally authorized law enforcement officials.more generally, escrowed encryption weakens the confidentiality provided by an encryption system by providing an access path that can becompromised.27 yet escrowed encryption also provides a hedge againstthe loss of access to encrypted data by those authorized for access; forexample, a user may lose or forget a decryption key. assurances thatencrypted data will be available when needed are clearly greater when amechanism has been installed to facilitate such access. reasonable peoplemay disagree about how to make that tradeoff in any particular case,thus underscoring the need for end users themselves to make their ownriskbenefit assessments regarding the loss of authorized access (againstwhich escrowed encryption can protect by guaranteeing key recovery) vs.the loss of confidentiality to unauthorized parties (whose likelihood isincreased by the use of escrowed encryption).a point more specifically related to ees is that escrowed encryptioncan also be used to enhance certain dimensions of title iii protection. forexample, the final procedures for managing law enforcement access toeesprotected voice conversations call for the hardware providing exceptional access to be designed in such a way that law enforcement officialswould decrypt communications only if the communications were occurring during the time window specified in the initial court authorization.the fact that law enforcement officials will have to approach escrow agents26even worse, it is not just future communications that are placed at risk, but past communications as well. for example, if encrypted conversations are recorded and therelevant key is not available, they are useless. however, once the unit key is obtained,those recordings become decipherable if they are still available. such recording would beillegal, because legal authorization for the wiretap would have been necessary to obtain thekey, but since these circumstances presume a breakdown of escrow procedures in the firstplace, the fact of illegality is not particularly relevant.27for example, if a party external to the corporation has the keys that provide access tothat corporationõs encrypted information, the corporation is more vulnerable to a loss ofconfidentiality, because the external party can become the target of theft, extortion, blackmail, and the like by unauthorized parties who are seeking that information. of course, thecorporation itself is vulnerable, but since only one target (either the corporation or anyexternal keyholding party) needs to be compromised, more targets lead to greater vulnerability. of course, if keys are split among a number of external parties, the likelihood ofcompromise through this route is reduced, but the overall risk of compromise is still increased.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyto obtain the relevant key means that there will be an audit trail for wiretaps requiring decryption, thus deterring officials who might be tempted orable to act on their own in obtaining a wiretap without legal authorization.5.5 the impact of escrowed encryption onlaw enforcementbox 5.5 describes the requirements for escrowed encryption that lawenforcement authorities (principally the fbi) would like product vendorsto accommodate. but two additional highlevel questions must be addressed before escrowed encryption is accepted as an appropriate solution to the stated law enforcement problem.5.5.1 balance of crime enabled vs. crime prosecutedone question is the following: does the benefit to law enforcementfrom access to encrypted information through an escrow mechanism outweigh the damage that might occur due to the failure of procedures intended to prevent unauthorized access to the escrow mechanism? sincegovernment authorities believe that the implementation of these procedures can be made robust (and thus the anticipated expectation of failureis slight), they answer the question in the affirmative. critics of government initiatives promoting escrowed encryption raise the concern thatthe risk of failure may be quite large, and thus their answer to the question ranges from òmaybeó to òstrongly negative.ó these parties generallyprefer to rely on technologies and procedures that they fully understandand control to maintain the security of their information, and at best, theybelieve that any escrow procedures create a potentially serious risk ofmisuse that must be stringently counteracted, diligently monitored, andlegally constrained. moreover, they believe that reliance on governmentestablished procedures to maintain proper access controls on escrowedkeys invites unauthorized third parties to target those responsible forupholding the integrity of the escrow system.history suggests that procedural risks materialize as real problemsover the long run,28 but in practice, a base of operational experience isnecessary to determine if these risks are significant.28see, for example, peter g. neumann, computerrelated risks, addisonwesley, newyork, 1995; and charles perrow, normal accidents: living with highrisk technologies, basicbooks, new york, 1984. neumann describes a large number of computerrelated reliabilityand safety problems and security vulnerabilities that have arisen from combinations ofdefective system implementation, flawed system design, and human error in executingprocedures. perrow describes a number of accidents that have occurred in other domains(e.g., maritime shipping, air traffic control, nuclear power plant operation) that have resulted from a similar set of problems.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues185box 5.5law enforcement requirements for escrowed encryption productsinformation identification¥ the product is unable to encrypt/decrypt data unless the necessary information to allow law enforcement to decrypt communications and stored information isavailable for release to law enforcement.¥ a field is provided that readily identifies the information needed to decrypteach message, session, or file generated or received by the user of the product.¥ repeated involvement by key escrow agents (keas) is not required to obtainthe information needed to decrypt multiple conversations and data messages (refer toexpeditious information release by keas) during a period of authorized communications interception.provision of subjectõs information only¥ only information pertaining to the communications or stored informationgenerated by or for the subject is needed for law enforcement decryption.subversions of decryption capability¥ the product is resistant against alterations that disable or bypass law enforcement decryption capabilities.¥ any alteration to the product to disable or bypass law enforcementõs decryption capability requires a significant level of effort regardless of whether similar alterations have been made to any other identical version of that product.transparency¥ the decryption of an intercepted communication is transparent to the intercept subject and all other parties to the communication except the investigative agency and the key escrow agent.access to technical details to develop decrypt capability¥ law enforcement may need access to a productõs technical details to developa key escrow decrypt capability for that product.source: federal bureau of investigation, viewgraphs of presentation to international cryptography institute 1995 conference, september 22, 1995.5.5.2 impact on law enforcement access to informationeven if escrowed encryption were to achieve significant market penetration and were widely deployed, the question would still remain regarding the likely effectiveness of a law enforcement strategy to preservewiretapping and data recovery capabilities through deployments of escryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycrowed encryption built around voluntary use.29 this question has surfaced most strongly in the debate over ees, but as with other aspects ofthe cryptography debate, the answer depends on the scenario in question:¥ many criminals will reach first for devices and tools that are readilyat hand because they are so much more convenient to use than those thatrequire special efforts to obtain. criminals who have relatively simpleand straightforward needs for secure communications may well use eescompliant devices if they are widely available. in such cases, they willsimply have forgotten (or not taken sufficient conscious account of) thefact that these òsecureó devices have features that provide law enforcement access,30 and law enforcement officials will obtain the same leveland quality of information they currently obtain from legal wiretaps. indeed, the level and quality of information might be even greater thanwhat is available today because criminals speaking on eescompliantdevices might well have a false sense of security that they could not bewiretapped.¥ criminals whose judgment suggests the need for extra and nonroutine security are likely to use secure communications devices withoutfeatures for exceptional access. in these cases, law enforcement officialsmay be denied important information. however, the use of these communications devices is likely to be an ad hoc arrangement amongparticipants in a criminal activity. since many criminal activities oftenrequire participants to communicate with people outside the immediatecircle of participants, òsecondaryó wiretap information might be available if nonsecure devices were used to communicate with others not directly associated with the activity.senior administration officials have recognized that the latter scenario is inevitableñit is impossible to prevent all uses of strong unescrowed encryption by criminals and terrorists. however, the widespread deployment of strong encryption without features for exceptionalaccess would mean that even the careless criminal would easily obtainunbreakable encryption, and thus the administrationõs initiatives are directed primarily at the first scenario.similar considerations would apply to escrowed encryption productsused to store datañmany criminals will use products with encryption29òvoluntaryó has been used ambiguously in the public debate on key escrow. it canmean voluntary use of key escrow in any context or implementation, or it can mean voluntary use of eescompliant products. in the latter situation, of course, the keyescrow feature would be automatic. usually, the context of its use will clarify which interpretation ofòvoluntaryó is intended.30cf. point in chapter 2 regarding behavior of criminals with respect to wiretapped telephone calls.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues187capabilities that are easily available to store files and send email. if theseproducts are escrowed, law enforcement officials have a higher likelihoodof having access to those criminal data files and email. on the otherhand, some criminals will hide or conceal their stored data through theuse of unescrowed products or by storing them on remote computerswhose location is known only to them, with the result that the efforts oflaw enforcement authorities to obtain information will be frustrated.5.6 mandatory vs. voluntary use ofescrowed encryptionas noted above, the federal government cannot compel the privatesector to use escrowed encryption in the absence of legislation, whetherfor voice communications or any other application. however, ees raisedthe very important public concern that the use of encryption withoutfeatures for exceptional access might be banned by statute. the administration has stated that it has no intention of outlawing the use of suchcryptography or of regulating in any other way the domestic use of cryptography. nevertheless, no administration can bind future administrations, and congress can change a law at any time. more importantly,widespread acceptance of escrowed encryption, even if voluntary, wouldput into place an infrastructure that would support such a policy change.thus, the possibility that a future administration and/or congress mightsupport prohibitions on unescrowed encryption cannot be dismissed.this topic is discussed in depth in chapter 7.with respect to the federal governmentõs assertion of authority in theuse of the ees by private parties, there are a number of gray areas. forexample, a federal agency that has adopted the ees for secure telephoniccommunications clearly has the right to require all contractors that interact with it to use eescompliant devices as a condition of doing businesswith the government;31,32 this point is explored further in chapter 6. moreproblematic is the question of whether an agency that interacts with thepublic at large without a contractual arrangement may require such use.a second important gray area relates to the establishment of ees as a31for example, at present the department of defense requires that contractors acquireand employ stuiii secure telephones for certain sensitive telephonic communications withdod personnel. the federal acquisition regulations (far) were modified to allow thecosts of such telephones to be charged against contracts, to further encourage purchase ofthese telephones.32one major manufacturer noted to the committee that meeting federal requirements forencryption also reduces its ability to standardize on a single solution in distributed networks. governmentmandated key escrow could differ substantially enough from keyescrow systems required for commercial operations that two separate key escrow systemscould be needed.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyde facto standard for use in the private sector through mechanisms described in chapter 6. in this area, administration officials have expressedto the committee a hope that such would be the case. if eescompliantdevices were to become very popular, they might well drive potentialcompetitors (specifically, devices for secure telephonic communicationswithout features for exceptional access) out of the market for reasons ofcost and scarcity. under such circumstances, it is not clear that initiallyvoluntary use of the ees would in the end leave room for a genuinechoice for consumers.5.7 process through which policy on escrowedencryption was developedmuch criticism of the clipper initiative has focused on the processthrough which the standard was established. specifically, the clipperinitiative was developed out of the public eye, with minimal if any connection to the relevant stakeholders in industry and the academic community, and appeared to be òsprungó on them with an announcement inthe new york times. furthermore, a coherent approach to the international dimensions of the problem was not developed, a major failing sincebusiness communications are global in nature. after the announcementof the clipper initiative, the federal government promulgated the eesdespite a nearunanimous condemnation of the proposed standard in thepublic comments on it.similar comments have been expressed with respect to the augustseptember 1995 administration proposal to relax export controls on 64bitsoftware products if they are properly escrowed. this proposal, advertisedby the administration as the followup to the gorecantwell letter of july1994,33 emerged after about a year of virtual silence from the administration during which public interactions with industry were minimal.33on july 20, 1994, vice president al gore wrote to representative maria cantwell (dwashington) expressing a willingness to enter into òa new phase of cooperation amonggovernment, industry representatives and privacy advocates with a goal of trying to develop a key escrow encryption system that will provide strong encryption, be acceptable tocomputer users worldwide, and address our national security needs as well.ó the vicepresident went on to say that òwe welcome the opportunity to work with industry todesign a more versatile, less expensive system. such a key escrow system would beimplementable in software, firmware, hardware, or any combination thereof, would notrely upon a classified algorithm, would be voluntary, and would be exportable. . . . we alsorecognize that a new key escrow encryption system must permit the use of privatesectorkey escrow agents as one option. . . . having a number of escrow agents would giveindividuals and businesses more choices and flexibility in meeting their needs for securecommunications.ó letter reprinted in hoffman, building in big brother, 1995, pp. 236238.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues189the result has been a tainting of escrowed encryption that inhibitsunemotional discussion of its pros and cons and makes it difficult to reacha rational and wellbalanced decision.5.8 affiliation and number of escrow agentsany deployment of escrowed encryption on a large scale raises thequestion of who the escrow agents should be. (the equally importantquestion of their responsibilities and liabilities is the subject of section5.9.) the original clipper/capstone escrow approach called for agenciesof the executive branch to be escrow agents; at this writing, theadministrationõs position seems to be evolving to allow parties in theprivate sector to be escrow agents. different types of escrow agents havedifferent advantages and disadvantages.the use of executive branch agencies as escrow agents has a numberof advantages. executive branch escrow agents can be funded directlyand established quickly, rather than depending on the existence of a private sector market or business for escrow agents. their continuing existence depends not on market forces but on the willingness of the congressto appropriate money to support them. executive branch escrow agentsmay well be more responsive than outside escrow agents to authorizedrequests from law enforcement for keys. executive branch escrow agentscan be enjoined more easily from divulging to the target of a surveillancethe fact that they turned over a key to law enforcement officials, therebyhelping to ensure that a surveillance can be performed surreptitiously. inthe case of fisa intercepts, executive branch escrow agents may be moreprotective of associated classified information (such as the specific targetof the intercept). under sovereign immunity, executive branch escrowagents can disavow civil liability for unauthorized disclosure of keys.of course, from a different standpoint, most of these putative advantages can be seen as disadvantages. if direct government subsidy is required to support an escrow operation, by definition it lacks the supportof the market.34 the high speed with which executive branch escrowagents were established suggested to critics that the administration wasattempting to present the market with a fait accompli with respect toescrow. a higher degree of responsiveness to requests for keys may well34the original clipper/capstone proposal made no provision for parties other than lawenforcement authorities to approach escrow agents, and in this context could be regardedas a simple law enforcement initiative with no particular relevance to the private sector.however, in light of the administrationõs arguments concerning the desirability of escrowedencryption to meet the key backup needs of the private sector, the importance of relevanceto the private sector is obvious.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycoincide with greater disregard for proper procedure; indeed, since one ofthe designated escrow agencies (the treasury department) also has lawenforcement jurisdiction and the authority to conduct wiretaps undersome circumstances, a treasury escrow agent might well be faced with aconflict of interest in managing keys. the obligation to keep the fact ofkey disclosure secret might easily lead to circumvention and unauthorized disclosures. the lack of civil liability and of criminal penalties forimproper disclosure might reduce the incentives for compliance withproper procedure. most importantly, all executive branch workers are inprinciple responsible to a unitary source of authority (the president).thus, concerns are raised that any corruption at the top levels of government might diffuse downward, as exemplified by past attempts by theexecutive office of the president to use the internal revenue service toharass its political enemies. one result might be that executive branchescrow agents might divulge keys improperly; a second result might bethat executive branch escrow agents could be more likely to reveal thefact of key disclosure to targets in the executive branch under investigation.some of the concerns described above could be mitigated by placementof escrow agents in the judiciary branch of government on the theory thatsince judicial approval is needed to conduct wiretaps, giving the judiciarycontrol of escrowed keys would in fact give it a way of enforcing the title iiirequirements for legal authorization. on the other hand, the judiciarybranch would have to rule on procedures and misuse, thereby placing it atrisk of a conflict of interest should alleged misdeeds in the judiciary branchcome to light. matters related to separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches of government are also relevant.the best argument for government escrow agents is that governmentcan be held politically accountable. when a government does bad things,the government can be replaced. escrow agents must be trustworthy, andthe question at root is whether it is more appropriate to trust governmentor a private party; the views on this point are diverse and often vigorously defended.the committee believes that governmentbased escrow agents presentfew problems when used to hold keys associated with government work.nonetheless, mistrust of governmentbased escrow agents has been oneof the primary criticisms of the ees. if escrowed encryption is to servebroad social purposes across government and the private sector, it makessense to consider other possible escrow agents in addition to governmentescrow agents:¥ private organizations established to provide key registration services (ona feeforservice basis). given that some business organizations have cercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues191tain needs for data retrieval and monitoring of communications as described in chapter 3, such needs might create a market for private escrowagents. some organizations might charge more and provide users withbonding against failure or improper revelations of keys; other organizations might charge less and not provide such bonding.¥ vendors of products with encryption capabilities and features for exceptional access. vendors acting as escrow agents would face a considerableburden in having to comply with registration requirements and might beexposed to liability.35 at the same time, vendors could register keys at thetime of manufacture or by default at some additional expense.36¥ customers themselves. in the case of a corporate customer, a specially trusted department within the corporation that purchases escrowedencryption products could act as an escrow agent for the corporation.such òcustomer escrowó of a corporationõs own keys may be sufficient forits needs; customer escrow would also enable the organization to knowwhen its keys have been revealed. since legal entities such as corporations will continue to be subject to extant procedures of the law enforcement court order or subpoena, law enforcement access to keys underauthorized circumstances could be assured. in the case of individualcustomers who are also the end users of the products they purchase, theindividual could simply store a second copy of the relevant keys as a formof customer escrow.note especially that site licenses37 to corporations account for the35for example, in the early days of an offering by at&t to provide picturephone meeting services, the question arose as to whether at&t or the end user should provide security. the business decision at the time was that at&t should not provide security becauseof the legal implicationsña company that guaranteed security but failed to provide it wasliable. (ironically, at least one major computer vendor declined to provide encryptionservices for data communications and storage on the grounds that encryption would beprovided by at&t.) while todayõs at&t support for the picturetel product line forvideoconferencing (which provides encryption capabilities) may suggest a different at&tperspective on the issue of who is responsible for providing security, companies will haveto decide for themselves their own tolerable thresholds of risk for liability.36the cost of vendor registration would be high in the case of certain software products.specifically, products that are distributed by cdrom must be identical, because it wouldbe very expensive (relative to current costs) to ship cdroms with unique serial numbersor keys. to some extent, the same is true of products distributed by networkñit is highlyconvenient and desirable from the vendorõs perspective to have just one file that can bedownloaded upon user request, although it is possible and more expensive to providenumbered copies of software distributed by network.37under a site license, a corporation agrees with a vendor on a price for a certain (perhapsvariable) number of licenses to use a given software package. site licenses also includeagreements on and conditions for support and documentation.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192cryptographyõs role in securing the information societylargest portion of vendor sales in software.38 in a domestic context, corporations are entities that are subject to legal processes in the unitedstates that permit law enforcement authorities to obtain information inthe course of a criminal investigation. in a foreign context, exports tocertain foreign corporations can be conditioned on a requirement that theforeign corporation be willing to escrow its key in such a manner that u.s.law enforcement authorities would be able to have access to that information under specified circumstances and in a manner to be determined bya contract binding on the corporation. (the use of contract law in thismanner is discussed further in chapter 7.) in short, sales of escrowedencryption to foreign and domestic corporate users could be undertakenin such a way that a very large fraction of the installed user base would infact be subject to legal processes for obtaining information on keys.nongovernment escrow agents are subject to the laws of the government under whose jurisdiction they operate. in addition, they raise otherseparate questions. for example, a criminal investigation may target thesenior officials of a corporation, who may themselves be the ones authorized for access to customerescrowed keys; they might then be notified ofthe fact of being wiretapped. the same would be true of end users controlling their own copies of keys. private organizations providing keyholding services might be infiltrated or even set up by criminal elementsthat would frustrate lawful attempts to obtain keys or would even use thekeys in their possession improperly. private organizations may be lessresponsive to government requests than government escrow agents. finally, private organizations motivated by profit and tempted to cut corners might be less responsible in their conduct.a second important issue regarding escrow agents deals with theirnumber. concentrating escrow arrangements in a few escrow agents maymake law enforcement access to keys more convenient, but it also focusesthe attention of those who may attempt to compromise those facilitiesñthe òbig, fat targetó phenomenonñbecause the aggregate value of thekeys controlled by these few agents is, by assumption, large.39 on theother hand, given a fixed budget, concentrating resources on a few escrow agents may enable them to increase the security against compro38the dominance of corporate sales over sales to individuals was cited in department ofcommerce and national security agency, a study of the international market for computersoftware with encryption, released january 11, 1996, p. iii2.39note also that maintaining the physical security of escrow agents, especially government escrow agents, may be especially critical; sabotage or destruction of an escrow agentfacility might well be seen in some segments of society as a blow for freedom and liberty.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues193mise, whereas spreading resources among many escrow agents may leaveeach one much more open to compromise. indeed, the security of a wellfunded and wellsupported escrow agent may be greater than that of theparty that owns the encryption keys; in this case, the incremental risk thata key would be improperly compromised by the escrow agent would benegligible. increasing the number of escrow agents so that each would beresponsible for a relatively small number of keys reduces the value ofcompromising any particular escrow agent but increases the logisticalburdens, overhead, and expense for the nation. the net impact on security against compromise of keys is very scenariodependent.405.9 responsibilities and obligations of escrowagents and users of escrowed encryptionregardless of who the escrow agents are, they will hold certain information and have certain responsibilities and obligations.41 users of escrowed encryption also face potential liabilities.5.9.1 partitioning escrowed informationconsider what precisely an escrow agent would hold. in the simplestcase, a single escrow agent would hold all of the information needed toprovide exceptional access to encrypted information. (in the clipper case,two escrow agents would be used to hold the unit keys to all eescompliant telephones.)a single escrow agent for a given key poses a significant risk of singlepoint failureñthat is, the compromise of only one party (the single escrow agent) places at risk all information associated with that key. theclipper/capstone approach addresses this point by designating two executive branch agencies (commerce and treasury), each holding one component (of two) of the unit key of a given clipper/capstonecompliantdevice. reconstruction of a unit key requires the cooperation of both40a similar issue arises with respect to certificate authorities for authentication. as discussed in chapter 2, a cryptographybased authentication of an individualõs identity depends on the existence of an entityña certification authorityñthat is trusted by third parties as being able to truly certify the identity of the individual in question. concentration ofcertification authority into a single entity would imply that an individual would be vulnerable to any penetration or malfeasance of the entity and thus to all of the catastrophiceffects that tampering with an individualõs digital identity would imply.41nothing in this discussion is intended to preclude the possibility that an organizationserving as an escrow agent might also have responsibilities as a certification authority (forauthentication purposes, as described in chapter 2).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyagencies. this approach was intended to give the public confidence thattheir keys were secure in the hands of the government.in the most general case, an escrow system can be designed to separate keys into n components but with the mathematics of the separationprocess arranged so that exceptional access would be possible if the thirdparty were able to acquire any k (for k less than or equal to n) of thesecomponents.42 this approach is known as the òkofnó approach. for thesingle escrow agent, k 1 and n 1; for the clipper/capstone system, k 2 and n 2. but it is possible to design systems where k is any number lessthan n; for example, the consent of any three (k) of five (n) escrow agentscould be sufficient to enable exceptional access. obviously, the greaterthe number of parties that are needed to consent, the more cumbersomeexceptional access becomes.it is a policy or business decision as to what the specific values of kand n should be, or if indeed the choice about specific values should beleft to users. the specific values chosen for k and n reflect policy judgments about needs for recovery of encrypted data relative to user concerns about improper exceptional access. whose needs? if a nationalpolicy decision determines k and n, it is the needs of law enforcement andnational security weighed against user concerns. if the user determines kand n, it is the needs of the user weighed against law enforcement andnational security concerns.5.9.2 operational responsibilities of escrow agentsfor escrowed encryption to play a major role in protecting the information infrastructure of the nation and the information of businesses andindividuals, users must be assured about the operational obligations andprocedures of escrow agents. clear guidelines will be required to regulate the operational behavior of escrow agents, and clear enforcementmechanisms must be set into place to ensure that the escrow agents comply with those guidelines. while these guidelines and mechanisms mightcome into existence through normal market forces or cooperative agreements within industries, they are more likely to require a legal setting thatwould also include criminal penalties for malfeasance.guidelines are needed to assure the public and law enforcement agencies of two points:42see, for example, silvio micali, òfair publickey cryptosystems,ó in advances incryptologyñcrypto ô92, springerverlag, heidelberg, 1993, pp. 113138.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues195¥ that information relevant to exceptional access (the full key or akey fragment) will be divulged upon proper legal request and that anescrow agent will not notify the key owner of disclosure until it is legallypermissible to do so, and¥ that information relevant to exceptional access will be divulgedonly upon proper legal request.note that the fulfillment of the second requirement has both an òabuseof authorityó component and a technical and procedural component. thefirst relates to an individual (an òinsideró) who is in a position to give outrelevant information but also to abuse his position by giving out thatinformation without proper authorization. the second relates to the factthat even if no person in the employ of an escrow agent improperly givesout relevant information, an òoutsideró may be able to penetrate the security of the escrow agent and obtain the relevant information without compromising any particular individual. such concerns are particularly relevant to the extent that escrow agents are connected electronically, sincethey would then be vulnerable in much the same ways that all otherparties connected to a network are vulnerable. the security of networkedcomputer systems is difficult to assure with high confidence,43 and thesecurity level required of escrow agents must be high, given the value oftheir holdings to unauthorized third parties.thus, those concerned about breaches of confidentiality must be concerned about technical and procedural weaknesses of the escrow agentinfrastructure that would enable outsiders to connect remotely to thesesites and obtain keys, as well as about insiders abusing their positions oftrust. either possibility could lead not just to individual keys being compromised, but also to wholesale compromise of all of the keys entrustedto escrow agents within that infrastructure. from a policy standpoint, itis necessary to have a contingency plan that would facilitate recoveryfrom wholesale compromise.box 5.6 describes law enforcement views on the responsibilities ofescrow agents. box 5.7 describes draft administration views on requirements for maintaining the integrity and security of escrow agents; box 5.8describes draft administration views on requirements for assuring accessto escrowed keys.43see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press,washington, d.c., 1991.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.6law enforcement requirements for escrow agentsinformation availability¥ the information necessary to allow law enforcement the ability to decryptcommunications and stored information is available. keas [key escrow agents] shouldmaintain or be capable of generating all the necessary decrypt (key) information.¥ key and/or related information needed to decrypt communications and storedinformation is retained for extended time periods. keas should be able to decryptinformation encrypted with a device or productõs current and/or former key(s) for atime period that may vary depending on the application (e.g., voice vs. stored files).¥ a backup capability exists for key and other information needed to decryptcommunications and stored information. thus, a physically separate backup capability should be available to provide redundancy of resources should the primarycapability fail.key escrow agent (kea) accessibility¥ keas should be readily accessible. for domestic products, they should reside and operate in the united states. they should be able to process proper requests at any time; most requests will be submitted during normal business hours,but exigent circumstances (e.g., kidnappings, terrorist threats) may require submission of requests during nonbusiness hours.information release by keas¥ the information needed for decryption is expeditiously released upon receiptof a proper request. since communications intercepts require the ability to decryptmultiple conversations and data messages sent to or from the subject (i.e., access toeach session or message key) during the entire intercept period, only one initialaffirmative action should be needed to obtain the relevant information. exigent circumstances (e.g., kidnappings, terrorist threats) will require the release of decryptinformation within a matter of hours.confidentiality and safeguarding of information¥ keas should safeguard and maintain the confidentiality of information pertaining to the request for and the release of decrypt information. keas should protectthe confidentiality of the person or persons for whom a key escrow agent holds keysor components thereof, and protect the confidentiality of the identity of the agencyrequesting decrypt information or components thereof and all information concerning such agencyõs access to and use of encryption keys or components thereof.for law enforcement requests, kea personnel knowledgeable of an interceptionor decryption should be of good character and have not been convicted of crimes ofmoral turpitude or otherwise bearing on their trustworthiness. for national securityrequests, kea personnel viewing and/or storing classified requests must meet theapplicable u.s. government requirements for accessing and/or storing classified information. efforts are ongoing to examine unclassified alternatives.¥ keas should be legitimate organizations without ties to criminal enterprises,and licensed to conduct business in the united states. keas for domestic productsshould not be a foreign corporation, a foreign country, or an entity thereof.source: federal bureau of investigation, viewgraphs of presentation to international cryptography institute 1995 conference, september 22, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues197box 5.7proposed u.s. government requirements for ensuringescrow agent integrity and security1.escrow agent entities shall devise and institutionalize policies, procedures,and mechanisms to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of key escrow related information.a.escrow agent entities shall be designed and operated so that a failure by asingle person, procedure, or mechanism does not compromise the confidentiality,integrity or availability of the key and/or key components (e.g., two person control ofkeys, split keys, etc.)b.unencrypted escrowed key and/or key components that are stored and/ortransmitted electronically shall be protected (e.g., via encryption) using approvedmeans.c.unencrypted escrowed key and/or key components stored and/or transferred via other media/methods shall be protected using approved means (e.g., safes).2.escrow agent entities shall ensure due form of escrowed key access requestsand authenticate the requests for escrowed key and/or key components.3.escrow agent entities shall protect against disclosure of information regarding the identity of the person/organization whose key and/or key components isrequested, and the fact that a key and/or key component was requested or provided.4.escrow agent entities shall enter keys/key components into the escrowedkey database immediately upon receipt.5.escrow agent entities shall ensure at least two copies of any key and/or keycomponent in independent locations to help ensure the availability of such key and/or key components due to unforeseen circumstances.6.escrow agent entities that are certified by the u.s. government shall workwith developers of key escrow encryption products and support a feature that allowsproducts to verify to one another that the productsõ keys have been escrowed with au.s.certified agent.source: national institute of standards and technology, draft key escrowagent criteria, december 1, 1995. reprinted from text available online athttp://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow/criteria.txt.5.9.3 liabilities of escrow agentsin order to assure users that key information entrusted to escrowagents remains secure and authorized third parties that they will be ableto obtain exceptional access to encrypted data when necessary, escrowagents and their employees must be held accountable for improper behavior and for the use of security procedures and practices that are appropriate to the task of protection.liabilities can be criminal or civil (or both). for example, criminalpenalties could be established for the disclosure of keys or key compocryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.8proposed requirements for ensuring key access7.an escrow agent entity shall employ one or more persons who possess asecret clearance for purposes of processing classified (e.g., fisa) requests to obtainkeys and/or key components.8.escrow agent entities shall protect against unauthorized disclosure of information regarding the identity of the organization requesting the key or key components.9.escrow agent entities shall maintain data regarding all key escrow requestsreceived, key escrow components released, database changes, system administration accesses, and dates of such events, for purposes of audit by appropriate government officials or others.10.escrow agent entities shall maintain escrowed keys and/or key componentsfor as long as such keys may be required to decrypt information relevant to a lawenforcement investigation.11.escrow agent entities shall provide key/key components to authenticatedrequests in a timely fashion and shall maintain a capability to respond more rapidlyto emergency requirements for access.12.escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain a certificate of good standing from the state of incorporation (or similar local/national authority).13.escrow agent entities shall provide to the u.s. government a dun & bradstreet/trw number or similar credit report pointer and authorization.14.escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain an errors & omissions insurance policy.15.escrow agent entities shall provide to the u.s. government a written copy of,or a certification of the existence of a corporate security policy governing the keyescrow agent entityõs operation.16.escrow agent entities shall provide to the u.s. government a certificationthat the escrow agent will comply with all applicable federal, state, and local lawsconcerning the provisions of escrow agent entity services.17.escrow agent entities shall provide to the u.s. government a certificationthat the escrow agent entity will transfer to another approved escrow agent the escrow agent entityõs equipment and data in the event of any dissolution or othercessation of escrow agent entity operations.18.escrow agent entities for products sold in the united states shall not be aforeign country or entity thereof, a national of a foreign country, or a corporation ofwhich an alien is an officer or more than onefourth of the stock which is owned byaliens or which is directly or indirectly controlled by such a corporation. foreignescrow agent entities for products exported from the united states will be approvedon a case by case basis as law enforcement and national security agreements can benegotiated.19.escrow agent entities shall provide to the u.s. government a certificationthat the escrow agent entity will notify the u.s. government in writing of any changesin the forgoing information.20.fulfillment of these and the other criteria are subject to periodic recertification.note: the material reprinted in this box is a continuation of the requirements listed in box 5.7 and is extracted from the same source.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues199nents to unauthorized parties or for the refusal to disclose such information to appropriately authorized parties. it is worth noting that the implementing regulations accompanying the ees proposal run counter to thisposition in the sense that they do not provide specific penalties for failureto adhere to the procedures for obtaining keys (which only legislationcould do). the implementing regulations specifically state that òtheseprocedures do not create, and are not intended to create, any substantiverights for individuals intercepted through electronic surveillance, andnoncompliance with these procedures shall not provide the basis for anymotion to suppress or other objection to the introduction of electronicsurveillance evidence lawfully acquired.ó44questions of civil liability are more complex. ideally, levels of civilliability for improper disclosure of keys would be commensurate with theloss that would be incurred by the damaged party. for unauthorizeddisclosure of keys that encrypt large financial transactions, this level ispotentially very large.45 on the other hand, as a matter of public policy, itis probably inappropriate to allow such levels of damages. more plausible may be a construct that provides what society, as expressed throughcongress, thinks is reasonable (box 5.9). users of escrow agents mightalso be able to buy their own insurance against unauthorized disclosure.note that holding government agencies liable for civil damages mightrequire an explicit change in the federal tort claims act that waivessovereign immunity in certain specified instances, or other legislativechanges.on the other hand, the amount of liability associated with compromising information related to data communications is likely to dwarf theanalogous volume for voice communications. if escrowed encryption isadopted widely in data communications, compromise of escrow agentsholding keys relevant to network encryption may be catastrophic, andmay become easier as the number of access points that can be penetratedbecomes larger.note that liability of escrow agents may be related to the voluntaryuse of escrow. a party concerned about large potential losses would havealternatives to escrowed encryptionñnamely, unescrowed encryptionñthat would protect the user against the consequences of improper keydisclosure. under these circumstances, a user whose key was compro44u.s. department of justice, authorization procedures for release of encryption key components in conjunction with intercepts pursuant to title iii and fisa, february 4, 1994. reprintedin hoffman (ed.), building in big brother, 1995, pp. 243246.45even if these transactions are authenticated (as most large transactions would be), largetransactions that are compromised could lead to loss of bids and the like by the firmsinvolved in the transaction.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.9statutory limitations on liabilitygovernment can promote the use of specific services and products by assumingsome of the civil liability risks associated with them. three examples follow:¥ the atomic energy damages act, also called the priceanderson act, limitsthe liability of nuclear power plant operators for harm caused by a nuclear incident(such as an explosion or radioactive release). to operate a nuclear power plant, alicensee must show the u.s. nuclear regulatory commission (u.s. nrc) that itmaintains financial protection (such as private insurance, selfinsurance, or otherproof of financial responsibility) equal to the maximum amount of insurance available at reasonable cost and reasonable terms from private sources, unless the u.s.nrc sets a lower requirement on a casespecific basis. the u.s. nrc indemnifieslicensees from all legal liability arising from a nuclear incident, including a precautionary evacuation, which is in excess of the required financial protection, up to amaximum combined licenseeandgovernment liability of $560 million. incidentsthat cause more than $560 million in damage will trigger review by the congress todetermine the best means to compensate the public, including appropriating funds.¥ the commercial space launch act provides similar protection to partieslicensed to launch space vehicles or operate launch sites, but with a limit on the totalliability the united states accepts. the licensee must obtain financial protectionsufficient to compensate the maximum probable loss that third parties could claimfor harm or damage, as determined by the secretary of transportation. the most thatcan be required is $500 million or the maximum liability insurance available fromprivate sources, whichever is lower. the united states is obligated to pay successfulclaims by third parties in excess of the required protection, up to $1.5 billion, unlessthe loss is related to the licenseeõs willful misconduct. the law also requires licensees to enter into reciprocal waivers of claims with their contractors and customers,under which each party agrees to be responsible for losses it sustains.¥ the swine flu vaccination program of 1976 provides an example in whichthe united states accepted openended liability and paid much more than expected.doctors predicted a swine flu epidemic, and congress appropriated money for thedepartment of health, education, and welfare (hew) to pay four pharmaceuticalmanufacturers for vaccines to be distributed nationwide. the manufacturersõ inability to obtain liability insurance delayed the program until congress passed legislation(p.l. 94380) in which the united states assumed all liability other than manufacturer negligence. the governmentõs liability could thus include, for example, harmfulside effects. claims against the united states would be processed under the federaltort claims act (which provides for trial by judge rather than jury and no punitivedamages, among other distinctions). some of the 45 million people who were immunized developed complications, such as guillainbarre syndrome; consequently,the program was canceled. by september 1977, 815 claims had been filed. theunited states ultimately paid more than $100 million to settle claims, and somelitigation is still pending today. manufacturers, who by law were liable only fornegligence, were not sued.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues201mised could be held responsible for his loss because he did not choose touse unescrowed encryption; an escrow agentõs exposure to liability wouldbe limited to the risks associated with parties that use its services. on theother hand, if escrowed encryption were the only cryptography permitted to be used, then by assumption the user would have no alternatives,and so in that case an escrow agent would shoulder a larger liability.another aspect of liability could arise if the escrow agents were alsocharged with the responsibilities of certificate authorities. under somecircumstances, it might be desirable for the functions of escrow agentsand certificate authorities to be carried out by the same organization.thus, these dualpurpose organizations would have all of the liabilitiescarried by those who must certify the authenticity of a given party.5.10 the role of secrecy in ensuringproduct securitythe fact that ees and the fortezza card involve classified algorithmshas raised the general question of the relationship between secrecy andthe maintenance of a productõs trustworthiness in providing security.specifically, the clipper/capstone approach is based on a secret (classified) encryption algorithm known as skipjack. in addition, the algorithmis implemented in hardware (a chip) whose design is classified. theshroud of secrecy surrounding the hardware and algorithms needed toimplement ees and fortezza makes skeptics suspect that encrypted communications could be decrypted through some secret òback dooró (i.e.,without having the escrowed key).46logically, secrecy can be applied to two aspects of an encryptionsystem: the algorithms used and the nature of the implementation ofthese algorithms. each is addressed in turn below. box 5.10 describes ahistorical perspective on cryptography and secrecy that is still valid today.5.10.1 algorithm secrecythe use of secret algorithms for encryption has advantages and disadvantages. from an information security standpoint, a third party who46a kind of de facto secret back door can result from the fact that vendors of securityproducts employing clipper or capstone technology are not likely to advertise the fact thatthe relevant encryption keys are escrowed with the u.s. government. thus, even if theescrowing capability is òopenó in the sense that no one involved makes any attempt to hidethat fact, a user that does not know enough to ask about the presence or absence of escrowingfeatures may well purchase such products without realizing their presence. functionally,escrowing of which the user is ignorant is equivalent for that user to a òsecretó back door.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 5.10perspectives on secrecy and system securitythe distinction between the general system (i.e., a product) and the specific key(of an encrypted message) was first articulated by auguste kerckhoffs in his historicbook la cryptographie militaire, published in 1883. quoting david kahn in thecodebreakers:kerckhoffs deduced [that] . . . compromise of the system should not inconvenience the correspondents. . . . perhaps the most startling requirement, at firstglance, was the second . . . . kerckhoffs explained that by òsystemó he meantòthe material part of the system; tableaux, code books, or whatever mechanical apparatus may be necessary,ó and not òthe key proper.ó kerckhoffs heremakes for the first time the distinction, now basic to cryptology, between thegeneral system and the specific key. why must the general system ònot require secrecyó? . . . òbecause,ó kerckhoffs said, òit is not necessary to conjureup imaginary phantoms and to suspect the incorruptibility of employees orsubalterns to understand that, if a system requiring secrecy were in the handsof too large a number of individuals, it could be compromised at each engagement. . . . this has proved to be true, and kerckhoffsõ second requirementhas become widely accepted under a form that is sometimes called the fundamental assumption of military cryptography: that the enemy knows the general system. but he must still be unable to solve messages in it without knowing the specific key. in its modern formulation, the kerckhoffs doctrine statesthat secrecy must reside solely in the keys.ó1a more modern expression of this sentiment is provided by dorothy denning:the security of a cryptosystem should depend only on the secrecy of the keysand not on the secrecy of the algorithms. . . . this requirement implies thealgorithms must be inherently strong; that is, it should not be possible to breaka cipher simply by knowing the method of encipherment. this requirement isneeded because the algorithms may be in the public domain, or known to acryptanalyst.21david kahn, the codebreakers, macmillan, new york, 1967, p. 235.2dorothy denning, cryptography and data security, addisonwesley, reading, mass., 1982, p. 8.knows the algorithm associated with a given piece of ciphertext has anenormous advantage over one who does notñif the algorithm is unknown,cryptanalysis is much more difficult. thus, the use of a secret algorithm bythose concerned about information security presents an additional (andsubstantial) barrier to those who might be eavesdropping. from a signalsintelligence (sigint) standpoint, it is advantageous to keep knowledge ofgood encryption out of the hands of potential sigint targets. thus, if ancryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues203algorithm provides good cryptographic security, keeping the algorithmsecret prevents the sigint target from implementing it. in addition, if analgorithm is known to be good, studying it in detail can reveal a great dealabout what makes any algorithm good or bad. algorithm secrecy thushelps to keep such information out of the public domain.47on the other hand, algorithm secrecy entails a number of disadvantages as well. one is that independent analysis of a secret algorithm bythe larger community is not possible. without such analysis, flaws mayremain in the algorithm that compromise the security it purports to provide. if these flaws are kept secret, users of the algorithm may unknowingly compromise themselves. even worse, sophisticated users who needhigh assurances of security are unable to certify for themselves the security it provides (and thus have no sense of the risks they are taking if theyuse it). in most cases, the real issue is whether the user chooses to rely onmembers of the academic cryptography communities publishing in theopen literature, or on members of the classified military community ormembers of the commercial cryptography community who are unable tofully disclose what they know about a subject because it is classified orproprietary.a second disadvantage of algorithm secrecy is the fact that if a cryptographic infrastructure is based on the assumption of secrecy, publicdiscovery of those secrets can compromise the ends to be served by thatinfrastructure. for example, if a cryptographic infrastructure based on asecret algorithm were widely deployed, and if that algorithm contained asecret and unannounced òback dooró that allowed those with knowledgeof this back door easy access to encrypted data, that infrastructure wouldbe highly vulnerable and could be rendered untrustworthy in short orderby the public disclosure of the back door.a third disadvantage is that a secret algorithm cannot be implementedin software with any degree of assurance that it will remain secret. software, as it exists ready for actual installation on a computer (socalledobject code or executable code), can usually be manipulated with specialsoftware tools to yield an alternate form (namely, source code) reflectingthe way the creating programmer designed it, and therefore revealingmany, even most, of its operational details, including any algorithm em47of course, if other strong algorithms are known publicly, the force of this argument isweakened from a practical standpoint. for example, it is not clear that the disclosure ofskipjack would be harmful from the standpoint of making strong algorithms public, because tripledes is already publicly known, and tripledes is quite strong.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204cryptographyõs role in securing the information society48as one example, the rc2 encryption algorithm, nominally a trade secret owned by rsadata security inc. was posted to the internet in early 1996, apparently as the result of anapparent òdisassemblyó of a product embedding that algorithm (personal communication,robert baldwin, rsa data security inc., may 16, 1996).bedded within it. this process is known as òdecompilingó or òdisassemblyó and is a standard technique in the repertoire of software engineers.48all of the previous comments apply to secrecy whether it is the resultof government classification decisions or vendor choices to treat an algorithm as a trade secret. in addition, vendors may well choose to treat analgorithm as a trade secret to obtain the market advantages that proprietary algorithms often bring. indeed, many applications of cryptographyfor confidentiality in use today are based on tradesecret algorithms suchas rc2 and rc4.5.10.2 product design and implementation secrecyproduct design and implementation secrecy has a number of advantages. for example, by obscuring how a product has been designed,secrecy makes it more difficult for an outsider to reverseengineer theproduct in such a way that he could understand it better or, even worse,modify it in some way. since vulnerabilities sometimes arise in implementation, keeping the implementation secret makes it harder for an attacker to discover and then exploit those vulnerabilities. design andimplementation secrecy thus protects any secrets that may be embeddedin the product for a longer time than if they were to be published openly.on the other hand, it is taken as an axiom by those in the securitycommunity that it is essentially impossible to maintain design or implementation secrecy indefinitely. thus, the question of the time scale ofreverse engineering is relevantñgiven the necessary motivation, howlong will it take and how much in resources will be needed to reverseengineer a chip or a product?¥ for software, reverse engineering is based on decompilation ordisassembly (as described in section 5.10.1). the larger the software product, the longer it takes to understand the original program; even a smallone can be difficult to understand, especially if special techniques havebeen used to obscure its functionality. modification of the original program can present additional technical difficulties (the product may bedesigned in such a way that disassembling or decompiling the entireproduct is necessary to isolate critical features that one might wish tomodify). certain techniques can be used to increase the difficulty ofcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues205making such modifications,49 but there is virtual unanimity in the computer community that modification cannot be prevented forever. howrobust must these antireverseengineering features be? the answer isthat they must be robust enough that the effort needed to overcome themis greater than the effort needed to develop an encryption system fromscratch.¥ for hardware, reverse engineering takes the form of physical disassembly and/or probing with xrays of the relevant integrated circuit chips.such chips can be designed to resist reverse engineering in a way thatmakes it difficult to understand what various components on the chip do.for example, the coating on a die used to fabricate a chip may be designedso that removal of the coating results in removal of one or more layers ofthe chip, thus destroying portions of what was to be reverseengineered.the chip may also be fabricated with decoy or superfluous elements thatwould distract a reverse engineer. for all of these reasons, reverse engineering for understanding a chipõs functions is difficult. however, it isnot impossible, and under some circumstances, it is possible to modify achip. in general, reverse engineering of the circuits and devices inside achip requires significant expertise and access to expensive tools.50an important factor that works against implementation secrecy is thewide distribution of devices or products whose implementation is secret.it is difficult to protect a device against reverse engineering when millionsof those devices are distributed around the world without any physicalbarriers (except those on the implementation itself) to control access tothem. everyone with an eescompliant telephone or a foretzza card, for49for example, trusted information systems inc. of glenwood, md., has advocated anapproach to preventing modification that relies on the placement of integrity checks atstrategic locations. with such an approach, a change to the disassembled source codewould have to be reflected properly in all relevant integrity checks; doing so might wellinvolve disassembly of an entire product rather than of just one module of the product.nevertheless, such an approach cannot prevent modification, although it can make modification more difficult. such antireverseengineering features may also increase the difficulty of vendor maintenance of a product. increased difficulty may be a price vendorsmust pay in order to have more secure software implementations.50estimates of the cost to reverseengineer the clipper chip nondestructively cover awide range, from òdoable in university laboratories with bright graduate students andtraditions of reverse engineeringó (as estimated by a number of electrical engineers inacademia with extensive experience in reverse engineering) to as much as $30 million to $50million (as estimated in informal conversations between jason members and dod engineers). the cost may well be lower if large numbers of chips are available for destructiveinspection.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyexample, will have access to the chip that provides encryption and keyescrow services.the comments above refer to the feasibility of maintaining implementation secrecy. but there are issues related to its desirability as well. forexample, implementation secrecy implies that only a limited number ofvendors can be trusted to produce a given implementation. thus, foreignproduction of clipper/capstonecompliant devices under classificationguidelines raises problems unless foreign producers are willing to abideby u.s. security requirements.a more important point is that implementation secrecy also demandstrust between user and supplier/vendor. users within government agencies generally trust other parts of the government to provide adequateservices as a supplier. but in the private sector, such trust is not necessarily warranted. users that are unable to determine for themselves whatalgorithms are embedded in computer and communications productsused must trust the vendor to have provided algorithms that do what theuser wants done, and the vast majority of users fall into this category.such opacity functions as a de facto mechanism of secrecy that also impedes user knowledge about the inner workings and that is exploited bythe distributors of computer viruses and worms. as a result, choosingbetween selfimplemented source code and a prepackaged program foruse in performing certain functions is in many ways analogous to choosing between unclassified and classified algorithms.an information security manager with very high security needs mustmake tradeoffs in assurance vs. cost. in general, the only way to becertain that the algorithms used are the ones claimed to be used is toimplement them on oneõs own. yet if a manager lacks the necessaryknowledge and experience, a selfimplementation may not be as secure oras capable as one developed by a trusted vendor. a selfimplementer alsocarries the considerable burden of development costs that a commercialvendor can amortize over many sales.as a result, securityconscious users of products whose inner workings are kept secret must (1) trust the vendor implicitly (based on factorssuch as reputation), or (2) face the possibility of various extreme scenarios. here are two:¥ the hardware of a secret device can be dynamically modified; forexample, electrically erasable readonly memories can direct the operation of a processor. one possible scenario with secret hardware is that achip that initially provides clipperchip functionality might be reprogrammed when it first contacts a clipper/capstonecompliant device toallow nonescrowed but unauthorized access to it; such a means of òinfectionó is common with computer viruses. in other words, the skipjackcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues207algorithm may have been embedded in the chip when it was first shipped,but after the initial contact, the algorithm controlling the chip is no longerskipjack.¥ an algorithm that is not skipjack is embedded by the manufacturerin chips purporting to be clipper or capstone chips. since the utility of avector test depends on the availability of an independent implementationof the algorithm, it is impossible for the user to perform this test independently if the user has no reference point. as a result, the user has noaccess to an independent test of the chip that is in the userõs òclipper/capstonecompliantó device, and so any algorithm might have been embedded.51any technically trained person can invent many other such scenarios.thus, public trust in the technical desirability of the ees and fortezza forexceptional access depends on a high degree of trust in the government,entirely apart from any fears about compromising escrow agents wherever they are situated.of course, some of the same considerations go beyond the skipjackalgorithm and the clipper/capstone approach. in general, users needconfidence that a given product with encryption capabilities indeed implements a given algorithm. labeling a box with the letters òdesó does notensure that the product inside really implements des. in this case, thefact that the des algorithm is publicly known facilitates testing to verifythat the algorithm is implemented correctly.52 if its source code is available for inspection, other securityrelevant aspects of a software productcan be examined to a certain extent, at least up to the limits of the expertise of the person checking the source code. but for software productswithout source code, and especially for hardware products that cannoteasily be disassembled, and even more so for hardware products that arespecifically designed to resist disassembly, confidence in the nonalgorithm security aspects of the product is more a matter of trusting thevendor than of the user making an independent technical verification of51according to dorothy denning, the review team for skipjack (see footnote 5 of thischapter) compared the output from clipper chips with output from the software version ofskipjack that the review team obtained for review to verify that the algorithm on the chipswas the same as the software version (personal communication, dorothy denning,georgetown university, march 1996).52as described in chapter 4, the product tester can use the product to encrypt a randomlychosen set of values with a randomly chosen key, and compare the encrypted output to theknown correct result obtained through the use of a product known to implement the algorithm correctly. this is known as a vector test.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyan implementation.53 in some sectors (e.g., banking, classified militaryapplications), however, independent technical verification is regarded asessential.finally, a given product may properly implement an algorithm butstill be vulnerable to attacks that target the part of the product surrounding the implementation of the algorithm. such vulnerabilities are mostcommon in the initial releases of products that have not been exposed topublic test and scrutiny. for example, a security problem with thenetscape navigatorõs keygeneration facility could have been found hadthe implementation in which the key generator was embedded been available for public examination prior to its release, even though the encryption algorithm itself was properly implemented.545.11 the hardwaresoftware choice inproduct implementationafter the clipper initiative was announced, and as the debate overescrowed encryption broadened to include the protection of data communications and stored data, the mass market software industry emphasizedthat a hardware solution to cryptographic securityñas exemplified bythe clipper chipñwould not be satisfactory. the industry argued withsome force that only a softwarebased approach would encourage thewidespread use of encryption envisioned for the worldõs electronic future, making several points:¥ customers have a strong preference for using integrated cryptographic products. while standalone products with encryption capabilities could be made to work, in general they lack operational conveniencefor the applications that software and systems vendors address.¥ compared to software, hardware is expensive to manufacture. inparticular, the relevant cost is not simply the cost of the hardware encryption device compared to a software encryption package,55 but also thecost of any modifications to the hardware environment needed to accept53such a comment is not meant to preclude the possibility of an independent certifyingauthority, a kind of òconsumersõ unionó for cryptography equipment and products. suchorganizations have been proposed to evaluate and certify computer security, and as of thiswriting, three u.s. firm have received nist approval to evaluate the conformance of products to fips 1401, the fips for cryptography modules.54this security problem is referenced in footnote 34, chapter 2. the lack of prior vettingfor netscape navigator is described by kathleen murphy, òa second security breach,ó webweek, volume 1(6), october 1995, p. 8.55in a recent contract, a vendor agreed to provide fortezza cards at $69 per card. see paulconstance, òafter complaining $99 was too low, fortezza vendors come in at $69,ógovernment computer news, october 2, 1995, p. 6.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues209the hardware encryption device.56 for example, one major companynoted to the committee that adoption of the fortezza card, a card that fitsinto the pccard slots available on most laptop computers, would be veryexpensive in its desktop computing environment, because most of itsdesktop computers do not have a pccard slot and would have to bemodified to accept the fortezza card. by contrast, a software encryptionproduct can simply be loaded via common media (e.g., a cdrom or afloppy disk) or downloaded via a network.¥ the fact that hardware is difficult to change means that problemsfound subsequent to deployment are more difficult to fix. for example,most users would prefer to install a software fix by loading a cdrominto their computers than to open up their machines to install a new chipwith a hardware fix.¥ hardwarebased security products have a history of being marketunfriendly. hardware will, in general, be used only to the extent that therequired hardware (and its specific configuration) is found in user installations. moreover, hardware requirements can be specified for softwareonly when that hardware is widely deployed. for example, a technicalapproach to the software piracy problem has been known for many years;the approach requires the installation of specialpurpose hardware that isavailable only to those who obtain the software legitimately. this òsolutionó has failed utterly in the marketplace, and software piracy remains amultibilliondollarperyear problem.¥ hardware for security consumes physical space and power in products. for example, a hardwarebased encryption card that fits into anexpansion slot on a computer takes up a slot permanently, unless the useris willing to install and deinstall the card for every use. it also creates anadditional power demand on electronic devices where power and batterylife are limited.in general, products with encryption capabilities today use softwareor hardware or both to help ensure security.57 the crux of the hardware56 one vendor is manufacturing a circuit board for encryption that fits into a 3.5" floppydisk drive. however, this device does not employ the capstone/foretzza approach. seeelizabeth sikorovsky, òdevice offers alternative to pc cardbased encryption,ó federalcomputer week, november 13, 1995, pp. 29 and 35.57note that the dividing line between hardware and software is not always clear. inparticular, product designers use the term òfirmwareó to refer to a design approach thatenters software into a special computer memory (an integrated circuit chip) that usually issubsequently unchangeable (readonly memory; rom). sometimes an alternate form ofmemory is used that does permit changes under controlled conditions (electrically programmable rom; eprom). such softwarecontrolled hardware (microprogrammed hardware) has the convenience that the functionality of the item can be updated or changedwithout redesign of the hardware portion.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210cryptographyõs role in securing the information societysoftware debate is what is good enough to ensure security. the securityneeded to manage electronic cash in the international banking systemneeds to be much stronger than the security to protect word processingfiles created by private individuals. thus, softwarebased cryptographymight work for the latter, while hardwarebased cryptography might beessential for the former.products with encryption capabilities must be capable of resistingattack. but since such products are often embedded in operating environments that are themselves insecure, an attacker may well choose to attackthe environment rather than the product itself. for example, a productwith encryption capabilities may be hardwarebased, but the operatingenvironment may leave the encryption keys or the unencrypted text exposed.58 more generally, in an insecure environment, system securitymay well not depend very much on whether the cryptography per se isimplemented in hardware or software or whether it is weak or strong.in the context of escrowed encryption, a second security concernarisesña user of an escrowed encryption product may wish to defeat theescrow mechanism built into the product. thus, the escrow features ofthe product must be bound to the product in a way that cannot be bypassed by some reverseengineered modification to the product. thisparticular problem is known as binding or, more explicitly, escrow binding; escrow binding is an essential element of any escrow scheme that isintended to provide exceptional access.concern over how to solve the escrow binding problem was the primary motivation for the choice of a hardware approach to the clipperinitiative. as suggested in section 5.10, the functionality of a hardwaresystem designed to resist change is indeed difficult to change, and sohardware implementations have undeniable advantages for solving theescrow binding problem.59 an eescompliant device would be a telephone without software accessible to the user, and would provide highassurance that the features for exceptional access would not be bypassed.as the debate has progressed, ideas for softwarebased escrow processes have been proposed. the primary concern of the u.s. governmentabout software implementations is that once a change has been designedand developed that can bypass the escrow features (òbreak the escrowbindingó), such a change can be easily propagated through many differentchannels and installed with relatively little difficulty. in the committeeõsview, the important question is whether software solutions to the escrow58peter g. neumann, can systems be trustworthy with softwareimplemented cryptography?, sri international, menlo park, calif., october 28, 1994.59a device controlled by software stored in readonly memory is for all intents and purposes the same as òpure hardwareó in this context.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues211binding problem can provide an acceptable level of protection against reverse engineering. whether an escrowed encryption product is implemented in software (or hardware for that matter), the critical threshold isthe difficulty of breaking the escrow binding (i.e., bypassing the escrowing features) compared to the effort necessary to set up an independentunescrowed encryption system (perhaps as part of an integrated product). if it is more difficult to bypass the escrow features than to build anunescrowed system, then òroguesó who want to defeat exceptional accesswill simply build an unescrowed system. the bottom line is that anescrowed encryption product does not have to be perfectly resistant tobreaking the escrow binding.a possible mitigating factor is that even if a software òpatchó is developed that would break the escrow binding of an escrowed encryptionsoftware product, it may not achieve wide distribution even among thecriminals who would have the most to gain from such a change. experience with widely deployed software products (e.g., operating systems)indicates that even when a software fix is made available for a problem ina product, it may not be implemented unless the anomalous or incorrectsoftware behavior is particularly significant to an end user. if this is thecase for products that are as critical as operating systems, it may well betrue for products with more specialized applications. on the other side ofthe coin, many parties (e.g., criminals) may care a great deal about thepresence of escrowing and thus be highly motivated to find òfixesó thateliminate escrowing.5.12 responsibility for generation of unit keyskey generation is the process by which cryptographic keys are generated. two types of keys are relevant:¥ a session key is required for each encryption of plaintext intociphertext; this is true whether the information is to be stored or communicated. ultimately, the intended recipients of this information (thosewho retrieve it from storage or those who receive it at the other end of acommunications channel) must have the same session key. for maximuminformation security, a new session key is used with every encryption.(see footnote 7 of this chapter for more discussion.)¥ a unit key is a cryptographic key associated with a particularproduct or device owned or controlled by a specific individual. unit keysare often used to protect session keys from casual observation in escrowedencryption products, but precisely how they are used depends on thespecifics of a given product.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyin the most general case, the session key is a random number, and adifferent one is generated anew for each encryption. but the unit key is acryptographic variable that typically changes on a much longer time scalethan does the session key. in many escrowed encryption schemes, knowledge of the unit key enables a third party to obtain the session key associated with any given encryption.the clipper/capstone approach requires that the unit key be generated by the manufacturer at the time of manufacture (òat birthó) and thenregistered prior to sale with escrow agents in accordance with establishedprocedures. such an approach has one major advantage from the standpoint of those who may require exceptional access in the futureñit guarantees registration of keys, because users need not take any action toensure registration.at the same time, since the clipper/capstone approach is based on ahardwarebased implementation that is not usermodifiable, a given device has only one unit key for its entire lifetime, although, at some cost,the user may change the clipper chip embedded in the device.60 if theunit key is compromised, the userõs only recourse is to change the chip. auser who does not do so violates one basic principle of information securityñfrequent changing of keys (or passwords).61 in addition, the factthat all unit keys are known at the time of manufacture raises concernsthat all keys could be kept (perhaps surreptitiously) in some masterdatabank that would be accessible without going to the designated escrow agents. the implication is that the user is forced to trust severalorganizations and individuals involved with the manufacturing process.such trust becomes an implicit aspect of the secrecy associated with eescompliant devices.one alternative to unit key generation at birth is the generation (orinput) of a new unit key at user request. this approach has the advantagethat the user can be confident that no one else retains a copy of the newkey without his or her knowledge. the disadvantage is that escrow ofthat key would require explicit action on the userõs part for that purpose.an alternative that has some of the advantages of each approach is toinstall and register a unit key at birth, but to design the product to allowthe user to change the unit key later. thus, all products designed in thismanner would have òdefaultó unit keys installed by the manufacturer60a clipper chip costs about $10 when bought in large lots (personal communication,jimmy dolphin, mykotronx, march 22, 1996). even when including retail markup costsand labor, the cost of changing a clipper chip is likely to be less than $100.61however, since the skipjack algorithm is classified, simple knowledge of the unit key(or the session key) would enable only those with knowledge of the algorithm to decryptthe session key (or the session).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues213and recorded with some escrow agent; each of these keys would be different. users who took the trouble to install a new unit key would have totake an explicit action to escrow it, but in many cases the inconvenienceand bother of changing the unit key would result in no action being taken.thus, valid unit keys would be held by escrow agents in two casesñforproducts owned by users who did not change the unit key, and for products owned by users who chose to register their new keys with escrowagents.who is responsible for the collection of unit keys? under the clipper/capstone approach, the responsible party is the u.s. government.but if nongovernment agencies were to be responsible for escrowing keys(see section 5.8), a large market with many vendors producing manydifferent types of encryption products in large volume could result in alarge administrative burden on these vendors.the specific implementation of ees also raises an additional point.as proposed, ees requires that unit keys be given to government authorities upon presentation of legal authorization. if these keys are still available to the authorities after the period of legal authorization has expired,the ees device is forever open to government surveillance. to guardagainst this possibility, administration plans for the final clipper keyescrow system provide for automatic key deletion from the decryptingequipment upon expiration of the authorized period. key deletion is tobe implemented on the tamperresistant device that law enforcement authorities will use to decrypt clipperencrypted traffic. however, by early1996, the deployed interim key escrow system had not been upgraded toinclude that feature.5.13 issues related to the administration proposalto relax export controls on 64bit escrowedencryption in softwareas noted in chapter 4, the administration has proposed to treat software products with 64bit encryption using any algorithm as it currentlytreats products that are based on 40bit rc2/rc4 algorithms, providingthat products using this stronger encryption are òproperly escrowed.óthis change is intended to make available to foreign customers of u.s.software products stronger cryptographic protection than they currentlyhave today. this proposal has raised several issues.5.13.1 the definition of òproper escrowingóthe definition of òproper escrowingó (as the phrase is used in theadministrationõs proposed new export rules in box 5.3) is that keys shouldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybe escrowed only with òescrow agent(s) certified by the u.s. government,or certified by foreign governments with which the u.s. government hasformal agreements consistent with u.s. law enforcement and nationalsecurity requirements.ó these agents would not necessarily be government agencies, although in principle they could be.the obvious question is whether foreign consumers will be willing topurchase u.s. products with encryption capabilities when it is openlyannounced that the information security of those products could be compromised by or with the assistance of escrow agents certified by the u.s.government. while the draft definition does envision the possibility thatescrow agents could be certified by foreign governments (e.g., those in thecountry of sale), formal agreements often take a long time to negotiate,during which time u.s. escrow agents would hold the keys, or the marketfor such products would fail to develop.for some applications (e.g., u.s. companies doing business with foreign suppliers), interim u.s. control of escrow agents may prove acceptable. but it is easy to imagine other applications for which it would not,and in any case a larger question is begged: what would be the incentivefor foreign users to purchase such products from u.s. vendors if comparably strong but unescrowed foreign products with encryption capabilities were available? as the discussion in chapter 2 points out, integratedproducts with encryption capabilities are generally available today fromu.s. vendors. however, how long the u.s. monopoly in this market willlast is an open question.the issue of who holds the keys in an international context is explored further in appendix g.5.13.2 the proposed limitation of key lengths to 64 bits or lessthe most important question raised by the 64bit limitation is this: ifthe keys are escrowed and available to law enforcement and nationalsecurity authorities, why does it matter how long the keys are? in response to this question, senior administration officials have said that thelimitation to 64 bits is a way of hedging against the possibility of findingeasily proliferated ways to break the escrow binding built into software,with the result that u.s. software products without effective key escrowwould become available worldwide. paraphrasing the remarks of a senior administration official at the international cryptography institute1995 conference, òthe 64bit limit is there because we might have a chanceof dealing with a breakdown of software key escrow 10 to 15 years downthe line; but if the key length implied a work factor of something liketripledes, we would never [emphasis in original] be able to do it.ótwo factors must be considered in this argument. one is the likelicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.escrowed encryption and related issues215hood that software key escrow can in fact be compromised. this subjectis considered in sections 5.10.2 and 5.11. but a second point is the fact thatthe 64bit limit is easily circumvented by multiple encryption under somecircumstances. specifically, consider a standalone securityspecific product for file encryption that is based on des and is escrowed. such aproductñin its unaltered stateñmeets all of the proposed draft criteriafor export. but disassembly of the object code of the program (to defeatthe escrow binding) may also reveal the code for des encryption in theproduct. once the source code for the des encryption is available, it is atechnically straightforward exercise to implement a package that will usethe product to implement a tripledes encryption on a file.5.14 recapescrowed encryption is one of several approaches to providing exceptional access to encrypted information. the u.s. government has advanced a number of initiatives to support the insertion of escrow featuresinto products with encryption capabilities that will become available inthe future, including the escrowed encryption standard, the capstone/fortezza initiative, and a proposal to liberalize export controls on products using escrowed encryption. its support of escrowed encryption embodies the governmentõs belief that the benefit to law enforcement andnational security from exceptional access to encrypted information outweighs the damage owing to loss of confidentiality that might occur withthe failure of procedures intended to prevent unauthorized access to theescrow mechanism.escrowed encryption provides more confidentiality than leaving information unprotected (as most information is today), but less confidentiality than what could be provided by good implementations ofunescrowed cryptography. on the other hand, escrowed encryption provides more capability for exceptional access under circumstances of keyloss or unavailability than does unescrowed encryption. all users willhave to address this tradeoff between level of confidentiality and keyunavailability.the central questions with respect to escrowed encryption are thefollowing:¥ with what degree of confidence is it possible to ensure that thirdparties will have access to encrypted information only under lawfullyauthorized circumstances?¥ what is the tradeoff for the user between potentially lower levelsof confidentiality and higher degrees of confidence that encrypted datawill be available when necessary?cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216cryptographyõs role in securing the information society2166other dimensions of nationalcryptography policyin addition to export controls and escrowed encryption, current national policy on cryptography is affected by government use of a largenumber of levers available to it, including the communications assistance for law enforcement act, the standardssetting process, r&d funding, procurement practices, education and public jawboning, licenses andcertification, and arrangements both formal and informal with variousother governments (state, local, and foreign) and organizations (e.g., specific private companies). all of these are controversial because they embody judgments about how the interests of law enforcement and nationalsecurity should be reconciled against the needs of the private sector. inaddition, the international dimensions of cryptography are both critical(because cryptography affects communications and communications arefundamentally international) and enormously difficult (because nationalinterests differ from government to government).6.1 the communications assistancefor law enforcement actthe communications assistance for law enforcement act (calea)was widely known as the òdigital telephonyó bill before its formal passage. the calea is not explicitly connected to national cryptographypolicy, but it is an important aspect of the political context in which national cryptography policy has been discussed and debated.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy2176.1.1 brief description of and stated rationale for the caleageneral descriptionthe communications assistance for law enforcement act (calea)was passed in october 1994. the act imposes on telecommunicationscarriers four requirements in connection with those services or facilitiesthat allow customers to originate, terminate, or direct communications:¥to expeditiously isolate and enable the government to intercept,pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization, all wire and electronic communications in the carrierõs control to or from the equipment,facilities, or services of a subscriber, in real time or at any later timeacceptable to the government. carriers are not responsible for decryptingencrypted communications that are the subject of courtordered wiretaps,unless the carrier provided the encryption and can decrypt it. moreover,carriers are not prohibited from deploying an encryption service for whichit does not retain the ability to decrypt communications for law enforcement access.¥to expeditiously isolate and enable the government to access, pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization, reasonably availablecallidentifying information about the origin and destination of communications. access must be provided in such a manner that the informationmay be associated with the communication to which it pertains and isprovided to the government before, during, or immediately after thecommunicationõs transmission to or from the subscriber.¥to make intercepted communications and callidentifying information available to government, pursuant to court order or other lawfulauthorization, so that they may be transmitted over lines or facilities leasedor procured by law enforcement to a location away from the carrierõs premises.¥to meet these requirements with a minimum of interference withthe subscriberõs service and in such a way that protects the privacy ofcommunications and callidentifying information that are not targeted byelectronic surveillance orders, and that maintains the confidentiality ofthe governmentõs interceptions.the calea also authorizes federal money for retrofitting commoncarrier systems to comply with these requirements. as this report isbeing written, no money has yet been appropriated for this task.the calea requirements apply only to those services or facilitiesthat enable a subscriber to make, receive, or direct calls. they do notapply to information services, such as the services of electronic mail providers; online services such as compuserve or america online; orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyinternet access providers; or to private networks or services whose solepurpose is to interconnect carriers. furthermore, the calea requireslaw enforcement authorities to use carrier employees or personnel to activate a surveillance. the calea also provides that a warrant is needed totap a cordless telephone; wiretaps on cellular telephones are already governed by title iii or the foreign intelligence surveillance act.the stated rationale for the caleahistorically, telecommunications service providers have cooperatedwith law enforcement officials in allowing access to communications uponlegal authorization. new telecommunications services (e.g., call forwarding, paging, cellular calls) and others expected in the future have diminished the ability of law enforcement agencies to carry out legally authorized electronic surveillance. the primary rationale for the calea is toensure that within 4 years, telecommunications service providers will stillbe able to provide the assistance necessary to law enforcement officials toconduct surveillance of wire and electronic communications (both content and callidentifying information) controlled by the carrier, regardlessof the nature of the particular services being offered.6.1.2 reducing resource requirements for wiretapsonce a surveillance order has been approved judicially, it must beimplemented. in practice, the implementation of a surveillance orderrequires the presence of at least two agents around the clock. such apresence is required if realtime minimization requirements are to be met.1as a result, personnel requirements are the most expensive aspect ofelectronic surveillance. the average cost of a wiretap order is $57,000(appendix d), or approximately onehalf of a fulltimeequivalent agentyear. such costs are not incurred lightly by law enforcement agencies.1minimization refers to the practice, required by title iii, of monitoring only those portions of a conversation that are relevant to the crime under investigation. if a subjectdiscusses matters that are strictly personal, such discussions are not subject to monitoring.in practice, a team of agents operate a tape recorder on the wiretapped line. minimizationrequires agents to turn off the tape recorder and to cease monitoring the conversation for ashort period of time if they overhear nonrelevant discussions. at the end of that timeperiod, they are permitted to resume monitoring. for obvious reasons, this practice isconducted in real time. when agents encounter a foreign language with which they areunfamiliar, they are allowed to record the entire conversation; the tape is then òminimizedóafter the fact of wiretapping. additional discussion of the requirements imposed on wiretapping by title iii is contained in appendix d.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy219under these circumstances, procedures and/or technologies that couldreduce the labor required to conduct wiretaps pose a potential problem forindividuals concerned about excessive use of wiretaps. specifically, theseindividuals are concerned that the ability to route wiretapped calls to acentral location would enable a single team of agents to monitor multipleconversations.2 such time sharing among monitoring teams could lowerwiretap costs significantly. from the standpoint of law enforcement, thesesavings could be used for other law enforcement purposes, and theywould have the additional effect of eliminating an operational constrainton the frequency with which wiretap authority is sought today.technologies that would enable minimization without human assistance are in their infancy today. for example, the technology of speechrecognition for the most part cannot cope with speech that is speakerindependent and continuous, and artificial intelligence programs todayand for the foreseeable future will be unable to distinguish between thecriminally relevant and nonrelevant parts of a conversation. humanagents are an essential component of a wiretap, and law enforcementofficials have made three key points in response to the concern raisedabove:¥most importantly, todayõs wiretaps are performed generally withlaw enforcement agencies paying telecommunications service providersfor delivering the intercepted communications to a point of law enforcementõs choosing.¥from an operational standpoint, the realtime minimization ofwiretapped conversations requires agents who are personally familiarwith the details of the case under investigation, so that they know whenthe subjects are engaged in conversations related to the caseñagents exceed their authority if they monitor unrelated conversations.¥procedural rules require that all evidence be maintained through aproper chain of custody and in a manner such that the authenticity ofevidence can be established. law enforcement officials believe that the2for example, such a concern was raised at the fifth conference on computers, freedom,and privacy held in san francisco in march 1995. the argument goes as follows. while thecalea authorizes $500 million to pay for existing inplace telephone switch conversions toimplement the capabilities desired by law enforcement, this amount is intended as a onetime cost; upgrades of switching systems are expected to implement these capabilities without government subsidy. the point is that additional wiretap orders would not pose anadditional incremental cost (though the original cost of $57,000 would still obtain), and thebarrier of incremental cost would not impede more wiretap orders. in short, critics arguethat it would make good economic sense to make additional use of resources if such use canòpiggybackó on an alreadymade investment.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyuse of one team to monitor different conversations could call into question the ability to establish a clear chain of custody.6.1.3 obtaining access to digital streams in the futurein the conduct of any wiretap, the first technical problem is simplygaining access to the relevant traffic itself, whether encrypted or not. forlaw enforcement, products with encryption capabilities and features thatallow exceptional access are useless without access to the traffic in question.the calea was an initiative spearheaded by law enforcement to deal withthe access problem created by new telecommunications services.the problems addressed by the calea will inevitably resurface asnewer communications services are developed and deployed for use bycommon carriers and private entities (e.g., corporations) alike. it is axiomatic that the complexity of interactions among communications systems will continually increase, both as a result of increased functionalityand the need to make more efficient use of available bandwidth. consequently, isolation of the digital streams associated with the party or parties targeted by law enforcement will become increasingly difficult if thecooperation of the service provider is not forthcoming, for all of the reasons described in chapter 2. (it is for this reason that the calea appliesto parties that are not common carriers today upon appropriate designation by the federal communications commission (fcc).)moreover, even when access to the digital stream of an application isassured, the structure of the digital stream may be so complex that itwould be extremely costly to determine all of the information presentwithout the assistance of the application developer. tools designed toisolate the relevant portions of a given digital stream transmitted on opensystems will generally be less expensive than tools for proprietary systems, but since both open and proprietary systems will be present in anyfuture telecommunications environment, law enforcement authorities willneed tools for both. the development of such tools will require considerable technical skill, skill that is most likely possessed by the applicationdevelopers; cooperation with product developers may decrease the costof developing these tools.finally, as the telecommunications system becomes more and moreheterogeneous, even the term òcommon carrieró will become harder todefine or apply. the routing of an individual data communication throughthe ònetworkó will be dynamic and may take any one of a number of paths,decisions about which are not under the userõs control. while only one linkin a given route need be a common carrier for calea purposes, identifying that common carrier in practice may be quite difficult.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy2216.1.4 the calea exemption of information service providersand distinctions between voice and data servicesat present, users of data communications services access networkssuch as the internet either through private networks (e.g., via their employers) or through internet service providers that provide connectionsfor a variety of individuals and organizations. both typically make use oflines owned and operated by telecommunications service providers. inthe former case, law enforcement access to the digital stream is more orless the same problem as it is for the employer (and law enforcement hasaccess through the legal process to the employer). in the latter case, thecalea requires the telephone service provider to provide to law enforcement authorities a copy of the digital stream being transported.the calea exempts online information service providers such asamerica online and compuserve from its requirements. in the future,other calea issues may arise as the capabilities provided by advancedinformation technologies grow more sophisticated. for example, the technological capability exists to use internetbased services to supply realtime voice communications.3 even today, a number of internet and network service providers are capable of supporting (or are planning tosupport) realtime òpushtotalkó voice communications. the caleaprovides that a party providing communications services that in the judgment of the fcc are òa replacement for a substantial portion of the localtelephone exchange serviceó may be deemed a carrier subject to the requirements of the calea. thus, one possible path along which telecommunications services may evolve could lead to the imposition of calearequirements on information service providers, even though they wereexempted as an essential element of a legislative compromise that enabled the calea to pass in the first place.these possibilities are indicative of a more general problem: the factthat lines between òvoiceó and òdataó services are being increasinglyblurred. this issue is addressed in greater detail in chapter 7.6.2 other levers used in national cryptography policythe government has a number of tools to influence the possessionand use of cryptography domestically and abroad. how the governmentuses these tools in the context of national cryptography policy reflects thegovernmentõs view of how to balance the interests of the various stakeholders affected by cryptography.3fred hapgood, òiphone,ó wired, october 1995, p. 140; and lawrence m. fisher, òlongdistance phone calls in the internet,ó new york times, march 14, 1995, p. d6.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222cryptographyõs role in securing the information society6.2.1 federal information processing standardsfederal information processing standards (fipss) are an importantelement of national cryptography policy, and all federal agencies are encouraged to cite fipss in their procurement specifications. (box 6.1 contains a brief description of all fipss related to cryptography.) the national institute of standards and technology (nist) is responsible forissuing fipss.fipss can have enormous significance to the private sector as well,despite the face that the existence of a fips does not legally compel aprivate party to adopt it. one reason is that to the extent that a fips isbased on existing private sector standards (which it often is), it codifiesstandards of existing practice and contributes to a planning environmentof greater certainty. a second reason is that a fips is often taken as agovernment endorsement of the procedures, practices, and algorithmscontained therein, and thus a fips may set a de facto òbest practicesóstandard for the private sector. a third reason is related to procurementsthat are fipscompliant as discussed in the next section.nist has traditionally relied on private sector standardssetting processes when developing fipss. such practice reflects nistõs recognitionof the fact that the standards it sets will be more likely to succeedñinterms of reducing procurement costs, raising quality, and influencing thedirection of information technology market developmentñif they are supported by private producers and users.4the existence of widely accepted standards is often an enormousboon to interoperability of computers and communication devices, andthe converse is generally true as well: the absence of widely acceptedstandards often impedes the growth of a market.in the domain of cryptography, fipss have had a mixed result. thepromulgation of fips 461, the data encryption standard (des) algorithm for encrypting data, was a boon to cryptography and vendors ofcryptographic products. on the other hand, the two cryptographyrelated fipss most recently produced by nist (fips 185, the escrowedencryption standard (ees), and fips 186, the digital signature standard(dss)) have met with a less favorable response. neither was consistentwith existing de facto industry standards or practice, and both met withsignificant negative response from private industry and users.54carl f. cargill, information technology standardization, digital press, bedford, mass., 1989,p. 213.5the story of resistance to the ees is provided in susan landau et al., codes, keys, andconflicts, association for computing machinery inc., washington, d.c., june 1994, p. 48; todss, in landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, pp. 4143. in the case of dss, a defacto industry standard had already emerged based on rsa data security inc.õs publickeyalgorithm.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy223box 6.1cryptographyrelated federal information processing standards¥fips 46, 461 and 462: data encryption standard (des). specification ofdes algorithm and rules for implementing des in hardware. fips 461 recertifiesdes and extends it for software implementation. fips 462 reaffirms the data encryption standard algorithm until 1998 and allows for its implementation in software, firmware or hardware. several other fipss address interoperability and security requirements for using des in the physical layer of data communications (fips139) and in fax machines (fips 141), guidelines for implementing and using des(fips 74), modes of operation of des (fips 81), and use of des for authenticationpurposes (fips 113).¥fips 1801: secure hash standard. this standard specifies a secure hashalgorithm (sha) that can be used to generate a condensed representation of a message called a message digest. the sha is required for use with the digital signaturealgorithm (dsa) as specified in the digital signature standard (dss) and whenever asecure hash algorithm is required for federal applications. the sha is used by boththe transmitter and intended receiver of a message in computing and verifying adigital signature.¥fips 186: digital signature standard. this standard specifies a digital signature algorithm (dsa) appropriate for applications requiring a digital rather than awritten signature. the dsa digital signature is a pair of large numbers represented ina computer as strings of binary digits. the digital signature is computed using a setof rules (i.e., the dsa) and a set of parameters such that the identity of the signatoryand integrity of the data can be verified. the dsa provides the capability to generateand verify signatures.¥fips 1401: security requirements for cryptographic modules. this standard provides specifications for cryptographic modules which can be used withincomputer and telecommunications systems to protect unclassified information in avariety of different applications.¥fips 185: escrowed encryption standard (see main text).¥fips 171: key management using ansi x9.17. this standard specifies aselection of options for the automated distribution of keying material by the federalgovernment when using the protocols of ansi x9.17. the standard defines procedures for the manual and automated management of keying materials and contains anumber of options. the selected options will allow the development of costeffective systems that will increase the likelihood of interoperability.other fipss that address matters related more generally to computer securityinclude the following:¥fips 48: guidelines on evaluation of techniques for automated personalidentification,¥fips 83: guidelines on user authentication techniques for computer network access control,¥fips 112: password usage,¥fips 113: computer data authentication, and¥fips 73: guidelines for security of computer applications.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe promulgation of the ees and the dss, as well as current administration plans to promulgate a modification of the ees to accommodateescrowed encryption for data storage and communications and anotherfips for key escrow to performance requirements for escrow agents andfor escrowed encryption products, has generated a mixed market reaction. some companies see the promulgation of these standards as a market opportunity, while others see these standards as creating yet moreconfusion and uncertainty in pushing escrowed encryption on a resistantmarket.appendix m contains a general discussion of fipss and the standardssetting process.6.2.2 the government procurement processgovernment procurement occurs in two domains. one domain isspecialpurpose equipment and products, for which government is theonly consumer. such products are generally classified in certain ways;weapons and militarygrade cryptography are two examples. the otherdomain is procurement of products that are useful in both the private andpublic sectors.where equipment and products serve both government and privatesector needs, in some instances the ability of the government to buy inbulk guarantees vendors a large enough market to take advantage ofmass production, thereby driving down for all consumers the unit costsof a product that the government is buying in bulk. through its marketpower, government has some ability to affect the price of products thatare offered for sale on the open market. furthermore, acceptance by thegovernment is often taken as a òseal of approvaló for a given product thatreassures potential buyers in the private sector.history offers examples with variable success in promoting the widespread public use of specific information technologies through the use ofgovernment standards.¥the des was highly successful. des was first adopted as a cryptographic standard for federal use in 1975. since then, its use has becomecommonplace in cryptographic applications around the world, and manyimplementations of des now exist worldwide.¥a less successful standard is gosip, the government osi profile,fips 146.6 the gosip was intended to specify the details of an osiconfiguration for use in the government so that interoperable osi net6osi refers to open systems interconnect, a standardized suite of international networking protocols developed and promulgated in the early 1980s.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy225work products could be procured from commercial vendors and to encourage the market development of products. gosip has largely failed inthis effort, and network products based on the tcp/ip protocols nowdominate the market.7in the case of the ees, the government chose not to seek legislationoutlawing cryptography without features for exceptional access, but choseinstead to use the ees to influence the marketplace for cryptography. thispoint was acknowledged by administration officials to the committee on anumber of occasions. specifically, the government hoped that the adoptionof the ees to ensure secure communications within the government and forcommunications of other parties with the federal government would leadto a significant demand for eescompliant devices, thus making possibleproduction in larger quantities and thereby driving unit costs down andmaking eescompliant devices more attractive to other users. a secondaryeffect would be the fact that two nongovernmental parties wishing to engage in secure communications would be most likely to use eescompliantdevices if they already own them rather than purchase other devices. aspart of this strategy to influence the market, the government persuadedat&t in 1992 to base a secure telephone on the ees.in the case of the fortezza card, the large government procurementfor use with the defense messaging system may well lower unit costssufficiently that vendors of products intended solely for the commercialnondefense market will build support for the fortezza card into theirproducts.8 given the wide availability of pccard slots on essentially allnotebook and laptop computers, it is not inconceivable that the securityadvantages offered by hardwarebased authentication would find a widecommercial market. at the same time, the disadvantages of hardwarebased cryptographic functionality discussed in chapter 5 would remainas well.6.2.3 implementation of policy: fear, uncertainty,doubt, delay, complexitythe implementation of policy contributes to how those affected bypolicy will respond to it. this important element is often unstated, and itrefers to the role of government in creating a climate of predictability. a7see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, realizing the information future: the internet and beyond, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1994, chapter 6.8in a recent contract, a vendor agreed to provide fortezza cards at $69 per card. see paulconstance, òafter complaining $99 was too low, fortezza vendors come in at $69,ógovernment computer news, october 2, 1995, p. 6.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226cryptographyõs role in securing the information societygovernment that speaks with multiple voices on a question of policy, orone that articulates isolated elements of policy in a piecemeal fashion, orone that leaves the stakeholders uncertain about what is or is not permissible, creates an environment of fear, uncertainty, and doubt that caninhibit action. such an environment can result from a deliberate choice onthe part of policy makers, or it can be inadvertent, resulting from overlapping and/or multiple sources of authority that may have at least partialresponsibility for the policy area in question. decisions made behindclosed doors and protected by government security classifications tend toreinforce the concerns of those who believe that fear, uncertainty, anddoubt are created deliberately rather than inadvertently.the committee observes that cryptography policy has indeed beenshrouded in secrecy for many years and that many agencies have partialresponsibility in this area. it also believes that fear, uncertainty, anddoubt are common in the marketplace. for example, the introduction ofnonmarketdriven standards such as the dss and the ees may have created market uncertainty that impeded the rapid proliferation of highquality products with encryption capabilities both internationally anddomestically. uncertainty over whether or not the federal governmentwould recertify the des as a fips has plagued the marketplace in recentyears, because withdrawal of the des as a fips could cause considerableconsternation among some potential buyers that might suddenly be usingproducts based on a decertified standard, although in fact the government has recertified the des in each case. on the other hand, the des isalso a standard of the american national standards institute and theamerican banking association, and if these organizations continue toendorse it, the des will arguably represent a viable algorithm for a widerange of products.many parties in industry believe that the complexity and opacity ofthe decisionmaking process with respect to cryptography are major contributors to this air of uncertainty. of course, the creation of uncertaintymay be desirable from the perspective of policy makers if their goal is toretard action in a given area. impeding the spread of highquality products with encryption capabilities internationally is the stated and explicitgoal of export controls; on the domestic front, impeding the spread ofhighquality products with encryption capabilities has been a desirableoutcome from the standpoint of senior officials in the law enforcementcommunity.a very good example of the impact of fear, uncertainty, and doubt onthe marketplace for cryptography can be found in the impact of government action (or more precisely, inaction) with respect to authentication.as noted in chapter 2, cryptography supports digital signatures, a technology that provides high assurance for both data integrity and user aucryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy227thentication. however, federal actions in this area have led to considerable controversy. one example is that the federal government failed toadopt what was (and still is) the de facto commercial standard algorithmon digital signatures, namely the rsa algorithm. government sourcestold the committee that the fact that the rsa algorithm is capable ofproviding strong confidentiality as well as digital signatures was onereason that the government deemed it inappropriate for promulgation asa fips.9 further, the governmentõs adoption of the digital signaturestandard10 in 1993 occurred despite widespread opposition from industry to the specifics of that standard.6.2.4 r&d fundingan agency that supports research (and/or conducts such research onits own inhouse) in a given area of technology is often able to shape thefuture options from which the private sector and policy makers willchoose. for example, an agency that wishes to maintain a monopoly ofexpertise in a given area may not fund promising research proposals thatoriginate from outside. multiple agencies active in funding a given areamay thus yield a broader range of options for future policy makers.in the context of cryptography and computer and communicationssecurity, it is relevant that the national security agency (nsa) has beenthe main supporter and performer of r&d in this area.11 the nsaõs r&d9the specific concern was that widespread adoption of rsa as a signature standard wouldresult in an infrastructure that could support the easy and convenient distribution of deskeys. the two other reasons for the governmentõs rejection of rsa were the desire topromulgate an approach to digital signatures that would be royaltyfree (rsa is a patentedalgorithm) and the desire to reduce overall system costs for digital signatures. for a discussion of the intellectual issues involved in the rejection of the rsa algorithm and the concernover confidentiality, see office of technology assessment, information security and privacyin network environments, otatct606, u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c., september 1994, pp. 167168 and pp. 217222.10the dss is based on an unclassified algorithm known as the digital signature algorithm that does not explicitly support confidentiality. however, the dss and its supportingdocumentation do amount to u.s. government endorsement of a particular oneway hashfunction, and document in detail how to generate the appropriate numbertheoretic constants needed to implement it. given this standard, it is possible to design a confidentialitystandard that is as secure as the dss. in other words, the dss is a road map to a confidentiality standard, although it is not such a standard explicitly. whether an ersatz confidentiality standard would pass muster in the commercial market remains to be seen.11it is important to distinguish between r&d undertaken internally and externally tonsa. internal r&d work can be controlled and kept private to nsa; by contrast, it is muchmore difficult to control the extent to which external r&d work is disseminated. thus,decisions regarding specific external cryptographyrelated r&d projects could promote orinhibit public knowledge of cryptography.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyorientation has been, quite properly, on technologies that would help it toperform more effectively and efficiently its two basic missions: (1) defending national security by designing and deploying strong cryptography toprotect classified information and (2) performing signals intelligence againstpotential foreign adversaries. in the information security side of the operation, nsadeveloped technology has extraordinary strengths that haveproven well suited to the protection of classified information relevant todefense or foreign policy needs.how useful such technologies will prove for corporate informationsecurity remains to be seen. increasing needs for information security inthe private sector suggest that nsa technology may have much to offer,especially if such technology can be made available to the private sectorwithout limitation. at the same time, the environment in which privatesector information security needs are manifested may be different enoughfrom the defense and foreign policy worlds that these technologies maynot be particularly relevant in practice to the private sector. furthermore,the rapid pace of commercial developments in information technologymay make it difficult for the private sector to use technologies developedfor national security purposes in a less rapidly changing environment.these observations suggest that commercial needs for cryptographictechnology may be able to draw on nsa technologies for certain applications, and most certainly will draw on nonclassified r&d work in cryptography (both in the united states and abroad); even the latter will havea high degree of sophistication. precisely how the private sector willdraw on these two sources of technology will depend on policy decisionsto be made in the future. finally, it is worth noting that nonclassifiedresearch on cryptography appearing in the open literature has been oneof the most important factors leading to the dilemma that policy makersface today with respect to cryptography.6.2.5 patents and intellectual propertya number of patents involving cryptography have been issued. patents affect cryptography because patent protection can be used by bothvendors and governments to keep various patented approaches to cryptography out of broad use in the public domain.12the des, first issued in 1977, is an open standard, and the algorithmit uses is widely known. according to nist, devices implementing thedes may be covered by u.s. and foreign patents issued to ibm (althoughthe original patents have by now expired).13 however, ibm granted12see footnote 9.13national institute of standards and technology, òfips 462: announcing the data encryption standard,ó nist, gaithersburg, md., december 30, 1993.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy229nonexclusive, royaltyfree licenses under the patents to make, use, andsell apparatus that complies with the standard.rsa data security inc. (rsa) holds the licensing rights to rc2, rc4,and rc5, which are variablekeylength ciphers developed by ronaldrivest.14 rc2 and rc4 are not patented, but rather are protected as tradesecrets (although both algorithms have been published on the internetwithout rsaõs approval). rsa has applied for a patent for rc5 and hasproposed it as a security standard for the internet. another alternativefor data encryption is idea, a block cipher developed by james masseyand xueija lai of the swiss federal institute of technology (eth), zurich.the patent rights to idea are held by ascom systec ag, a swiss firm.idea is implemented in the software application pgp.in addition to the above patents, which address symmetrickey encryption technologies, there are several important patent issues related to publickey cryptography. the concept of publickey cryptography, as well assome specific implementing methods, is covered by u.s. patents 4,200,770(m. hellman, w. diffie, and r. merkle, 1980) and 4,218,582 (m. hellmanand r. merkle, 1980), both of which are owned by stanford university. thebasic patent for the rsa publickey cryptosystem, u.s. patent 4,405,829 (r.rivest, a. shamir, and l. adelman, 1983), is owned by the massachusettsinstitute of technology. the 4,218,582 patent has counterparts in severalother countries. these basic publickey patents and related ones have beenlicensed to many vendors worldwide. with the breakup of the partnershipthat administered the licensing of stanford universityõs and mitõs patents,the validity of the various patents has become the subject of current litigation. in any event, the terms will expire in 1997 for the first two of the abovepatents and in 2000 for the third.15in 1994, nist issued the digital signature standard, fips 186. thedss uses the nistdeveloped digital signature algorithm, which according to nist is available for use without a license. however, during thedssõs development, concern arose about whether the dss might infringeon the publickey patents cited above, as well as a patent related to signature verification held by claus schnorr of goethe university in frankfurt,germany.16 nist asserts that the dss does not infringe on any of these14see rsa data security inc. home page at http://www.rsa.com.15in 1994, congress changed patent terms from 17 years after issuance to 20 years fromthe date of filing the patent application; however, applications for these patents were filedin or before 1977, and so they will not be affected.16see office of technology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, p. 220.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230cryptographyõs role in securing the information societypatents.17 at the least, u.s. government users have the right to use publickey cryptography without paying a license fee for the stanford and mitpatents because the concepts were developed at these universities withfederal research support. however, there remains some disagreementabout whether commercial uses of the dss (e.g., in a publickey infrastructure) will require a license from one or more of the various patent holders.a potential patent dispute regarding the keyescrow features of theees may have been headed off by nistõs negotiation of a nonexclusivelicensing agreement with silvio micali in 1994.18 micali has patents thatare relevant to dividing a key into components that can be separatelysafeguarded (e.g., by escrow agents) and later combined to recover theoriginal key.a provision of the u.s. code (title 35, u.s.c., section 181) allows thepatent and trademark office (pto) to withhold a patent and order thatthe invention be kept secret if publication of the patent is detrimental tonational security. relevant to cryptography is the fact that a patent application for the skipjack encryption algorithm was filed on february 7,1994. this application was examined and all of the claims allowed, andnotification of the algorithmõs patentability was issued on march 28, 1995.based on a determination by nsa, the armed services patent advisoryboard issued a secrecy order for the skipjack patent application; the effectof the secrecy order is that even though skipjack can be patented, a patentwill not be issued until the secrecy order is rescinded. since applicationsare kept in confidence until a patent is issued, no uninvolved party canfind out any information concerning the application. in this way, thepatentability of the algorithm has been established without having todisclose the detailed information publicly.19 since 35 u.s.c. 181 also provides that the pto can rescind the secrecy order upon notification thatpublication is no longer detrimental to national security, compromise andsubsequent public revelation of the skipjack algorithm (e.g., through reverse engineering of a clipper chip) might well cause a patent to be issued for skipjack that would give the u.s. government control over itssubsequent use in products.17national institute of standards and technology, òdigital signature standard,ó computer systems laboratory (csl) bulletin, nist, gaithersburg, md., november 1994. available online at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/nistbul/csl9411.txt.18national institute of standards and technology press release, òpatent agreement removes perceived barrier to telecommunications security system,ó nist, gaithersburg, md.,july 11, 1994. available online at gopher://rigel.nist.gov:7346/0/.docs/.releases/n9428.rel.19clinton c. brooks, national security agency, provided this information to the committee in an email message dated may 23, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy2316.2.6 formal and informal arrangements with various othergovernments and organizationsinternational agreements can be an important part of national policy.for example, for many years the coordinating committee (cocom) nations cooperated in establishing a common export control policy on militarily significant items with civilian purposes, including cryptography(appendix g has more details).international agreements can take a variety of different forms. themost formal type of agreement is a treaty between (or among) nationsthat specifies the permissible, required, and prohibited actions of the various nations. treaties require ratification by the relevant national politicalbodies as well as signature before entry into force. in the united statestreaties must be approved by the u.s. senate by a twothirds vote. sometimes treaties are selfexecuting, but often they need to be followed byimplementing legislation enacted by the congress in the normal mannerfor legislation.another type of agreement is an executive agreement. in the unitedstates, executive agreements are, as the name implies, entered into by theexecutive branch. unlike the treaty, no senate ratification is involved, butthe executive branch has frequently sought approval by a majority of bothhouses of the congress. for all practical purposes executive agreementswith other countries bind the united states in international law just asfirmly as treaties do, although a treaty may carry greater weight internally due to the concurrence by a twothirds vote of the senate. executiveagreements can also be changed with much greater flexibility than treaties.finally, nations can agree to cooperate through diplomacy. eventhough cooperation is not legally required under such arrangements, informal understandings can work very effectively so long as relationshipsremain good and the countries involved continue to have common goals.in fact, informal understanding is the main product of much diplomacyand is the form that most of the worldõs business between governmentstakes. for example, although the united states maintains formal mutuallegal assistance treaties with a number of nations, u.s. law enforcementagencies cooperate (sometimes extensively) with foreign counterparts ina much larger number of nations. indeed, in some instances, such cooperation is stronger, more reliable, and more extensive than is the case withnations that are a party to a formal mutual legal assistance treaty with theunited states.note that the more formal the agreement, the more public is the substance of the agreement; such publicity often leads to attention that maycompromise important and very sensitive matters, such as the extent tocryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232cryptographyõs role in securing the information societywhich a nation supports a given policy position or the scope and nature ofa nationõs capabilities. when informal arrangements are negotiated andentered into force, they may not be known by all citizens or even by allparts of the governments involved. because they are less public, informalarrangements also allow more latitude for governments to make decisions on a casebycase basis. in conducting negotiations that may involve sensitive matters or agreements that may require considerable flexibility, governments are often inclined to pursue more informal avenuesof approach.6.2.7 certification and evaluationanalogous to good housekeeping seals of approval or òcheck ratingsófor products reviewed in consumer reports, independent testing and certification of products can provide assurance in the commercial marketplacethat a product can indeed deliver the services and functionality that itpurports to deliver. for example, the results of government crash tests ofautomobiles are widely circulated as data relevant to consumer purchasesof automobiles. government certification that a commercial airplane issafe to fly provides significant reassurance to the public about flight safety.at the same time, while evaluation and certification would in principlehelp users to avoid products that implement a sound algorithm in a waythat undermines the security offered by the algorithm, the actual behaviorof users demonstrates that certification of a product is not necessarily aselling point. many of the des products in the united states have neverbeen evaluated relative to fs 1027 or fips 1401, and yet such productsare used by many parties.the government track record in the cryptography and computer security domain is mixed. for example, a number of des products wereevaluated with respect to fs 1027 (the precursor to fips 1401) over several years and a number of products were certified by nsa. for a time,government agencies purchased des hardware only if it met fs 1027, orfips 140. commercial clients often required compliance because it provided the only assurance that a product embodying des was secure in abroader sense. in this case, the alignment between government and commercial security requirements seems to have been reasonably good, andthus this program had some success. two problems with this evaluationprogram were that it addressed only hardware and that it lagged in allowing use of publickey management technology in products (in theabsence of suitable standards).a second attempt to provide product evaluation was represented bythe national computer security center (ncsc), which was establishedby the department of defense (dod) for the purpose of certifying varicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy233ous computer systems for security. the theory underlying the center wasthat the government needed secure systems but could not afford to buildthem. the quid pro quo was that industry would design and implementsecure operating systems that the government would test and evaluate atno cost to industry; systems meeting government requirements wouldreceive a seal of approval.although the ncsc still exists, the security evaluation program itsponsors, the trusted product evaluation program (tpep), has more orless lapsed into disuse. in the judgment of many, the tpep was a relativefailure because of an underlying premise that the information securityproblems of the government and the private sector were identical to thoseof the defense establishment. in fact, the private sector has for the mostpart found that a military approach to computer security is inadequatefor its needs. a second major problem was that the time scale of theevaluation process was much longer than the private sector could tolerate, and products that depended on ncsc evaluation would reach market already on the road to obsolescence, perhaps superseded by a newversion to which a given evaluation would not necessarily apply. in late1995, articles in the trade press reported that the dod was attempting torevive the evaluation program in a way that would involve private contractors.20a recent attempt to provide certification services is the cryptographicmodule validation program (cmvp) to test products for conformance tofips 1401, security requirements for cryptographic modules.21 fips 1401provides a broad framework for all nist cryptographic standards, specifying design, function, and documentation requirements for cryptographicmodulesñincluding hardware, software, òfirmware,ó and combinationsthereofñused to protect sensitive, unclassified information in computerand telecommunication systems.22 the cmvp was established in july 1995by nist and the communications security establishment of the government of canada.the validation program is currently optional: agencies may purchaseproducts based on a vendorõs written assurance of compliance with thestandard. however, beginning in 1997, u.s. federal procurement willrequire cryptographic products to be validated by an independent, third20see, for example, paul constance, òsecure products list gets cpr,ó government computing news, november 13, 1995, p. 40.21national institute of standards and technology press release, òcryptographic modulevalidation program announced,ó nist, gaithersburg, md., july 17, 1995.22national institute of standards and technology, federal information processing standardspublication 1401: security requirements for cryptographic modules, nist, gaithersburg, md.,january 11, 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyparty. under the program, vendors will submit their products for testingby an independent, nistaccredited laboratory.23such a laboratory evaluates both the product and its associated documentation against the requirements in fips 1401. nist has also specifiedtest procedures for all aspects of the standard. examples include attempting to penetrate tamperresistant coatings and casings, inspecting software source code and documentation, attempting to bypass protection ofstored secret keys, and statistically verifying the performance of randomnumber generators.24 the vendor sends the results of independent teststo nist, which determines whether these results show that the testedproduct complies with the standard and then issues validation certificatesfor products that do. time will tell whether the cmvp will prove moresuccessful than the ncsc.6.2.8 nonstatutory influenceby virtue of its size and role in society, government has considerableability to influence public opinion and to build support for policies. inmany cases, this ability is not based on specific legislative authority, butrather on the use of the òbully pulpit.ó for example, the government canact in a convening role to bring focus and to stimulate the private sector towork on a problem.25 the bully pulpit can be used to convey a sense ofurgency that is tremendously important in how the private sector reacts,especially large companies that try to be good corporate citizens andresponsive to informal persuasion by senior government officials. bothvendors and users can be influenced by such authority.2623as of september 1995, the national institute of standards and technologyõs nationalvoluntary laboratory accreditation program had accredited three u.s. companies as competent to perform the necessary procedures: cygnacom solutions laboratory (mclean,va.), domus software limited (ottawa, canada), and infogard laboratories (san luisobispo, calif.). a current list of these companies is available online at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips/1401labs.txt.24national institute of standards and technology, derived test requirements for fips publication 1401, nist, gaithersburg, md., march 1995.25one advantage of governmentõs acting in this way is that it may provide some assurance to the private sector that any coordinated action taken in response to government callsfor action will be less likely to be interpreted by government as a violation of antitrustprovisions.26for example, in responding favorably to a request by president clinton for a particularaction in a labor dispute, the chairman of american airlines noted, òhe [president clinton]is the elected leader of the country. for any citizen or any company or any union to sayôno, i wonõt do thatõ to the president requires an awfully good reason.ó see gwen ifill,òstrike at american airlines; airline strike ends as clinton steps in,ó new york times,november 23, 1993, p. 1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy235in the security domain, the clinton administration has sponsoredseveral widely publicized public meetings to address security dimensionsof the national information infrastructure (nii). these meetings weremeetings of the nii security issues forum, held in 1994 and 1995.27 theywere announced in the federal register and were intended to provide aforum in which members of the interested public could air their concernsabout security.in the cryptography domain, the u.s. government has used its convening authority to seek comments on various proposed cryptographicstandards and to hold a number of workshops related to key escrow(discussed in chapter 5). many in the affected communities believe thatthese attempts at outreach were too few and too late to influence anythingmore than the details of a policy outline on which the government hadalready decided. a second example demonstrating the governmentõs nonstatutory influence was the successful government request to at&t to basethe 3600 secure telephone unit on the clipper chip instead of an unescrowed des chip (as described in appendix e).6.2.9 interagency agreements within the executive branchgiven that one government agency may have expertise or personnelthat would assist another agency in doing its job better, government agencies often conclude agreements between them that specify the terms andnature of their cooperative efforts. in the domain of cryptography policy,nsaõs technical expertise in the field has led to memorandums of understanding with nist and with the fbi (appendix n).the memorandum of understanding (mou) between nist and nsaoutlines several areas of cooperation between the two agencies that areintended to implement the computer security act of 1987; joint nistnsa activities are described in box 6.2. this mou has been the subject ofsome controversy, with critics believing that the mou and its implementation cede too much authority to nsa and defenders believing that the27office of management and budget press release, ònational information infrastructuresecurity issues forum releases ônii security: the federal role,õó washington, d.c., june14, 1995. the subjects of these meetings were òcommercial security on the nii,ó whichfocused on the need for intellectual property rights protection in the entertainment, software, and computer industries; òsecurity of insurance and financial informationó; òsecurity of health and education informationó; òsecurity of the electronic delivery of government services and informationó; òsecurity for intelligent transportation systems and tradeinformationó; and òthe nii: will it be there when you need it?,ó addressing the availability and reliability of the internet, the public switched telecommunicatins network, andcable, wireless, and satellite communications services. available online at gopher://ntiant1.ntia.doc.gov:70/00/iitf/security/files/fedworld.txt.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 6.2overview of joint nistnsa activitiesthe national security agency provides technical advice and assistance to thenational institute of standards and technology in accordance with public law 100235, the computer security act of 1987. an overview of nistnsa activities follows.national conference. nist and nsa jointly sponsor, organize, and chair theprestigious national computer security conference, held yearly for the past 16 years.the conference is attended by over 2,000 people from government and private industry.common criteria. nsa is providing technical assistance to nist for the development of computer security criteria that would be used by both the civilian anddefense sides of the government. representatives from canada and europe are joining the united states in the development of the criteria.product evaluations. nist and nsa are working together to perform evaluations of computer security products. in the trusted technology assessment program,evaluations of some computer security products will be performed by nist and itslaboratories, while others will be performed by nsa. nist and nsa engineers routinely exchange information and experiences to ensure uniformity of evaluations.standards development. nsa supports nist in the development of standardsthat promote interoperability among security products. sample standards includesecurity protocol standards, digital signature standards, key management standards,and encryption algorithm standards (e.g., the des, skipjack).research and development. under the joint r&d technology exchange program, nist and nsa hold periodic technical exchanges to share information on newand ongoing programs. research and development are performed in areas such assecurity architectures, labeling standards, privilege management, and identificationand authentication. testbed activities are conducted in areas related to electronicmail, certificate exchange and management, protocol conformity, and encryptiontechnologies.source: national security agency, april 1994 (as reprinted in office oftechnology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, otatct606, u.s. government printing office, washington d.c.,september 1994, box 48, p. 165).mou is faithful to both the spirit and letter of the computer security actof 1987.28the mou between the fbi and nsa, declassified for the nationalresearch council, states that the nsa will provide assistance to the fbiupon request, when the assistance is consistent with nsa policy (includ28for more discussion of these critical perspectives, see office of technology assessment,information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, box 48, pp. 164171.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy237ing protection of sources and methods), and in accordance with certainadministrative requirements. furthermore, if the assistance requested isfor the support of an activity that may be conducted only pursuant to acourt order or with the authorization of the attorney general, the fbirequest to the nsa must include a copy of that order or authorization.in 1995, the national security agency, the advanced research projectsagency, and the defense information systems agency (disa) signed amemorandum of agreement (moa) to coordinate research and development efforts in system security. this moa provides for the establishmentof the information systems security researchjoint technology office(issrjto). the role of the issrjto is òto optimize use of the limitedresearch funds available, and strengthen the responsiveness of the programs to disa, expediting delivery of technologies that meet disaõs requirements to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, andavailability of data in dod information systems, provide a robust first lineof defense for defensive information warfare, and permit electronic commerce between the dod and its contractors.ó296.3 organization of the federal governmentwith respect to information security6.3.1 role of national security vis‹viscivilian information infrastructuresthe extent to which the traditional national security model is appropriate for an information infrastructure supporting both civilian and military applications is a major point of contention in the public debate. thereare two schools of thought on this subject:¥the traditional national security model should be applied to thenational information infrastructure, because protecting those networksalso protects services that are essential to the military, and the role of thedefense establishment is indeed to protect important components of thenational infrastructure that private citizens and businesses depend upon.3029see òmemorandum of agreement between the advanced research projects agency,the defense information systems agency, and the national security agency concerningthe information systems security researchjoint technology officeó; moa effective april2, 1995. the full text of the moa is available in appendix n and online at http://www.ito.darpa.mil/researchareas/informationsurvivability/moa.html.30for example, the joint security commission recommended that òpolicy formulation forinformation systems security be consolidated under a joint dod/dci security executivecommittee, and that the committee oversee development of a coherent networkorientedinformation systems security policy for the dod and the intelligence community that couldalso serve the entire government.ó see joint security commission, redefining security,washington, d.c., february 28, 1994, p. 107.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238cryptographyõs role in securing the information society¥the traditional national security model should not be applied tothe national information infrastructure, because the needs of civilian activities are so different from those of the military, and the imposition of anational security model would impose an unacceptable burden on thecivilian sector. proponents of this view argue that the traditional nationalsecurity model of information securityña topdown approach to information security managementñwould be very difficult to scale up to ahighly heterogeneous private sector involving hundreds of millions ofpeople and tens of millions of computers in the united states alone.there is essential unanimity that the world of classified information(both military and nonmilitary) is properly a domain in which the dodand nsa can and should exercise considerable influence. but movingoutside this domain raises many questions that have a high profile in thepublic debateñspecifically, what the dod and nsa role should be indealing with the following categories of information:1. unclassified government information that is military in nature,2. unclassified government information that is nonmilitary in nature,and3. nongovernment information.to date, policy decisions have been made that give the dod jurisdiction in information security policy for category 1. for categories 2 and 3,the debate continues. it is clear that the security needs for business andfor national security purposes are both similar (box 6.3) and different(box 6.4). in category 2, the argument is made that dod and nsa have agreat deal of expertise in protecting information, and that the governmentshould draw on an enormous historical investment in nsa expertise toprotect all government information. at the same time, nist has theresponsibility for protecting such information under the computer security act of 1987, with nsaõs role being one of providing technical assistance. some commentators believe that nist has not received resourcesadequate to support its role in this area.3131for example, the office of technology assessment stated that òthe current state ofgovernment security practice for unclassified information has been depressed by the chronicshortage of resources for nistõs computer security activities in fulfillment of its governmentwide responsibilities under the computer security act of 1987. since enactment ofthe computer security act, there has been no serious (i.e., adequately funded and properlystaffed), sustained effort to establish a center of informationsecurity expertise and leadership outside the defense/intelligence communities.ó see office of technology assessment,issue update on information security and privacy in network environments, otabpitc147,u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., june 1995, p. 42. a similar conclusioncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy239box 6.3similarities in commercial security needs andnational security needs¥ strong aversion to public discussion of security breaches. information aboutthreats is regarded as highly sensitive. such a classification makes it very difficult toconduct effective user education, because security awareness depends on an understanding of the true scope and nature of a threat.¥ need to make costbenefit tradeoffs in using security technology. neitherparty can afford the resources to protect against an arbitrary threat model.¥ strong preference for selfreliance (government relying on government, industry relying on industry) to meet security needs.¥ strong need for high security. both government and industry need strongcryptography with no limitations for certain applications. however, the best technology and tools are often reserved for government and military use because commercial deployment cannot be adequately controlled, resulting in opportunities foradversaries to obtain and examine the systems so that they can plan how to exploitthem.¥ increasing reliance on commercial products in many domains (business,third world nations).¥ increasing scale and sophistication of the security threat for businesses, whichis now approaching that posed by foreign intelligence services and foreign governments.¥ possibility that exceptional access to encrypted information and data maybecome important to commercial entities.in category 3, the same argument is made with respect to nongovernment information on the grounds that the proper role of government is to serve the needs of the entire nation. a second argument is madethat the military depends critically on nongovernment information infrastructures (e.g., the public switched telecommunications network) and thatit is essential to protect those networks not just for civilian use but also formilitary purposes. (note that nsa does not have broad authority to assistprivate industry with information security, although it does conduct forindustry, upon request, unclassified briefings related to foreign information security threats; nsd 42 (text provided in appendix n) also gives nsawas reached by the board on assessment of nist programs of the national research council, which wrote that òthe computer security division is severely understaffed andunderfunded given its statutory security responsibilities, the growing national recognitionof the need to protect unclassified but sensitive information, and the unique role the division can play in fostering security in commercial architectures, hardware, and software.ósee board on assessment of nist programs, national research council, an assessment ofthe national institute of standards and technology, fiscal year 1993, national academy press,washington, d.c., 1994, p. 228.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 6.4differences in commercial security needs andnational security needs¥ business wants marketdriven cryptographic technology; government is apprehensive about such technology. for example, standards are a critical element ofmarketdriven cryptography. market forces and the need to respond to rapidly evolving dynamic new markets demand an approach to establishing cryptographic standards; businesses want standards for interoperability, and they want to create marketcritical mass in order to lower the cost of cryptography.¥ by its nature, the environment of business must include potential adversarieswithin its security perimeter. commercial enterprises now realize that electronicdelivery of their products and services to their customers will increase. they mustdesign systems and processes explicitly so that customers can enter into transactionswith considerable ease. business strategies of today empower the customer throughsoftware and technology. enterprise networks have value in allowing the maximumnumber of people to be attached to the network. customers will choose whichenterprise to enter in order to engage in electronic commerce, and making it difficultfor the customer will result in loss of business. but adversaries masquerading ascustomers (or who indeed may be customers themselves) can enter as well. bycontrast, the traditional national security model keeps potential adversaries outsidethe security perimeter, allowing access only to those with a real need. however, tothe extent that u.s. military forces work in collaboration with forces of other nations,the security perimeter for the military may also become similarly blurred.¥ business paradigms value teamwork, openness, trust, empowerment, andspeed. such values are often difficult to sustain in the national security establishment. the cultures of the two worlds are different and are reflected in, for example,the unwillingness of business to use multilevel security systems designed for militaryuse. such systems failed the market test, although they met defense departmentcriteria for security.¥ national security resources (personnel with cryptographic expertise, funding)are much larger than the resources in nondefense government sectors and in privateindustry and universities. as a result, a great deal of cryptographic knowledge resides within the world of national security. industry wants access to this knowledgeto ensure appropriate use of protocols and strong algorithms, as well as developmentof innovative new products and services.¥ national security places considerable emphasis on confidentiality as well ason authentication and integrity. todayõs commercial enterprises stress authentication of users and data integrity much more than they stress confidentiality (althoughthis balance may shift in the future). for example, improperly denying a juniormilitary officer access to a computer facility may not be particularly important in amilitary context, whereas improperly denying a customer access to his bank accountbecause of a faulty authentication can pose enormous problems for the bank.¥ while both businesses and national security authorities have an interest insafeguarding secrets, the tools available to businesses to discourage individuals fromdisclosing secrets (generally civil suits) are less stringent than those available to national security authorities (criminal prosecution).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy241the authority to work with private industry when such work involves national security information systems used by private industry.)6.3.2 other government entities with influence oninformation securityas noted above, nsa has primary responsibility for information security in the classified domain, while nist has primary responsibility forinformation security in the unclassified domain, but for government information only. no organization or entity within the federal governmenthas the responsibility for promoting information security in the privatesector.32the security policy board (spb) does have a coordination function.specifically, the charge of the spb is to consider, coordinate, and recommend for implementation to the president policy directives for u.s. security policies, procedures, and practices, including those related to securityfor both classified and unclassified government information. the spb isintended to be the principal mechanism for reviewing and proposinglegislation and executive orders pertaining to security policy, procedures,and practices. the security policy advisory board provides a nongovernmental perspective on security policy initiatives to the spb and independent input on such matters to the president. the spb does not haveoperational responsibilities.other entities supported by the federal government have some influence over information security, though little actual policymaking authority. these include:¥the computer emergency response team (cert). cert was formed bythe defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) in november1988 in response to the needs exhibited during the internet worm incident.certõs charge is to work with the internet community to facilitate its response to computer security events involving internet hosts, to take proactivesteps to raise the communityõs awareness of computer security issues, and toconduct research targeted at improving the security of existing systems.33cert offers aroundtheclock technical assistance for responding to computer security incidents, educates users regarding product vulnerability32this observation was also made in computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991, a report that proposed an information security foundation as the most plausible type of organization to promote information securityin the private sector.33available online at http://www.sei.cmu.edu/technology/cert.faqintro.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythrough technical documents and seminars, and provides tools for users toundertake their own vulnerability analyses.¥the information infrastructure task forceõs (iitf) national informationinfrastructure security issues forum. the forum is charged with addressinginstitutional, legal, and technical issues surrounding security in the nii.a draft report issued by the forum proposes federal actions to addressthese issues.34 the intent of the report, and of the security issues forummore generally, is to stimulate a dialogue on how the federal governmentshould cooperate with other levels of government and the private sectorto ensure that participants can trust the nii. the draft report proposes anumber of security guidelines (proposed nii security tenets), the adoption of organization of economic cooperation and development securityprinciples for use on the nii, and a number of federal actions to promotesecurity.¥the computer system security and privacy advisory board (csspab).csspab was created by the computer security act of 1987 as a statutoryfederal public advisory committee. the law provides that the board shallidentify emerging managerial, technical, administrative, and physicalsafeguard issues relative to computer systems security and privacy; advise the national institute of standards and technology and the secretaryof commerce on security and privacy issues pertaining to federal computer systems; and report its findings to the secretary of commerce, thedirectors of the office of management and budget and the national security agency, and the appropriate committees of the congress. the boardõsscope is limited to federal computer systems or those operated by a contractor on behalf of the federal government and which process sensitivebut unclassified information. the boardõs authority does not extend toprivate sector systems, systems that process classified information, ordod unclassified systems related to military or intelligence missions ascovered by the warner amendment (10 u.s.c. 2315). the activities of theboard bring it into contact with a broad cross section of the nondefenseagencies and departments; consequently, it often deals with latent policyconsiderations and societal consequences of information technology.¥the national counterintelligence center (nacic). established in 1994by presidential decision directive nsc24, nacic is primarily responsible for coordinating nationallevel counterintelligence activities, and itreports to the national security council. operationally, the nacic works34office of management and budget press release, ònational information infrastructuresecurity issues forum releases ônii security: the federal role,õó washington, d.c., june14, 1995. available online at gopher://ntiant1.ntia.doc.gov:70/00/iitf/security/files/fedworld.txt.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy243with private industry through an industry council (consisting of seniorsecurity officials or other senior officials of major u.s. corporations) andsponsors counterintelligence training and awareness programs, seminars,and conferences for private industry. nacic also produces coordinatednationallevel, allsource, foreign intelligence threat assessments to support private sector entities having responsibility for the protection of classified, sensitive, or proprietary information, as well as such assessmentsfor government use.35in addition, a number of private organizations (e.g., trade or professional groups) are active in information security.6.4 international dimensions ofcryptography policythe cryptography policy of the united states must take into account anumber of international dimensions. most importantly, the united statesdoes not have the unquestioned dominance in the economic, financial,technological, and political affairs of the world as it might have had at theend of world war ii. indeed, the u.s. economy is increasingly intertwined with that of other nations. to the extent that these economicallysignificant links are based on communications that must be secure, cryptography is one aspect of ensuring such security. differing national policies on cryptography that lead to difficulties in communicating internationally work against overall national policies that are aimed at openingmarkets and reducing commercial and trade barriers.other nations have the option to maintain some form of export controls on cryptography, as well as controls on imports and use of cryptography; such controls form part of the context in which u.s. cryptographypolicy must be formulated. specifically, foreign export control regimesmore liberal than that of the united states have the potential to undercutu.s. export control efforts to limit the spread of cryptography. on theother hand, foreign controls on imports and use of cryptography couldvitiate relaxation of u.s. export control laws; indeed, relaxation of u.s.export controls laws might well prompt a larger number of nations toimpose additional barriers on the import and use of cryptography withintheir borders. finally, a number of other nations have no explicit lawsregarding the use of cryptography, but nevertheless have tools at their35national counterintelligence center (nacic), counterintelligence news and developments, issue no. 1, nacic, washington, d.c. this newsletter is available online at http://www. oss.net/oss.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244cryptographyõs role in securing the information societydisposal to discourage its use; such tools include laws related to the postal,telephone, and telegraph (ptt) system, laws related to content carried byelectronic media, laws related to the protection of domestic industries thatdiscourage the entry of foreign products, laws related to classification ofpatents, and informal arrangements related to licensing of businesses.as a first step in harmonizing cryptography policies across nationalboundaries, the organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd) held a december 1995 meeting in france among membernations to discuss how these nations were planning to cope with thepublic policy problems posed by cryptography. what the paris meetingmade clear is that many oecd member nations are starting to come togrips with the public policy problems posed by encryption, but that thedialogue on harmonizing policies across national borders has not yet matured. moreover, national policies are quite fluid at this time, with various nations considering different types of regulation regarding the use,export, and import of cryptography.appendix g contains more discussion of international issues relevantto national cryptography policy.6.5 recapwhile export controls and escrowed encryption are fundamental pillars of current national cryptography policy, many other aspects of government action also have some bearing on it. the communications assistance for law enforcement (digital telephony) act calls attention to therelationship between access to a communications stream and governmentaccess to the plaintext associated with that digital stream. the formerproblem must be solved (and was solved, by the calea, for telephonecommunications) before the latter problem is relevant.the government can influence the deployment and use of cryptography in many ways. federal information processing standards often set aòbest practiceó standard for the private sector, even though they have noofficial standing outside government use. by assuring largevolume saleswhen a product is new, government procurement practices can reducethe cost of preferred cryptography products to the private sector, givingthese products a price advantage over possible competitors. policy itselfcan be implemented in ways that instill actioninhibiting uncertainty inthe private sector. government r&d funding and patents on cryptographic algorithms can narrow technical options to some degree. formaland informal arrangements with various other governments and organizations can promote various policies or types of cooperation. productcertification can be used to provide the information necessary for a flourcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other dimensions of national cryptography policy245ishing free market in products with encryption capabilities. conveningauthority can help to establish the importance of a topic or approach topolicy.in some ways, the debate over national cryptography policy reflects atension in the role of the national security establishment with respect toinformation infrastructures that are increasingly important to civilian use.in particular, the use of cryptography has been the domain of nationalsecurity and foreign policy for most of its history, a history that has led toa national cryptography policy that today has the effect of discouragingthe use of cryptography in the private sector.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iiipolicy options, findings,and recommendationspart iii consists of two chapters. chapter 7 considers diverse policy options ranging in scope and scale from large to small. not every item described inchapter 7 has been deemed worthy of adoption by the committee, but the committee hopes to broaden the publicõs understanding of crytography policy by discussing ideas that at least have the support of respectable and responsible elements ofthe various stakeholding communities.chapter 8 is a synthesizing chapter that brings together threads of the previous seven chapters and presents the committeeõs findings and recommendations.247cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2497policy options for the futurecurrent national cryptography policy defines only one point in thespace of possible policy options. a major difficulty in the public debateover cryptography policy has been incomplete explanation of why thegovernment has rejected certain policy options. chapter 7 explores anumber of possible alternatives to current national cryptography policy,selected by the committee either because they address an important dimension of national cryptography policy or because they have been raisedby a particular set of stakeholders. although in the committeeõs judgment these alternatives deserve analysis, it does not follow that they necessarily deserve consideration for adoption. the committeeõs judgmentsabout appropriate policy options are discussed in chapter 8.7.1 export control options for cryptography7.1.1 dimensions of choice for controlling theexport of cryptographyan export control regimeña set of laws and regulations governingwhat may or may not be exported under any specified set of circumstancesñhas many dimensions that can be considered independently.these dimensions include:¥the type of export license granted. three types of export licenses areavailable:ña general license, under which export of an item does not in gencryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.250cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyeral require prior government approval but nonetheless is tracked underan export declaration;ña special license, under which prior government approval is required but which allows multiple and continuing transactions under onelicense validation; andñan individual license, under which prior government approval isrequired for each and every transaction.as a general rule, only individual licenses are granted for the exportof items on the u.s. munitions list, which includes òstrongó cryptography.1¥the strength of a productõs cryptographic capabilities. current policyrecognizes the difference between rc2/rc4 algorithms using 40bit keysand other types of cryptography, and places fewer and less severe restrictions on the former.¥the default encryption settings on the delivered product. encryptioncan be tacitly discouraged, but not forbidden, by the use of appropriatesettings.2¥the type of product. many different types of products can incorporate encryption capabilities. products can be distinguished by medium(e.g., hardware vs. software) and/or intended function (e.g., computer vs.communications).¥the extent and nature of features that allow exceptional access. theadministration has suggested that it would permit the export of encryption software with key lengths of 64 bits or less if the keys were òproperlyescrowed.ó3 thus, inclusion in a product of a feature for exceptionalaccess could be made one condition for allowing the export of that product. in addition, the existence of specific institutional arrangements (e.g.,which specific parties would hold the information needed to implementexceptional access) might be made a condition for the export of theseproducts.¥the ultimate destination or intended use of the delivered product. u.s.1however, as noted in chapter 4, the current export control regime for cryptographyinvolves a number of categorical exemptions as well as some uncodified òinpracticeó exemptions.2software, and even softwaredriven devices, commonly have operational parametersthat can be selected or set by a user. an example is the fax machine that allows many userchoices to be selected by keyboard actions. the parameters chosen by a manufacturerbefore it ships a product are referred to as the òdefaultsó or òdefault condition.ó users aregenerally able to alter such parameters at will.3at the time of this writing, the precise definition of òproperly escrowedó is under debateand review in the administration. the most recent language on this definition as of december 1995 is provided in chapter 5.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future251export controls have long distinguished between exports to òfriendlyóand òhostileó nations. in addition, licenses have been granted for the saleof certain controlled products only when a particular benign use (e.g.,financial transactions) could be certified. a related consideration is theextent to which nations cooperate with respect to reexport of a controlledproduct and/or export of their own products. for example, cocom member nations4 in principle agreed to joint controls on the export of certainproducts to the eastern bloc; as a result, certain products could be exported to cocom member nations much more easily than to other nations.at present, there are few clear guidelines that enable vendors to designa product that will have a high degree of assurance of being exportable(chapters 4 and 6). table 7.1 describes various mechanisms that might beused to manage the export of products with encryption capabilities.this remainder of section 7.1 describes a number of options for controlling the export of cryptography, ranging from the sweeping to thedetailed.7.1.2 complete elimination of export controls on cryptographythe complete elimination of export controls (both the usml and thecommerce control list controls) on cryptography is a proposal that goesbeyond most made to date, although certainly such a position has advocates. if export controls on cryptography were completely eliminated, itis possible that within a short time most information technology productsexported from the united states would have encryption capabilities. itwould be difficult for the u.s. government to influence the capabilities ofthese products, or even to monitor their deployment and use worldwide,because numerous vendors would most probably be involved.note, however, that the simple elimination of u.s. export controls oncryptography does not address the fact that other nations may have import controls and/or restrictions on the use of cryptography internally.furthermore, it takes time to incorporate products into existing infrastructures, and slow market growth may encourage some vendors to taketheir time in developing new products. thus, simply eliminating u.s.export controls on cryptography would not ensure markets abroad foru.s. products with encryption capabilities; indeed, the elimination of u.s.4cocom refers to the coordinating committee, a group of western nations (and japan)that agreed to a common set of export control practices during the cold war to control theexport of militarily useful technologies to eastern bloc nations. cocom was disbanded inmarch 1994, and a successor regime known as the new forum is being negotiated as thisreport is being written.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.252cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytotal embargoselective exportprohibitionsselective activityprohibitionstransactionallicensingall or most exports of cryptography to target country prohibited (this wouldbe more restrictive than todayõs regime). hypothetical example: noproducts with encryption capabilities can be exported to vietnam, libya,iraq, iran.certain products with encryption capabilities barred for export to targetcountry. hypothetical example: nothing cryptographically stronger than40bit rc4 can be exported to south africa.exports of cryptography for use in particular activities in target countryprohibited. hypothetical example: pgp allowed for export to prodemocracy groups in peopleõs republic of china but not for government use.products with encryption capabilities require government agency licensingfor export to a particular country or country group. hypothetical example:state department individual validated license for a des encryptionproduct. licensing actions may be conditioned on enduse verification orpostexport verification.appropriate during wartime orother acute national emergencyor when imposed pursuant tounited nations or other broadinternational effort.appropriate when suppliercountries agree on items fordenial and cooperate onrestrictions.appropriate when suppliercountries identify proscribedoperations and agree tocooperate on restrictions.appropriate when product isinherently sensitive for exportto any destination, or whenitems have both acceptable andundesired potentialapplications. also requires aneffective multilateral controlregime.table 7.1mechanisms of export managementtypedescriptionwhen appropriatecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future253bulk licensingpreexportnotificationconditions ongeneral authorityor right to exportpostexportrecordkeepingexporter obtains government authority to export categories of products withencryption capabilities to particular consignees for a specified time period.hypothetical examples: commerce department distribution license, itarforeign manufacturing license. note that categories can be determinedwith considerable freedom. enforcement may rely on afterthefact audits.exporter must prenotify shipment; government agency may prohibit, imposeconditions, or exercise persuasion. hypothetical example: requirementimposed on vendors of products with encryption capabilities to notify theu.s. government prior to shipping product overseas.exporter not required to obtain government agency license but must meetregulatory conditions that preclude highrisk exports. (in general, 40bitrc2/rc4 encryption falls into this category once the commodityjurisdiction procedure has determined that a particular product withencryption capabilities may be governed by the ccl. hypotheticalexample: commerce department general licenses.while no license may be necessary, exporter must keep records of particularsof exports for specified period and submit or make available to governmentagency. hypothetical example: vendor is required to keep records offoreign sales of 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption products under a shippersexport declaration.same as precedingcircumstances, but whenspecific transaction facts arenot critical to effective exportcontrol.generally regarded as aninappropriate export controlmeasure because exportercannot accept lastminuteuncertainty.appropriate when risk ofdiversion or undesired use islow.appropriate when it is possibleto monitor exports of weakcryptography for possiblediversion.source: adapted from national research council, finding common ground: u.s. export controls in a changed global environment, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1990, p. 109.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyexport controls could in itself stimulate foreign nations to impose importcontrols more stringently. appendix g contains more discussion of theseissues.the worldwide removal of all controls on the export, import, and useof products with encryption capabilities would likely result in greaterstandardization of encryption techniques. standardization brought aboutin this manner would result in:¥higher degrees of international interoperability of these products;¥broader use, or at least more rapid spread, of encryption capabilities as the result of the strong distribution capabilities of u.s. firms;¥higher levels of confidentiality, as a result of greater ease in adopting more powerful algorithms and longer keys as standards; and¥greater use of cryptography by hostile, criminal, and unfriendlyparties as they, too, begin to use commercial products with strong encryption capabilities.on the other hand, rapid, largescale standardization would be unlikely unless a few integrated software products with encryption capabilities were able to achieve worldwide usage very quickly. consider, forexample, that although there are no restrictions on domestic use of cryptography in the united states, interoperability is still difficult, in manycases owing to variability in the systems in which the cryptography isembedded. likewise, many algorithms stronger than des are wellknown, and there are no restrictions in place on the domestic use of suchalgorithms, and yet only des even remotely approaches common usage(and not all desbased applications are interoperable).for reasons well articulated by the national security and law enforcement communities (see chapter 3) and accepted by the committee, thecomplete elimination of export controls on products with encryption capabilities does not seem reasonable in the short term. whether exportcontrols will remain feasible and efficacious in the long term has yet to beseen, although clearly, maintaining even their current level of effectiveness will become increasingly difficult.7.1.3 transfer of all cryptography products to thecommerce control listas discussed in chapter 4, the commerce control list (ccl) complements the u.s. munitions list (usml) in controlling the export of cryptography. (box 4.2 in chapter 4 describes the primary difference betweenthe usml and the ccl.) in 1994, representative maria cantwell (dwashington) introduced legislation to transfer all massmarket softwareproducts involving cryptographic functions to the ccl. although thiscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future255legislation never passed, it resulted in the promise and subsequent delivery of an executive branch report on the international market for computer software with encryption.5the cantwell bill was strongly supported by the software industrybecause of the liberal consideration afforded products controlled for export by the ccl. many of the billõs advocates believed that a transfer ofjurisdiction to the commerce department would reflect an explicit recognition of cryptography as a commercial technology that should be administered under a dualuse export control regime. compared to the usml,they argued that the ccl is a more balanced regime that still has considerable effectiveness in limiting exports to target destinations and endusers.on the other hand, national security officials regard the broad authorities of the arms export control act (aeca) as essential to the effective control of encryption exports. the aeca provides authority forcasebycase regulation of exports of cryptography to all destinations,based on national security considerations. in particular, licensing decisions are not governed by factors such as the country of destination, endusers, end uses, or the existence of bilateral or multilateral agreementsthat often limit the range of discretionary action possible in controllingexports pursuant to the export administration act. further, the nationalsecurity provisions of the aeca provide a basis for classifying the specific rationale for any particular export licensing decision made under itsauthority, thus protecting what may be very sensitive information aboutthe particular circumstances surrounding that decision.although sympathetic to the cantwell billõs underlying rationale, thecommittee believes that the bill does not address the basic dilemma ofcryptography policy. as acknowledged by some of the billõs supporters,transfer of a productõs jurisdiction to the ccl does not mean automaticdecontrol of the product, and national security authorities could still haveconsiderable input into how exports are actually licensed. in general, thecommittee believes that the idea of split jurisdiction, in which some typesof cryptography are controlled under the ccl and others under theusml, makes considerable sense given the various national security implications of widespread use of encryption. however, where the splitshould be made is a matter of discussion; the committee expresses its ownjudgments on this point in chapter 8.5department of commerce and national security agency, a study of the internationalmarket for computer software with encryption, prepared for the interagency working groupon encryption and telecommunications policy, office of the secretary of commerce, released january 11, 1996.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.256cryptographyõs role in securing the information society7.1.4 enduse certificationexplicitly exempted under the current international traffic in armsregulations (itar) is the export of cryptography for ensuring the confidentiality of financial transactions, specifically for cryptographic equipment and software that are òspecially designed, developed or modifiedfor use in machines for banking or money transactions, and restricted touse only in such transactions.ó6 in addition, according to senior nationalsecurity agency (nsa) officials, cryptographic systems, equipment, andsoftware are in general freely exportable for use by u.s.controlled foreign companies and to banking and financial institutions for purposesother than financial transactions, although nsa regards these approvalsas part of the casebycase review associated with equipment and products that do not enjoy an explicit exemption in the itar.in principle, the itar could explicitly exempt products with encryption capabilities for use by foreign subsidiaries of u.s. companies, foreigncompanies that are u.s.controlled, and banking and financial institutions. explicit òverticaló exemptions for these categories could do muchto alleviate confusion among users, many of whom are currently uncertain about what cryptographic protection they may be able to use in theirinternational communications, and could enable vendors to make betterinformed judgments about the size of a given market.specific vertical exemptions could also be made for different industries (e.g., health care or manufacturing) and perhaps for large foreignowned companies that would be both the largest potential customers andthe parties most likely to be responsible corporate citizens. inhibiting thediversion to other uses of products with encryption capabilities sold tothese companies could be the focus of explicit contractual language binding the recipient to abide by certain terms that would be required of anyvendor as a condition of sale to a foreign company, as it is today underusml procedures under the itar. enforcement of enduse restrictions isdiscussed in chapter 4.7.1.5 nationbynation relaxation of controls andharmonization of u.s. export control policy on cryptographywith export/import policies of other nationsthe united states could give liberal export consideration to productswith encryption capabilities intended for sale to recipients in a select setof nations;7 exports to nations outside this set would be restricted. na6international traffic in arms regulations, section 121.1, category xiii (b)(1)(ii).7for example, products with encryption capabilities can be exported freely to canadawithout the need of a usml export license if intended for domestic canadian use.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future257tions in the select set would be expected to have a more or less uniform setof regulations to control the export of cryptography, resulting in a morelevel playing field for u.s. vendors. in addition, agreements would beneeded to control the reexport of products with encryption capabilitiesoutside this set of nations.nationbynation relaxation of controls is consistent with the fact thatdifferent countries generally receive different treatment under the u.s.export control regime for military hardware. for example, exports of u.s.military hardware have been forbidden to some countries because theywere terrorist nations, and to others because they failed to sign the nuclearnonproliferation treaty. a harmonization of export control regimes forcryptography would more closely resemble the former cocom approachto control dualuse items than the approach reflected in the unilateralcontrols on exports imposed by the usml.from the standpoint of u.s. national security and foreign policy, aserious problem with harmonization is the fact that the relationship between the united states and almost all other nations has elements of bothcompetition and cooperation that may change over time. the widespreaduse of u.s. products with strong encryption capabilities under some circumstances could compromise u.s. positions with respect to these competitive elements, although many of these nations are unlikely to use u.s.products with encryption capabilities for their most sensitive communications.finally, as is true for other proposals to liberalize u.s. export controlson cryptography, greater liberalization may well cause some other nations to impose import controls where they do not otherwise exist. suchan outcome would shift the onus for impeding vendor interests awayfrom the u.s. government; however, depending on the nature of the resulting import controls, u.s. vendors of information technology productswith encryption capabilities might be faced with the need to conform to amultiplicity of import control regimes established by different nations.7.1.6 liberal export for strong cryptography with weak defaultsan export control regime could grant liberal export consideration toproducts with encryption capabilities designed in such a way that thedefaults for usage result in weak or nonexistent encryption (box 7.1), butalso so that users could invoke options for stronger encryption throughan affirmative action.for example, such a product might be a telephone designed for endtoend security. the default mode of operation could be set in two different ways. one way would be for the telephone to establish a secureconnection if the called party has a comparable unit. the second waycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.258cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 7.1possible examples of weak encryption defaults¥ the product does not specify a minimum password length. many users willgenerate short, and thus poor or weak, passwords.¥ the product does not perform link encryption automatically. the user oneither side of the communication link must select an option explicitly to encrypt thecommunications before encryption happens.¥ the product requires user key generation rather than simple passwords andretains a user key or generates a record of one. users might well accidentally compromise it and make it available, even if they had the option to delete it.¥ the product generates a key and instructs the user to register it.¥ email encryption is not automatic. the sender must explicitly select an encryption option to encrypt messages.would be for the telephone always to establish an insecure connection;establishing a secure connection would require an explicit action by theuser. all experience suggests that the second way would result in farfewer secure calls than the first way.8an export policy favoring the export of encryption products withweak defaults benefits the informationgathering needs of law enforcement and signals intelligence efforts because of user psychology. manypeople, criminals and foreign government workers included, often makemistakes by using products òout of the boxó without any particular attempt to configure them properly. such a policy could also take advantage of the distribution mechanisms of the u.s. software industry tospread weaker defaults.experience to date suggests that good implementations of cryptography for confidentiality are transparent and automatic and thus do notrequire positive user action. such implementations are likely to be chosenby organizations that are most concerned about confidentiality and thathave a staff dedicated to ensuring confidentiality (e.g., by resetting weakvendorsupplied defaults). end users that obtain their products withencryption capabilities on the retail store market are the most likely to beaffected by this proposal, but such users constitute a relatively small partof the overall market.8of course, other techniques can be used to further discourage the use of secure modes.for example, the telephone could be designed to force the user to wait several seconds forestablishment of the secure mode.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future2597.1.7 liberal export for cryptographic applicationsprogramming interfacesa cryptographic applications programming interface (capi; see appendix k) is a welldefined boundary between a baseline product (such asan operating system, a database management program, or a word processing program) and a cryptography module that provides a secure setof cryptographic services such as authentication, digital signature generation, random number generation, and stream or block mode encryption.the use of a capi allows vendors to support cryptographic functions intheir products without actually providing them at distribution.even though such products have no cryptographic functionality per seand are therefore not specifically included in category xiii of the itar (seeappendix n), license applications for the export of products incorporatingcapis have in general been denied. the reason is that strong cryptographic capabilities could be deployed on a vast scale if u.s. vendors exported applications supporting a common capi and a foreign vendor thenmarketed an addin module with strong encryption capabilities.9to meet the goals of less restrictive export controls, liberal exportconsideration could be given to products that incorporate a capi designed so that only òcertifiedó cryptographic modules could be incorporated into and used by the application. that is, the application with thecapi would have to ensure that the capi would work only with certifiedcryptographic modules. this could be accomplished by incorporatinginto the application a check for a digital signature whose presence wouldindicate that the addon cryptographic module was indeed certified; ifand only if such a signature were detected by the capi would the product allow use of the module.one instantiation of a capi is the capi built into applications thatuse the fortezza card (discussed in chapter 5). capi software for fortezzais available for a variety of operating systems and pccard reader types;such software incorporates a check to ensure that the device being used isitself a fortezza card. the fortezza card contains a private digital signature standard (dss) key that can be used to sign a challenge from theworkstation. the corresponding dss public key is made available in the9this discussion refers only to òdocumentedó or òopenó capis, i.e., capis that are accessible to the end user. another kind of capi is òundocumentedó and òclosedó; that is, it isinaccessible to the end user, though it is used by system developers for their own convenience. while a history of export licensing decisions and practices supports the conclusionthat most products implementing òopenó capis will not receive export licenses, historyprovides no consistent guidance with respect to products implementing capis that areinaccessible to the end user.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.260cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 7.2the microsoft cryptoapiin june 1995, microsoft received commodity jurisdiction (cj) to the commercecontrol list (ccl) for windows nt with cryptoapi (a microsoft trademark) plus aòbaseó cryptomodule that qualifies for ccl jurisdiction under present regulations(i.e., it uses a 40bit rc4 algorithm for confidentiality); a similar cj application forwindows õ95 is pending. the òbaseó cryptomodule can be supplemented by acryptomodule provided by some other vendor of cryptography, but the cryptographic applications programming interface within the operating system will function onlywith cryptomodules that have been digitally signed by microsoft, which will provide a digital signature for a cryptomodule only if the cryptomodule vendor certifies that it (the module vendor) will comply with all relevant u.s. export controlregulations. (in the case of a cryptomodule for sale in the united states only, microsoft will provide a digital signature upon the module vendorõs statement to thateffect.)responsibility for complying with export control regulations on cryptography isas follows:¥ windows nt (and windows õ95, should the pending application be successful) qualify for ccl jurisdiction on the basis of a state department export licensingdecision.¥ individual cryptomodules are subject to a casebycase licensing analysis, andthe cryptography vendor is responsible for compliance.¥ applications that use windows nt or windows õ95 for cryptographic servicesshould not be subject to export control regulations on cryptography. at the time of thiswriting, microsoft is seeking an advisory opinion to this effect so that applicationsvendors do not need to submit a request for a cj cryptography licensing decision.capi, and thus the capi is able to verify the authenticity of the fortezzacard.a second approach to the use of a capi has been proposed bymicrosoft and is now eligible for liberal export consideration by the statedepartment (box 7.2). the microsoft approach involves three components: an operating system with a capi embedded within it, modulesproviding cryptographic services through the capi, and applications thatcan call on the modules through the capi provided by the operatingsystem. in principle, each of these components is the responsibility ofdifferent parties: microsoft is responsible for the operating system, cryptography vendors are responsible for the modules, and independent applications vendors are responsible for the applications that run on theoperating system.from the standpoint of national security authorities, the effectivenessof an approach based on the use of a certified capi/module combinationdepends on a number of factors. for example, the product incorporatingcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future261the capi should be known to be implemented in a manner that enforcesthe appropriate constraints on cryptomodules that it calls; furthermore,the code that provides such enforcement should not be trivially bypassed.the party certifying the cryptomodule should protect the private signature key used to sign it. vendors would still be required to supportdomestic and exportable versions of an application if the domestic version was allowed to use any module while the export version was restricted in the set of modules that would be accepted, although the amountof effort required to develop these two different versions would be quitesmall.the use of capis that check for appropriate digital signatures wouldshift the burden for export control from the applications or systems vendors to the vendors of the cryptographic modules. this shift could benefit both the government and vendors because of the potential to reducethe number of players engaged in the process. for example, all of thehundreds of email applications on the market could quickly supportencrypted email by supporting a capi developed by a handful of software and/or hardware cryptography vendors. the cryptography vendors would be responsible for dealing with the export and import controls of various countries, leaving email application vendors to exportfreely anywhere in the world. capabilities such as escrowed encryptioncould be supported within the cryptography module itself, freeing theapplications or system vendor from most technical, operational, and political issues related to export control.a trustworthy capi would also help to support cryptography policies that might differ among nations. in particular, a given nation mightspecify certain performance requirements for all cryptography modulesused or purchased within its borders.10 international interoperability10an approach to this effect is the thrust of a proposal from hewlettpackard. thehewlettpackard international cryptography framework (icf) proposal includes a stampsize òpolicy cardó (smart card) that would be inserted into a cryptographic unit that is apart of a host system. cryptographic functions provided within the cryptographic unitcould be executed only with the presence of a valid policy card. the policy card could beconfigured to enable only those cryptographic functions that are consistent with government export and local policies. the òpolicy cardó allows for managing the use of the integrated cryptography down to the applicationspecific level. by obtaining a new policycard, customers could be upgraded to take advantage of varying cryptographic capabilitiesas government policies or organizational needs change. as part of an icf solution, a network security server could be implemented to provide a range of different security services, including verification of the other three service elements (the card, the host system,the cryptographic unit). sources: carl snyder, hewlettpackard, testimony to the nrccommittee in february 1995; hewlettpackard, international cryptography framework whitepaper, february 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyproblems resulting from conflicting national cryptography policies wouldstill remain.7.1.8 liberal export for escrowable products withencryption capabilitiesas discussed in chapter 5, the administrationõs proposal of august17, 1995, would allow liberal export consideration for software productswith encryption capabilities whose keys are òproperly escrowed.ó inother words, strong cryptography would be enabled for these productsonly when the keys were escrowed with appropriate escrow agents.an escrowed encryption product differs from what might be calledan òescrowableó product. specifically, an escrowed encryption productis one whose key must be escrowed with a registered, approved agentbefore the use of (strong) cryptography can be enabled, whereas anescrowable product is one that provides full cryptographic functionalitythat includes optional escrow features for the user. the user of anescrowable product can choose whether or not to escrow the relevantkeys, but regardless of the choice, the product still provides its full suite ofencryption capabilities.11liberal export consideration for escrowable products could be grantedand incentives promulgated to encourage the use of escrow features.while the shortterm disadvantage of this approach from the standpointof u.s. national security is that it allows encryption stronger than thecurrent 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption allowed under present regulations todiffuse into foreign hands, it has the longterm advantage of providingforeign governments with a tool for influencing or regulating the use ofcryptography as they see fit. currently, most products with encryptioncapabilities do not have builtin features to support escrow built intothem. however, if products were designed and exported with such features, governments would have a hook for exercising some influence.some governments might choose to require the escrowing of keys, whileothers might simply provide incentives to encourage escrowing. in anyevent, the diffusion of escrowable products abroad would raise the awareness of foreign governments, businesses, and individuals about encryption and thus lay a foundation for international cooperation on the formulation of national cryptography policies.11for example, an escrowable product would not enable the user to encrypt files withpasswords. rather, the installation of the product would require the user to create a key orset of named keys, and these keys would be used when encrypting files. the installationwould also generate a protected òsafe copyó of the keys with instructions to users that theyshould register the key òsomewhere.ó it would be up to the users to decide where orwhether to register the keys.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future2637.1.9 alternatives to government certificationof escrow agents abroadas discussed in chapter 5, the administrationõs august 1995 proposalfocuses on an implementation of escrowed encryption that involves the useof òescrow agents certified by the u.s. government or by foreign governments with which the u.s. government has formal agreements consistentwith u.s. law enforcement and national security requirements.ó12 thisapproach requires foreign customers of u.s. escrowed encryption productsto use u.s. escrow agents until formal agreements can be negotiated thatspecify the responsibilities of foreign escrow agents to the united states forlaw enforcement and national security purposes.skeptics ask what incentives the u.s. government would have to conclude the formal agreements described in the august 1995 proposal ifu.s. escrow agents would, by default, be the escrow agents for foreignconsumers. they believe that the most likely result of adopting theadministrationõs proposal would be u.s. footdragging and inordinatedelays in the consummation of formal agreements for certifying foreignescrow agents. appendix g describes some of the u.s. government efforts to date to promote a dialogue on such agreements.the approaches described below address problems raised by certifying foreign escrow agents:¥informal arrangements for cooperation. one alternative is based onthe fact that the united states enjoys strong cooperative law enforcementrelationships with many nations with which it does not have formal agreements regarding cooperation. negotiation of a formal agreement between the united states and another nation could be replaced by presidential certification that strong cooperative law enforcement relationshipsexist between the united states and that nation. subsequent cooperationwould be undertaken on the same basis that cooperation is offered today.¥contractual key escrow. a second alternative is based on the ideathat formal agreements between nations governing exchange of escrowedkey information might be replaced by private contractual arrangements.13a user that escrows key information with an escrow agent, wherever thatagent is located, would agree contractually that the u.s. governmentwould have access to that information under a certain set of carefullyspecified circumstances. a suitably designed exportable product wouldprovide strong encryption only upon receipt of affirmative confirmationthat the relevant key information had been deposited with escrow agentsrequiring such contracts with users. alternatively, as a condition of sale,12see box 5.3, chapter 5.13henry perritt, òtransnational key escrow,ó paper presented at the international cryptography institute 1995 conference, washington, d.c., september 22, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyend users could be required to deposit keys with escrow agents subject tosuch a contractual requirement.7.1.10 use of differential work factors in cryptographydifferential work factor cryptography is an approach to cryptography that presents different work factors to different parties attempting tocryptanalyze a given piece of encrypted information.14 iris associates,the creator of notes, proposed such an approach for lotus notes version4 to facilitate its export, and the u.s. government has accepted it. specifically, the international edition of lotus notes version 4 is designed topresent a 40bit work factor to the u.s. government and a 64bit workfactor to all other parties. it implements this differential work factor byencrypting 24 bits of the 64bit key with the publickey portion of an rsakey pair held by the u.s. government. because the u.s. government caneasily decrypt these 24 bits, it faces only a 40bit work factor when it needsaccess to a communications stream overseas encrypted by the international edition. all other parties attempting to cryptanalyze a message facea 64bit work factor.differential work factor cryptography is similar to partial key escrow(described in chapter 5) in that both provide very strong protectionagainst most attackers but are vulnerable to attack by some specificallychosen authority. however, they are different in that differential workfactor cryptography does not require user interaction with an escrowagent, and so it can offer strong cryptography òout of the box.ó partialkey escrow offers all of the strengths and weaknesses of escrowed encryption, including the requirement that the enabling of strong cryptographydoes require interaction with an escrow agent.7.1.11 separation of cryptography fromother items on the u.s. munitions listas noted in chapter 4, the inclusion of products with encryptioncapabilities on the usml puts them on a par with products intended forstrictly military purposes (e.g., tanks, missiles). an export control regimethat authorized the u.s. government to separate cryptographyña truedualuse technologyñfrom strictly military items would provide muchneeded flexibility in dealing with nations on which the united stateswishes to place sanctions.14recall from chapter 2 that a work factor is a measure of the amount of work that ittakes to undertake a bruteforce exhaustive cryptanalytic search.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future2657.2 alternatives for providing governmentexceptional access to encrypted dataproviding government exceptional access to encrypted data is an issue with a number of dimensions, only some of which relate directly toencryption.7.2.1 a prohibition on the use and sale of cryptographylacking features for exceptional accessone obvious approach to ensuring government exceptional access toencrypted information is to pass legislation that forbids the use of cryptography lacking features for such access, presumably with criminal penaltiesattached for violation. (given that escrowed cryptography appears to bethe most plausible approach to providing government exceptional access,the term òunescrowed cryptographyó is used here as a synonym for cryptography without features for exceptional access.) indeed, opponents ofthe escrowed encryption standard (ees) and the clipper chip have arguedrepeatedly that the ees approach would succeed only if alternatives werebanned.15 many concerns have been raised about the prospect of a mandatory prohibition on the use of unescrowed cryptography.from a law enforcement standpoint, a legislative prohibition on theuse of unescrowed encryption would have clear advantages. its primaryimpact would be to eliminate the commercial supply of unescrowed products with encryption capabilitiesñvendors without a market would mostlikely not produce or distribute such products, thus limiting access ofcriminals to unescrowed encryption and increasing the inconvenience ofevading a prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryption. at the sametime, such a prohibition would leave lawabiding users with strong concerns about the confidentiality of their information being subject to procedures beyond their control.a legislative prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryption alsoraises specific technical, economic, and legal issues.concerns about personal freedomthe clinton administration has stated that it has no intention of outlawing unescrowed cryptography, and it has repeatedly and explicitlydisavowed any intent to regulate the domestic use of cryptography. how15for example, see electronic privacy information center, press release, august 16, 1995,available online at http://www.epic.org.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.266cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyever, no administration can bind future administrations (a fact freely acknowledged by administration officials). thus, some critics of the administration position believe that the dynamics of the encryption problemmay well drive the governmentñsooner or laterñto prohibit the use ofencryption without government access.16 the result is that the administration is simply not believed when it forswears any intent to regulatecryptography used in the united states. two related concerns are raised:¥the òslippery slope.ó many skeptics fear that current cryptographypolicy is the first step down a slippery slope toward a more restrictivepolicy regime under which government may not continue to respect limits in place at the outset. an oftcited example is current use of the socialsecurity number, which was not originally intended to serve as a universal identifier when the social security act was passed in 1935 but has,over the last 50 years, come to serve exactly that role by default, simplybecause it was there to be exploited for purposes not originally intendedby the enabling legislation.¥misuse of deployed infrastructure for cryptography. many skeptics areconcerned that a widely deployed infrastructure for cryptography couldbe used by a future administration or congress to promulgate and/orenforce restrictive policies regarding the use of cryptography. with suchan infrastructure in place, critics argue that a simple policy change mightbe able to transform a comparatively benign deployment of technologyinto an oppressive one. for example, critics of the clipper proposal wereconcerned about the possibility that a secure telephone system with government exceptional access capabilities could, under a strictly voluntaryprogram to encourage its purchase and use, achieve moderate marketpenetration. such market penetration could then facilitate legislation outlawing all other cryptographically secure telephones.1716for example, senator charles grassley (riowa) introduced legislation (the antielectronic racketeering act of 1995) on june 27, 1995, to òprohibit certain acts involving the useof computers in the furtherance of crimes.ó the proposed legislation makes it unlawful òtodistribute computer software that encodes or encrypts electronic or digital communicationsto computer networks that the person distributing the software knows or reasonably shouldknow, is accessible to foreign nationals and foreign governments, regardless of whethersuch software has been designated as nonexportable,ó except for software that uses òauniversal decoding device or program that was provided to the department of justice priorto the distribution.ó17by contrast, a deployed infrastructure could have characteristics that would make itquite difficult to implement policy changes on a short time scale. for example, it would bevery difficult to implement a policy change that would change the nature of the way inwhich people use todayõs telephone system. not surprisingly, policy makers would preferto work with infrastructures that are quickly responsive to their policy preferences.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future267box 7.3bobby inman on the classification of cryptologic researchin 1982, thendeputy director of the central intelligence agency bobby r. inman wrote that[a] . . . source of tension arises when scientists, completely separate from thefederal government, conduct research in areas where the federal governmenthas an obvious and preeminent role for society as a whole. one example isthe design of advanced weapons, especially nuclear ones. another is cryptography. while nuclear weapons and cryptography are heavily dependenton theoretical mathematics, there is no public business market for nuclearweapons. such a market, however, does exist for cryptographic concepts andgear to protect certain types of business communications.[however], . . . cryptologic research in the business and academic arenas, nomatter how useful, remains redundant to the necessary efforts of the federalgovernment to protect its own communications. i still am concerned thatindiscriminate publication of the results of that research will come to theattention of foreign governments and entities and, thereby, could cause irreversible and unnecessary harm to u.s. national security interests. . . . [while]key features of scienceñunfettered research, and the publication of the results for validation by others and for use by all mankindñare essential to thegrowth and development of science, . . . nowhere in the scientific ethos isthere any requirement that restrictions cannot or should not, when necessary,be placed on science. scientists do not immunize themselves from socialresponsibility simply because they are engaged in a scientific pursuit. societyhas recognized over time that certain kinds of scientific inquiry can endangersociety as a whole and has applied either directly, or through scientific/ethicalconstraints, restrictions on the kind and amount of research that can be donein those areas.for the original text of inmanõs article, see òclassifying science: a governmentproposal . . . ,ó aviation week and space technology, february 8, 1982.adding to these concerns are suggestions such as those made by aresponsible and senior government official that even research in cryptography conducted in the civilian sector should be controlled in a legalregime similar to that which governs research with relevance to nuclearweapons design (box 7.3). ironically, former nsa director bobby inmanõscomments on scientific research appeared in an article that called forgreater cooperation between academic scientists and national securityauthorities and used as a model of cooperation an arrangement, recommended by the public cryptography study group, that has worked generally well in balancing the needs of academic science and those of nacryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.268cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytional security.18 nevertheless, inmanõs words are often cited as reflecting a national security mindset that could lead to a serious loss of intellectual freedom and discourse. more recently, fbi director louis freehstated to the committee that òother approaches may be necessaryó if technology vendors do not adopt escrowed encryption on their own. moreover, the current administration has explicitly rejected the premise thatòevery american, as a matter of right, is entitled to an unbreakable encryption product.ó19given concerns about possible compromises of personal and civilliberties, many skeptics of government in this area believe that the safestapproach is for government to stay out of cryptography policy entirely.they argue that any steps in this area, no matter how well intentioned orplausible or reasonable, must be resisted strongly, because such steps willinevitably be the first poking of the camelõs nose under the tent.technical issueseven if a legislative prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryptionwere enacted, it would be technically easy for parties with special needsfor security to circumvent such a ban. in some cases, circumventionwould be explicitly illegal, while in others it might well be entirely legal.for example:¥software for unescrowed encryption can be downloaded from theinternet; such software is available even today. even if posting suchsoftware in the united states were to be illegal under a prohibition, itwould nonetheless be impossible to prevent u.s. internet users fromdownloading software that had been posted on sites abroad.18the arrangement recommended by the public cryptography study group called forvoluntary prepublication review of all cryptography research undertaken in the privatesector. for more discussion of this arrangement, see public cryptography study group,report of the public cryptography study group, american council on education, washington,d.c., february, 1981. a history leading to the formation of the public cryptography studygroup can be found in national research council, òvoluntary restraints on research withnational security implications: the case of cryptography, 19721982,ó in scientific communication and national security, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1982, appendixe, pp. 120125. the acm study on cryptography policy concluded that this prepublicationarrangement has not resulted in any chilling effects in the long term (see susan landau etal., codes, keys and conflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy, association for computing machinery inc., new york, 1994, p. 39.)19òquestions and answers about the clinton administrationõs telecommunications initiative,ó undated document released on april 16, 1993, with òstatement by the press secretary on the clipper chip.ó see the third cpsr cryptography and privacy conference sourcebook, computer professionals for social responsibility, washington, d.c., june 7, 1993, partiii.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future269¥superencryption can be used. superencryption (sometimes alsoknown as double encryption) is encryption of traffic before it is given toan escrowed encryption device or system. for technical reasons, superencryption is impossible to detect without monitoring and attempting todecrypt all escrowencrypted traffic, and such largescale monitoringwould be seriously at odds with the selected and limited nature of wiretaps today.an additional difficulty with superencryption is that it is not technically possible to obtain escrow information for all layers simultaneously,because the fact of double and triple encryption cannot be known inadvance. even if the second (or third or fourth) layers of encryption wereescrowed, law enforcement authorities would have to approach separately and sequentially the escrow agents holding key information forthose layers.¥talent for hire is easy to obtain. a criminal party could easily hirea knowledgable person to develop needed software. for example, an outofwork or underemployed scientist or mathematician from the formersoviet union would find a retainer fee of $500 per month to be a kingõsransom.20¥information can be stored remotely. an obvious noncryptographiccircumvention is to store data on a remote computer whose internet address is known only to the user. such a computer could be physicallylocated anywhere in the world (and might even automatically encryptfiles that were stored there). but even if it were not encrypted, data storedon a remote computer would be impossible for law enforcement officialsto access without the cooperation of the dataõs owner. such remote storage could occur quite legally even with a ban on the use of unescrowedencryption.¥demonstrating that a given communication or data file is òencryptedó is fraught with ambiguities arising from the many different possibilities for sending information:ñan individual might use an obscure data format. for example,while ascii is the most common representation of alphanumeric characters today, unicode (a proposed 16bit representation) and ebcdic (amoreorless obsolete 8bit representation) are equally good for sendingplain english text.20alan cooperman and kyrill belianinov, òmoonlighting by modem in russia,ó u.s.news & world report, april 17, 1995, pp. 4548. in addition, many hightechnology jobs aremoving overseas in general, not just to the former soviet union. see, for example, keithbradsher, òskilled workers watch their jobs migrate overseas,ó new york times, august28, 1995, p. 1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.270cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyñan individual talking to another individual might speak in a language such as navajo.ñan individual talking to another individual might speak in codephrases.ñan individual might send compressed digital data that could easilybe confused with encrypted data despite having no purpose related toencryption. if, for example, an individual develops his own good compression algorithm and does not share it with anyone, that compressedbit stream may prove as difficult to decipher as an encrypted bit stream.21ñan individual might deposit fragments of a text or image that hewished to conceal or protect in a number of different internetaccessiblecomputers. the plaintext (i.e., the reassembled version) would be reassembled into a coherent whole only when downloaded into the computerof the user.22ñan individual might use steganography.23none of these alternative coding schemes provides confidentiality asstrong as would be provided by good cryptography, but their extensiveuse could well complicate attempts by government to obtain plaintextinformation.given so many different ways to subvert a ban on the use ofunescrowed cryptography, emergence of a dedicated subculture is likelyin which the nonconformists would use coding schemes or unescrowedcryptography impenetrable to all outsiders.21a discussion of using text compression for confidentiality purposes can be found in ianwhitten and john cleary, òon the privacy afforded by adaptive text compression,ó computers and security, july 1988, volume 7(4), pp. 397408. one problem in using compressionschemes as a technique for ensuring confidentiality is that almost any practical compression scheme has the characteristic that closely similar plaintexts would generate similarciphertexts, thereby providing a cryptanalyst with a valuable advantage not available if astrong encryption algorithm is used.22jaron lanier, òunmuzzling the internet: how to evade the censors and make a statement, too,ó oped, new york times, january 2, 1996, p. a15.23steganography is the name given to techniques for hiding a message within anothermessage. for example, the first letter of each word in a sentence or a paragraph can be usedto spell out a message, or a photograph can be constructed so as to conceal information.specifically, most blackandwhite pictures rendered in digital form use at most 216 (65,536)shades of gray, because the human eye is incapable of distinguishing any more shades.each element of a digitized blackandwhite photo would then be associated with 16 bits ofinformation about what shade of gray should be used. if a picture were digitized with 24bits of gray scale, the last 8 bits could be used to convey a concealed message that wouldnever appear except for someone who knew to look for it. the digital size of the picturewould be 50% larger than it would ordinarily be, but no one but the creator of the imagewould know.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future271economic concernsan important economic issue that would arise with a legislative prohibition on the use of unescrowed cryptography would involve the political difficulty of mandating abandonment of existing user investments inproducts with encryption capabilities. these investments, considerableeven today, are growing rapidly, and the expense to users of immediatelyhaving to replace unescrowed encryption products with escrowed onescould be enormous;24 a further expense would be the labor cost involvedin decrypting existing encrypted archives and reencrypting them usingescrowed encryption products. one potential mitigating factor for cost isthe short product cycle of information technology products. whetherusers would abandon nonconforming products in favor of new productswith escrowing featuresñknowing that they were specifically designedto facilitate exceptional accessñis open to question.legal and constitutional issueseven apart from the issues described above, which in the committeeõsview are quite significant, a legislative ban on the domestic use ofunescrowed encryption would raise constitutional issues. insofar as aprohibition on unescrowed encryption were treated for constitutionalpurposes as a limitation on the content of communications, the government would have to come forward with a compelling state interest tojustify the ban. to some, a prohibition on the use of unescrowed encryption would be the equivalent of a law proscribing use of a language (e.g.,spanish), which would almost certainly be unconstitutional. on the otherhand, if such a ban were regarded as tantamount to eliminating a methodof communication (i.e., were regarded as contentneutral), then the courtswould employ a simple balancing test to determine its constitutionality.the government would have to show that the public interests were jeopardized by a world of unrestrained availability of encryption, and theseinterests would have to be weighed against the free speech interests sacrificed by the ban. it would also be significant to know what alternative24existing unescrowed encryption products could be kept in place if end users could bemade to comply with a prohibition on the use of such products. in some cases, a smalltechnical fix might suffice to disable the cryptography features of a system; such fixeswould be most relevant in a computing environment in which the software used by endusers is centrally administered (as in the case of many corporations) and provides systemadministrators with the capability for turning off encryption. in other cases, usersñtypically individual users who had purchased their products from retail store outletsñwouldhave to be trusted to refrain from using encryption.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.272cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyforms of methods of anonymous communication would remain availablewith a ban and how freedom of speech would be affected by the specificsystem of escrow chosen by the government. these various considerations are difficult, and in some cases impossible, to estimate in advanceof particular legislation and a particular case, but the first amendmentissues likely to arise with a total prohibition on the use of unescrowedencryption are not trivial.25a step likely to raise fewer constitutional problems, but not eliminatethem, is one that would impose restrictions on the commercial sale ofunescrowed products with encryption capabilities.26 under such a regime, products with encryption capabilities eligible for sale would haveto conform to certain restrictions intended to ensure public safety, in muchthe same way that other products such as drugs, automobiles, and meatmust satisfy particular government regulations. òfreewareó or homegrown products with encryption capabilities would be exempt from suchregulations as long as they were used privately. the problem of alreadydeployed products would remain, but in a different form: new productswould either interoperate or not interoperate with existing alreadydeployed products. if noninteroperability were required, users attemptingto maintain and use two noninteroperating systems would be faced withenormous expenses. if interoperability were allowed, the intent of theban would be thwarted.finally, any national policy whose stated purpose is to prevent theuse of unescrowed encryption preempts decision making that the committee believes properly belongs to users. as noted in chapter 5, escrowed encryption reduces the level of assured confidentiality in exchange for allowing controlled exceptional access to parties that may needto retrieve encrypted data. only in a policy regime of voluntary compliance can users decide how to make that tradeoff. a legislative prohibition on the use or sale of unescrowed encryption would be a clear statement that law enforcement needs for exceptional access to informationclearly outweigh user interests in having maximum possible protection25for a view arguing that relevant fourth and fifth amendment issues would be resolved against a constitutionality of such a prohibition, see michael froomkin, òthe metaphor is the key: cryptography, the clipper chip and the constitution,ó university ofpennsylvania law review, volume 143(3), january 1995, pp. 709897. the committee takes noposition on these fourth and fifth amendment issues.26such a scheme has been suggested by dorothy denning in òthe future of cryptography,ó internet security monthly, october 1995, p. 10. (also available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto.) denningõs paper does not suggest thatòfreewareó be exempt, although her proposal would provide an exemption for personallydeveloped software used to encrypt personal files.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future273for their information, a position that has yet to be defended or even publicly argued by any player in the debate.7.2.2 criminalization of the use of cryptography in thecommission of a crimeproposals to criminalize the use of cryptography in the commission ofa crime have the advantage that they focus the weight of the criminaljustice system on the òbad guyó without placing restrictions on the use ofcryptography by ògood guys.ó further, deliberate use of cryptography inthe commission of a crime could result in considerable damage, either tosociety as a whole or to particular individuals, in circumstances suggesting premeditated wrongdoing, an act that society tends to view as worthyof greater punishment than a crime committed in the heat of the moment.two approaches could be taken to criminalize the use of cryptography in the commission of a crime:¥construct a specific list of crimes in which the use of cryptographywould subject the criminal to additional penalties. for example, using adeadly weapon in committing a robbery or causing the death of someoneduring the commission of a crime are themselves crimes that lead toadditional penalties.¥develop a blanket provision stating that the use of cryptographyfor illegal purposes (or for purposes contrary to law) is itself a felony.in either event, additional penalties for the use of cryptography couldbe triggered by a conviction for a primary crime, or they could be imposed independently of such a conviction. precedents include the lawscriminalizing mail fraud (fraud is a crime, generally a state crime, butmail fraudñuse of the mails to commit fraudñis an additional federalcrime) and the use of a gun during the commission of a felony.intentional use of cryptography in the concealment of a crime couldalso be criminalized. since the use of cryptography is a prima facie act ofconcealment, such an expansion would reduce the burden of proof on lawenforcement officials, who would have to prove only that cryptographywas used intentionally to conceal a crime. providers of cryptographywould be criminally liable only if they had knowingly provided cryptography for use in criminal activity. on the other hand, a law of moreexpansive scope might well impose additional burdens on businesses andraise civil liberties concerns.in considering legal penalties for misuse of cryptography, the question of what it means to òuseó cryptography must be addressed. forexample, if and when encryption capabilities are integrated seamlesslyinto applications and are invoked automatically without effort on the partcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyof a user, should the use of these applications for criminal purposes leadto additional penalties or to a charge for an additional offense? answering yes to this question provides another avenue for prosecuting a criminal (recall that al capone was convicted for income tax evasion ratherthan bank robbery). answering no leaves open the possibility ofprosecutorial abuse. a second question is what counts as òcryptography.ó as noted above in the discussion of prohibiting unescrowed encryption, a number of mathematical coding schemes can serve to obscurethe meaning of plaintext even if they are not encryption schemes in thetechnical sense of the word. these and related questions must be addressed in any serious consideration of the option for criminalizing theuse of cryptography in the commission of a crime.7.2.3 technical nonescrow approachesfor obtaining access to informationescrowed encryption is not the only means by which law enforcement can gain access to encrypted data. for example, as advised bydepartment of justice guidelines for searching and seizing computers,law enforcement officials can approach the software vendor or the justicedepartment computer crime laboratory for assistance in cryptanalyzingencrypted files. these guidelines also advise that òclues to the password[may be found] in the other evidence seizedñstray notes on hardware ordesks; scribble in the margins of manuals or on the jackets of disks. agentsshould consider whether the suspect or someone else will provide thepassword if requested.ó27 moreover, product designs intended to facilitate exceptional access can include alternatives with different strengthsand weaknesses such as link encryption, weak encryption, hidden backdoors, and translucent cryptography.link encryptionwith link encryption, which applies only to communications andstands in contrast to endtoend encryption (box 7.4), a plaintext messageenters a communications link, is encrypted for transmission through thelink, and is decrypted upon exiting the link. in a communication that mayinvolve many links, sensitive information can be found in plaintext format the ends of each link (but not during transit). thus, for purposes ofprotecting sensitive information on an open network accessible to anyone(the internet is a good example), link encryption is more vulnerable than27criminal division, u.s. department of justice, federal guidelines for searching and seizing computers, washington, d.c., july 1994, p. 55.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future275box 7.4link vs. endtoend encryption of communicationsendtoend encryption involves a stream of data traffic (in one or both directions)that is encrypted by the end users involved before it is fed into the communicationslink; traffic in between the end users is never seen in plaintext, and the traffic isdecrypted only upon receipt by an end user. link encryption is encryption performed on data traffic after it leaves one of the end users; the traffic enters one end ofthe link, is encrypted and transmitted, and then is decrypted upon exit from that link.table 7.2 comparison of endtoend and link encryptionendtoend encryptionlink encryptioncontrolling partyuserlink providersuitable trafficmost suitable for encryptionfacilitates bulk encrypof individual messagestion of datapotential leaks ofonly at transmitting andat either end of the link,plaintextreceiving stationswhich may not bewithin the userõs security perimeterpoint of responsibilityuser must take responsibilitylink provider takes responsibilityendtoend encryption, which protects sensitive information from themoment it leaves party a to the moment it arrives at party b. however,from the standpoint of law enforcement, link encryption facilitates legallyauthorized intercepts, because the traffic of interest can always be obtained from one of the nodes in which the traffic is unencrypted.on a relatively closed network or one that is used to transmit datasecurely and without direct user action, link encryption may be costeffective and desirable. a good example would be encryption of thewireless radio link between a cellular telephone and its ground station;the cellular handset encrypts the voice signal and transmits it to theground station, at which point it is decrypted and fed into the landbasednetwork. thus, the landbased network carries only unencrypted voicetraffic, even though it was transmitted by an encrypted cellular telephone.a second example is the òbulkó encryption of multiple channelsñeachindividually unencryptedñover a multiplexed fiberoptic link. in both ofthese instances of link encryption, only those with access to carrier facilicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.276cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytiesñpresumably law enforcement officials acting under proper legal authorizationñwould have the opportunity to tap such traffic.weak encryptionweak encryption allowing exceptional access would have to be strongenough to resist bruteforce attack by unauthorized parties (e.g., businesscompetitors) but weak enough to be cracked by authorized parties (e.g.,law enforcement agencies). however, òweakó encryption is a movingtarget. the difference between cracking strong and weak encryption bybruteforce attack is the level of computational resources that can bebrought to such an attack, and those resources are ever increasing. in fact,the cost of bruteforce attacks on cryptography drops exponentially overtime, in accordance with mooreõs law.28widely available technologies now enable multiple distributed workstations to work collectively on a computational problem at the behest ofonly a few people; box 4.6 in chapter 4 discusses the bruteforce cryptanalysis of messages encrypted with the 40bit rc4 algorithm, and it isnot clear that the computational resources of unauthorized parties can belimited in any meaningful way. in todayõs environment, unauthorizedparties will almost always be able to assemble the resources needed tomount successful bruteforce attacks against weak cryptography, to thedetriment of those using such cryptography. thus, any technical dividing line between authorized and unauthorized decryption would changerather quickly.hidden back doorsa òback dooró is an entry point to an application that permits accessor use by other than the normal or usual means. obviously, a back doorknown to government can be used to obtain exceptional access. backdoors may be open or hidden. an open back door is one whose existenceis announced publicly; an example is an escrowed encryption system,which everyone knows is designed to allow exceptional access.29 by its28mooreõs law is an empirical observation that the cost of computation drops by a factorof two approximately every 18 months.29of course, the fact that a particular product is escrowed may not necessarily be knownto any given user. many users learn about the features of a product through readingadvertisments and operating manuals for the product; if these printed materials do notmention the escrowing features, and no one tells the user, he or she may well remainignorant of them, even though the fact of escrow is òpublic knowledge.ócryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future277nature, an open back door is explicit; it must be deliberately and intentionally created by a designer or implementer.a hidden back door is one whose existence is not widely known, atleast upon initial deployment. it can be created deliberately (e.g., by adesigner who insists on retaining access to a system that he may havecreated) or accidentally (e.g., as the result of a design flaw). often, a userwishing access through a deliberately created hidden back door mustpass through special systemprovided authorization services. almost bydefinition, an accidentally created hidden back door requires no specialauthorization for its exploitation, although finding it may require specialknowledge. in either case, the existence of hidden back doors may or maynot be documented; frequently, it is not.particularly harmful hidden back doors can appear when òsecureóapplications are implemented using insecure operating systems; moregenerally, òsecureó applications layered on top of insecure systems maynot be secure in practice. cryptographic algorithms implemented onweak operating systems present another large class of back doors that canbe used to undermine the integrity and the confidentiality that cryptographic implementations are intended to provide. for example, a database application that provides strong access control and requires authorization for access to its data files but is implemented on an operatingsystem that allows users to view those files without going through thedatabase application does not provide strong confidentiality. such anapplication may well have its data files encrypted for confidentiality.the existence of back doors can pose highlevel risks. the shutdownor malfunction of lifecritical systems, loss of financial stability in electronic commerce, and compromise of private information in databasesystems can all have serious consequences. even if back doors are undocumented, they can be discovered and misused by insiders or outsiders. reliance on òsecurity by obscurityó is always dangerous, becausetrying to suppress knowledge of a design fault is generally very difficult.if a back door exists, it will eventually be discovered, and its discoverercan post that knowledge worldwide. if systems containing a discoveredback door were on the internet or were accessible by modem, massiveexploitation could occur almost instantaneously, worldwide. if backdoors lack a capability for adequate authentication and accountability,then it can be very difficult to detect exploitation and to identify theculprit.translucent cryptographytranslucent cryptography has been proposed by ronald rivest as ancryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.278cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyalternative to escrowed encryption.30 the proposed technical scheme,which involves no escrow of unit keys, would ensure that any givenmessage or file could be decrypted by the government with probability p;the value of p (0 < p < 1) would be determined by the u.s. congress. inother words, on average, the government would be able to decrypt afraction p of all messages or files to which it was given legal access. today(without encryption), p = 1. in a world of strong (unescrowed) encryption, p = 0. a large value of p favors law enforcement, while a small valueof p favors libertarian privacy. rivest proposes that some value of pbalances the interests on both sides.it is not necessary that the value of p be fixed for all time or be madeuniform for all devices. p could be set differently for cellular telephonesand for email, or it could be raised or lowered as circumstances dictated.the value of p would be built into any given encryption device or program.note that in contrast to escrowed encryption, translucent cryptography requires no permanent escrowing of unit keys, although it rendersaccess indeterminate and probabilistic.7.2.4 networkbased encryptionsecurity for voice communicationsin principle, secure telephony can be made the responsibility of telephone service providers. under the current regulatory regime (changingeven as this report is being written), tariffs often distinguish between dataand voice. circuits designated as carrying ordinary voice (also to includefax and modem traffic) could be protected by encryption supplied by theservice provider, perhaps as an extra security option that users couldpurchase. common carriers (service providers in this context) that provide encryption services are required by the communications assistancefor law enforcement act to decrypt for law enforcement authorities uponlegal request. (the òtrusted third partyó (ttp) concept discussed in europe31 is similar in the sense that ttps are responsible for providing keymanagement services for secure communications. in particular, ttpsprovide session keys over secure channels to end users that they can then30ronald rivest, òtranslucent cryptography: an alternative to key escrow,ó paper presented at the crypto 1995 rump session, august 29, 1995.31see, for example, nigel jefferies, chris mitchell, and michael walker, a proposed architecture for trusted third party services, royal holloway, university of london, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future279use to encrypt communications with parties of interest; these keys aremade available to law enforcement officials upon authorized request.)the simplest version of networkbased encryption would provide forlink encryption (e.g., encrypting the voice traffic only between switches).link encryption would leave the user vulnerable to eavesdropping at apoint between the enduser device and the first switching office. in principle, a secure enduser device could be used to secure this òlast mileólink.32whether telecommunications service providers will move ahead ontheir own with networkbased encryption for voice traffic is uncertain fora number of reasons. because most people today either believe that theircalls are reasonably secure or are not particularly concerned about thesecurity of their calls, the extent of demand for such a service within theunited states is highly uncertain. furthermore, by moving ahead in apublic manner with voice encryption, telephone companies would be admitting that calls carried on their network are today not as secure as theycould be; such an acknowledgment might undermine their other businessinterests. finally, making networkbased encryption work internationally would remain a problem, although any scheme for ensuring secureinternational communications will have drawbacks.more narrowly focused networkbased encryption could be used withthat part of the network traffic that is widely acknowledged to be vulnerable to interceptionñnamely, wireless voice communications. wirelesscommunications can be tapped òin the etheró on an entirely passive basis,without the knowledge of either the sending or receiving party. of particular interest is the cellular telephone network; all of the current standards make some provisions for encryption. encryption of the wirelesslink is also provided by the global system for mobile communications(gsm), a european standard for mobile communications. in general,communication is encrypted from the mobile handset to the cell, but notend to end. structured in this manner, encryption would not block theability of law enforcement to obtain the contents of a call, because accesscould always be obtained by tapping the ground station.at present, transmission of most wireless communications is analog.unless special measures are taken to prevent surveillance, analog transmissions are relatively easy to intercept. however, it is widely expected32the òlast mileó is a term describing that part of a local telephone network between thepremises of an individual subscriber and the centraloffice switch from which service isreceived. the vulnerability of the òlast mileó is increased because it is easier to obtainaccess to the physical connections and because the volume of traffic is small enough topermit the relevant traffic to be isolated easily. on the other hand, the vulnerability of theswitch is increased because it is often accessible remotely through dialin ports.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.280cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythat wireless communications will become increasingly digital in the future, with two salutary benefits for security. one is that compared toanalog signals, even unencrypted digital communications are difficult forthe casual eavesdropper to decipher or interpret, simply because they aretransmitted in digital form. the second is that digital communicationsare relatively easy to encrypt.security for data communicationsthe body responsible for determining technical standards for internetcommunications, the internet engineering task force, has developed standards for the internet protocol (version 6, also known as ipv6) that require conforming implementations to have the ability to encrypt datapackets, with the default method of encryption being des.33 however,ipv6 standards are silent with respect to key management, and so leaveopen the possibility that escrow features might or might not be includedat the vendorõs option.if the proposed standards are finalized, vendors may well face ahobsonõs choice: to export internet routing products that do not conformto the ipv6 standard (to obtain favorable treatment under the currentitar, which do not allow exceptions for encryption stronger than 40bitwith rc2 or rc4), or to develop products that are fully compliant withipv6 (a strong selling point), but only for the domestic market. still,33the network working group has described protocols that define standards for encryption, authentication, and integrity in the internet protocol. these protocols are described inthe following documents, issued by the network working group as requests for comments (rfcs) in august 1995:rfctitle1825security architecture for the internet protocol (ip); describes the security mechanisms for ip version 4 (ipv4) and ip version 6 (ipv6).1826ip authentication header (ah); describes a mechanism for providing cryptographic authentication for ipv4 and ipv6 datagrams.1827ip encapsulating security payload (esp); describes a mechanism that works inboth ipv4 and ipv6 for providing integrity and confidentiality to ip datagrams.1828ip authentication using keyed md5; describes the use of a particular authentication technique with ipah.1829the esp descbc transform; describes the use of a particular encryption technique with the ip encapsulating security payload.these documents are available from ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfcnnnn.txt, wherennnn is the rfc number.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future281escrowed implementations of ipv6 would be consistent with the proposed standard and might be granted commodities jurisdiction to thecommerce control list under regulations proposed by the administration for escrowed encryption products.7.2.5 distinguishing between encrypted voice and datacommunications services for exceptional accessfor purposes of allowing exceptional access, it may be possible todistinguish between encrypted voice and data communications, at leastin the short run. specifically, a proposal by the jason study groupsuggests that efforts to install features for exceptional access should focuson secure voice communications, while leaving to market forces the evolution of secure data communications and storage.34 this proposal restson the following propositions:¥telephony, as it is experienced by the end user, is a relativelymature and stable technology, compared to data communications services that evolve much more rapidly. many peopleñperhaps the majority of the populationñwill continue to use devices that closely resemblethe telephones of today, and many more people are familiar with telephones than are familiar with computers or the internet.an important corollary is that regulation of rapidly changing technologies is fraught with more danger than is the regulation of maturetechnologies, simply because regulatory regimes are inherently slow toreact and may well pose significant barriers to the development of newtechnologies. this is especially true in a field moving as rapidly as information technology.¥telephony has a longstanding regulatory and technical infrastructure associated with it, backed by considerable historical precedent, suchas that for law enforcement officials obtaining wiretaps on telephoniccommunications under court order. by contrast, data communicationsservices are comparatively unregulated (box 7.5).¥in remarks to the committee, fbi director louis freeh pointed outthat it was voice communications that drove the fbiõs desire for passageof the communications assistance for law enforcement act (calea); heacknowledged that other mechanisms for communication might be relevant to law enforcement investigations but has undertaken nonlegislativeapproaches to deal with those mechanisms.34jason program office, jason encryption/privacy study, report jsr93520 (unpublished), mitre corporation, mclean, va., 1993.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.282cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybox 7.5two primary rate and service models fortelecommunications todayregulated common carrier telephony servicesregulated common carrier telephony services are usually associated with voicetelephony, including fax and lowspeed modem data communications. if a òcommon carrieró provision applies to a given service provider, the provider must provideservice to anyone who asks at a rate that is determined by a public utilities commission. common carriers often own their own transport facilities (e.g., fiberoptic cables, telephone wires, and so on), and thus the service provider exerts considerablecontrol over the routing of a particular communication. pricing of service for the enduser is often determined on the basis of actual usage. the carrier also providesvalueadded services (e.g., call waiting) to enhance the value of the basic service tothe customer. administratively, the carrier is usually highly centralized.bulk data transportbulk services are usually associated with data transport (e.g., data sent from onecomputer to another) or with òprivateó telephony (e.g., a privately owned or operated branch exchange for telephone service within a company). pricing for bulk services is usually a matter of negotiation between provider and customer and may bebased on statistical usage, actual usage, reliability of transport, regional coverage, orother considerations. policy for use is set by the party that pays for the bulk service,and thus, taken over the multitude of organizations that use bulk services, is administratively decentralized. in general, the customer provides valueadded services.routing paths are often not known in advance, but instead may be determined dynamically.¥demand for secure telephone communications, at least domestically, is relatively small, if only because most users consider todayõs telephone system to be relatively secure. a similar perception of internetsecurity does not obtain today, and thus the demand for highly securedata communications is likely to be relatively greater and should not bethe subject of government interference.under the jason proposal, attempts to influence the inclusion ofescrow features could affect only the hardware devices that characterizetelephony today (e.g., a dedicated fax device, an ordinary telephone). ingeneral, these devices do now allow user programming or additions and,in particular, lack the capability enabling the user to provide encryptioneasily.the jason study also recognized that technical trends in telecommunications are such that telephony will be increasingly indistinguishcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future283able from data communications. one reason is that communications arebecoming increasingly digital. a bit is a bit, whether it was originally partof a voice communication or part of a data communication, and the purpose of a communications infrastructure is to transport bits from point ato point b, regardless of the underlying information content; reconstituting the transported bits into their original form will be a task left to theparties at point a and point b. increasingly, digitized signals for voice,data, images, and video will be transported in similar ways over the samenetwork facilities, and often they will be combined into single multiplexed streams of bits as they are carried along.35for example, a voicegenerated analog sound wave that enters a telephone may be transmitted to a central switching office, at which point itgenerally is converted into a digital bit stream and merged with otherdigital traffic that may originally have been voices, television signals, andhighspeed streams of data from a computer. the network transports allof this traffic across the country by a fiberoptic cable and converts the bitsrepresenting voice back into an analog signal only when it reaches theswitching office that serves the telephone of the called party. to a contemporary user of the telephone, the conversation proceeds just as it mighthave done 30 years ago (although probably with greater fidelity), but thetechnology used to handle the call is entirely different.alternatively, a computer connected to a data network can be converted into the functional equivalent of a telephone.36 some online service providers will be offering voice communications capability in thenear future, and the internet itself can be used today to transport realtime voice and even video communications, albeit with relatively lowfidelity and reliability but also at very low cost.37 before these modalities35note, however, that the difficulty of searching for a given piece of information doesdepend on whether it is voice or text. it is quite straightforward to search a given digitalstream for a sequence of bits that represents a particular word as text, but quite difficult tosearch a digital stream for a sequence of bits that represents that particular word as voice.36for example, an ibm catalogue offers for general purchase a òdsp modem and audiocardó with òtelephony enhancementó that provides a fullduplex speaker telephone for$254. the card is advertised as being able to make the purchaserõs pc into òa telephonecommunications center with telephone voice mail, caller id, and full duplex speakerphonecapability (for true simultaneous, twoway communications).ó see the ibmpc direct sourcebook, fall 1994, p. 43. an article in the hewlettpackard journal describes the ease with whicha telephone option card was developed for a workstation; see s. paul tucker, òhp teleshare:integrating telephone capabilities on a computer workstation,ó hewlettpackard journal,april 1995, pp. 6974.37in january 1996, it was estimated that approximately 20,000 people worldwide are users of internet telephone service. see mike mills, òitõs the netõs best thing to being there,ówashington post, january 23, 1996, p. c1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.284cryptographyõs role in securing the information societybecome acceptable for mainstream purposes, the internet (or its successor) will have to implement on a wide scale new protocols and switchingservices to eliminate current constraints that involve time delays andbandwidth limitations.a second influence that will blur the distinction between voice anddata is that the owners of the devices and lines that transport bits todayare typically the common carriersñfirms originally formed to carry longdistance telephone calls and today subject to all of the legal requirementsimposed on common carriers (see box 7.5). but these firms sell transportcapacity to parties connecting data networks, and much of todayõs bulkdata traffic is carried over communications links that are owned by thecommon carriers. the telecommunications reform act of 1996 will further blur the lines among service providers.the lack of a technical boundary between telephony and data communications results from the way todayõs networks are constructed. networks are built on a protocol òstackó that embodies protocols at differentlayers of abstraction. at the very bottom are the protocols for the physicallayer that define the voltages and other physical parameters that represent ones and zeros. on top of the physical layer are other protocols thatprovide higherlevel services by making use of the physical layer. because the bulk of network traffic is carried over a physical infrastructuredesigned for voice communications (i.e., the public switched telecommunications network), interactions at the physical layer can be quite naturally regarded as being in the domain of òvoice.ó but interactions athigher layers in the stack are more commonly associated with òdata.óacknowledging these difficulties, the jason study concluded thatlimiting efforts to promote escrowed encryption products to those associated with voice communications had two important virtues. first, itwould help to preserve law enforcement needs for access to a communications modeñnamely telephonyñthat is widely regarded as importantto law enforcement. second, it would avoid premature government regulation in the data services area (an area that is less important historicallyto criminal investigation and prosecution than is telephony), thus avoiding the damage that could be done to a strong and rapidly evolving u.s.information technology industry. it would takeñseveral years to a decadeñfor the technical òloopholesó described above to become significant, thus giving law enforcement time to adapt to a new technical reality.7.2.6 a centralized decryption facilityfor government exceptional accessproposed procedures to implement the retrieval of keys escrowedunder the clipper initiative call for the escrowed key to be released by thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future285escrow agencies to the requesting law enforcement authorities upon presentation of proper legal authorization, such as a court order. critics haveobjected to this arrangement because it potentially compromises keys forall timeñthat is, once the key to a specific telephone has been divulged, itis in principle possible to eavesdrop forever on conversations using thattelephone, despite the fact that courtordered wiretaps must have a finiteduration.to counter this criticism, administration officials have designed aplan that calls for keys to be transmitted electronically to ees decryptiondevices in such a way that the decryption device will erase the key at thetime specified in the court order. however, acceptance of this plan relieson assurances that the decryption device would indeed work in this manner. in addition, this proposal is relevant only to the final planñtheinterim procedures specify manual key handling.another way to counter the objection to potential longlasting compromise of keys involves the use of a centralized governmentoperateddecryption facility. such a facility would receive eesencrypted trafficforwarded by law enforcement authorities and accompanied by appropriate legal authorization. keys would be made available by the escrowagents to the facility rather than to the law enforcement authorities themselves, and the plaintext would be returned to the requesting authorities.thus, keys could never be kept in the hands of the requesting authorities,and concern about illicit retention of keys by law enforcement authoritiescould be reduced. of course, concerns about retention by the decryptionfacility would remain, but since the number of decryption facilities wouldbe small compared to the number of possible requesting law enforcementauthorities, the problem would be more manageable. since the decryptionfacilities would likely be under centralized control as well, it would beeasier to promulgate and enforce policies intended to prevent abuse.3838the committee suspects that the likelihood of abusive exercise of wiretap authority isgreater for parties that are farther removed from higher levels of government, although theconsequences may well be more severe when parties closer to the top levels of governmentare involved. a single òbad appleó near the top of government can set a corrupt andabusive tone for an entire government, but at least òbad applesó tend to be politicallyaccountable. by contrast, the number of parties tends to increase as those parties are fartherand farther removed from the top, and the likelihood that at least some of these parties willbe abusive seems higher. (put differently, the committee believes that state/local authorities are more likely to be abusive in their exercise of wiretapping authority simply becausethey do the majority of the wiretaps. note that while title iii calls for a report to be filed onevery federal and state wiretap order, the majority of missing reports are mostly from statewiretap orders rather than federal orders. (see administrative office of the united statescourts, wiretap report, aousc, washington, d.c., april 1995, table 2.)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.286cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyone important aspect of this proposal is that the particular number offacilities constructed and the capacity of each could limit the number ofsimultaneous wiretaps possible at any given time. such a constraintwould force law enforcement authorities to exercise great care in choosing targets for interception, just as they must when they are faced withconstraints on resources in prosecuting cases. a result could be greaterpublic confidence that only wiretaps were being used only in importantcases. on the other hand, a limit on the number of simultaneous wiretapspossible is also a potential disadvantage from the standpoint of the lawenforcement official, who may not wish to make resourcedriven choicesabout how and whom to prosecute or investigate. making encryptionkeys directly available to law enforcement authorities allows them toconduct wiretaps unconstrained by financial and personnel limitations.a centralized decryption facility would also present problems of itsown. for example, many people would regard it as more threatening togive a centralized entity the capability to acquire and decrypt all trafficthan to have such capabilities distributed among local law enforcementagencies. in addition, centralizing all wiretaps and getting the communications out into the field in real time could require a complex infrastructure. the failure of a centralized facility would have more farreachingeffects than a local failure, crippling a much larger number of wiretaps atonce.7.3 looming issuestwo looming issues have direct significance for national cryptography policy: determining the level of encryption needed to protect againsthighquality attacks, and organizing the u.s. government for a societythat will need better information security. appendix m describes twoother issues that relate but are not central to the current debate overcryptography policy: digital cash and the use of cryptography to protectintellectual property.7.3.1 the adequacy of various levels of encryptionagainst highquality attackwhat level of encryption strength is needed to protect informationagainst highquality attack? for purposes of analysis, this discussionconsiders only perfect implementations of cryptography for confidentiality (i.e., implementations without hidden òtrap doors,ó installed on secure operating systems, and so on). thus, the only issue of significancefor this discussion is the size of the key and the algorithm used to encryptthe original plaintext.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future287any cryptanalysis problem can be solved by brute force given enoughcomputers and time; the question is whether it is possible to assembleenough computational resources to allow a bruteforce cryptanalysis on atime scale and cost reasonable for practical purposes.as noted in chapter 4, a message encoded with a 40bit rc4 algorithm was recently broken in 8 days by a bruteforce search through theuse of a single workstation optimized for speed in graphics processing.even so, such a key size is adequate for many purposes (e.g., creditcard purchases). it is also sufficient to deny access to parties with fewtechnical skills, or to those with access to limited computing resources.but if the data being protected is valuable (e.g., if it refers to critical proprietary information), 40bit keys are inadequate from an informationsecurity perspective. the reason is that for logistical and administrativereasons, it does not make sense to require a user to decide what information is or is not criticalñthe simplest approach is to protect both criticaland noncritical information alike at the level required for protecting critical information. if this approach is adopted, the user does not run the riskof inadequately protecting sensitive information. furthermore, the compromise of a single piece of information can be catastrophic, and since it isgenerally impossible to know if a particular piece of information has beencompromised, those with a high degree of concern for the confidentialityof information must be concerned about protecting all information at alevel higher than the thresholds offered by the 8day cryptanalysis timedescribed above.from an interceptorõs point of view, the cryptanalysis times providedby such demonstrations are quite daunting, because they refer to the timeneeded to cryptanalyze a single message. a specific encrypted messagecryptanalyzed in this time may be useful when it is known with highprobability to be useful; however, such times are highly burdensomewhen many messages must be collected and processed to yield one usefulmessage. an eavesdropper could well have considerable difficulty infinding the ciphertext corresponding to critical information, but the information security manager cannot take the chance that a critical piece ofinformation might be compromised anyway.39a larger key size increases the difficulty of a bruteforce search. for39in general, information security managers must develop a model of the threat andrespond to that threat, rather than simply assuming the worst (for which the only possibleresponse would be to do òeverythingó). however, in the case of encryption and in theabsence of governmental controls on technology, strong encryption costs about the same asweak encryption. under such circumstances, it makes no sense at all for the informationsecurity manager to choose weak encryption.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.288cryptographyõs role in securing the information societysymmetric algorithms, a 56bit key entails a work factor that is 216 (65,536)times larger than that of a 40bit key, and implies a search time of about1,430 years to accomplish (assuming that the algorithm using that keywould take about the same time to execute as the rc4 algorithm). usingmore computers could decrease the time proportionally. (a discussion ofkey lengths for asymmetric algorithms is contained in chapter 2.)large speedup factors for search time would be possible through theuse of specialpurpose hardware, which can be optimized to performspecific tasks. estimates have been made regarding the amount of moneyand time needed to conduct an exhaustive key search against a messageencrypted using the des algorithm. recent work by wiener in 1993,40dally in 1994,41 and diffie et al. in 199642 suggest the feasibility of usingspecialpurpose processors costing a few million dollars working in parallel or in a distributed fashion to enable a bruteforce solution of a single56bit des cipher on a time scale of hours. when the costs of design,operation, and maintenance are included (and these costs are generallymuch larger than the cost of the hardware itself), the economic burden ofbuilding and using such a machine would be significant for most individuals and organizations. criminal organizations would have to support an infrastructure for cracking des through bruteforce search clandestinely, to avoid being targeted and infiltrated by law enforcementofficials. as a result, developing and sustaining such an infrastructurewould be even more difficult for criminals attempting to take that approach.such estimates suggest that bruteforce attack against 56bit algorithms such as des would require the significant effort of a wellfundedadversary with access to considerable resources. such attacks would befar more likely from foreign intelligence services or organized criminalcartels with access to considerable resources and expertise, for whom theplaintext information sought would have considerable value, than fromthe casual snoop or hacker who is merely curious or nosy.thus, for routine information of relatively low or moderate sensitivity or value, 56bit protection probably suffices at this time. but for information of high value, especially information that would be valuable to40m.j. wiener, òefficient des key search,ó tr244, may 1994, school of computer science, carleton university, ottawa, canada; presented at the rump session of crypto õ93.41william p. dally, professor of electrical engineering, massachusetts institute of technology, private communication to the committee, september 1995.42matt blaze, whitfield diffie, ronald l. rivest, bruce schneier, tsutomu shimomura,eric thompson, and michael wiener, òminimal key lengths for symmetric ciphers toprovide adequate commercial security: a report by an ad hoc group of cryptographersand computer scientists,ó january 1996. available online at http://www.bsa.org.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future289foreign intelligence services or major competitors, the adequacy in a decade of 56bit encryption against a determined and rich attacker is open toquestion.7.3.2 organizing the u.s. governmentfor better information security on a national basisas noted in chapter 6, no organization or entity within the federalgovernment has the responsibility for promoting information security inthe private sector or for coordinating information security efforts betweengovernment and nongovernment parties. nist is responsible for settingfederal information processing standards, and from time to time the private sector adopts these standards, but nist has authority for informationsecurity only in unclassified government information systems. given thegrowing importance of the private nongovernment sector technologicallyand the dependence of government on the private information infrastructure, security practices of the private information infrastructure may have aprofound effect on government activities, both civilian and military.how can coordination be pursued? coherent policy regarding information assurance, information security, and the operation of the information infrastructure itself is needed. business interests and the privatesector need to be represented at the policymaking table, and a forum forresolving policy issues is needed. and, since the details of implementation are often critical to the success of any given policy, policy implementation and policy formulation must go hand in hand.information security functions that may call for coordinated nationalaction vary in scale from large to small:¥assisting individual companies in key commercial sectors at theirown request to secure their corporate information infrastructures by providing advice, techniques, and analysis that can be adopted at the judgment and discretion of the company involved. in some key sectors (e.g.,banking and telecommunications), conduits and connections for such assistance already exist as the result of government regulation of firms inthose sectors. at present, the u.s. government will provide advice regarding information security threats, vulnerabilities, and solutions onlyto government contractors (and federal agencies).43¥educating users both inside and outside government about vari43this responsibility belongs to the nsa, as specified in the nsanist memorandum ofunderstanding of march 24, 1989 (reprinted in office of technology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, otatct606, u.s. government printingoffice, washington, d.c., september 1994, and in appendix n).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.290cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyous aspects of better information security. for example, many productvendors and potential users are unaware of the fact that there are no legalbarriers to the use of cryptography domestically. outreach efforts couldalso help in publicizing the information security threat.¥certifying appropriate entities that perform some cryptographicservice. for example, a publickey infrastructure for authentication requires trusted certification authorities (appendix h). validating the bonafides of these authorities (e.g., through a licensing procedure) will be anessential aspect of such an infrastructure. in the event that private escrowagents become part of an infrastructure for the wide use of cryptography,such agents will need to be approved or certified to give the public confidence in using them.¥setting de jure standards for information security. as noted above,the nist charter prevents it from giving much weight to commercial orprivate sector needs in the formulation of federal information processingstandards if those needs conflict with those of the federal government,even when such standards affect practice in the private sector. standardsof technology and of practice that guide the private sector should bebased on private sector needs, both to promote òbest practicesó for information security and to provide a legitimate defense in liability cases involving breaches of information security.how such functions should be implemented is another major question. the committee does not wish to suggest that the creation of a neworganization is the only possible mechanism for performing these functions; some existing organization or entity could well be retooled to service these purposes. but it is clear that whatever entity assumes thesefunctions must be highly insulated from political pressure (arguing for ahigh degree of independence from the executive branch), broadly representative (arguing for the involvement of individuals who have genuinepolicymaking authority drawn from a broad range of constituencies, notjust government), and fully capable of hearing and evaluating classifiedarguments if necessary (arguing the need for security clearances).44one proposal that has been discussed for assuming these responsibilities is based on the federal reserve board. the federal reserve boardoversees the federal reserve system (frs), the nationõs central bank. the44as noted in the preface to this report, the committee concluded that the broad outlinesof national cryptography policy can be argued on an unclassified basis. nevertheless, it is areality of decision making in the u.s. government on these matters that classified information may nevertheless be invoked in such discussions and uncleared participants asked toleave the room. to preclude this possibility, participating members should have the clearances necessary to engage as full participants in order to promote an effective interchangeof views and perspectives.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy options for the future291frs is responsible for setting monetary policy (e.g., setting the discountrate), the supervision of banking organizations and open market operations, and providing services to financial institutions. the board of governors is the frsõs central coordinating body. its seven members areappointed by the president of the united states and confirmed by thesenate for 14year terms. these terms are staggered to insulate the governors from daytoday political pressure. its primary function is theformulation of monetary policy, but the board of governors also hassupervisory and regulatory responsibilities over the activities of bankingorganizations and the federal reserve banks.a second proposal has been made by the crossindustry workingteam (xiwt) of the corporation for national research initiatives for theu.s. government to establish a new joint security technology policyboard as an independent agency of the government.45 under this proposal, the board would be an authoritative agency and coordination bodyofficially chartered by statute or executive order òresponsible and answerableó for federal performance across all of its agencies, and for promotion of secure information technology environments for the public. inaddition, the board would solicit input, analysis, and recommendationsabout security technology policy concerns from private sector groups andgovernment agencies, represent these groups and agencies within theboard, disseminate requests and inquiries and information back to thesegroups and agencies, review draft legislation in cognizant areas and makerecommendations about the legislation, and represent the u.s. government in international forums and other activities in the domain of international security technology policy. the board would be chaired by thevice president of the united states and would include an equal number ofmembers appointed from the private sector and the federal government.a third proposal, perhaps more in keeping with the objective of minimal government, could be to utilize existing agencies and organizationalstructures. the key element of the proposal would be to create an explicitfunction in the government, that of domestic information security. becauseinformation policy intersects with the interests and responsibilities of several agencies and cabinet departments, the policy role should arguablyreside in the executive office of the president. placing the policy functionthere would also give it the importance and visibility it requires. it mightalso be desirable to give specific responsibility for the initiation and coordination of policy to a counselor to the president for domestic informa45crossindustry working team, a process for information security technology: an xiwtreport on industrygovernment cooperation for effective public policy, march 1995. availablefrom corporation for national research initiatives, reston, va., or online at http://www.cnri.reston.va.us.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.292cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytion security (dis). this individual could chair an interagency committeeconsisting of agencies and departments with a direct interest in and responsibilities for information security matters, including the operatingagency, economic policy agencies (departments of treasury and commerce), law enforcement agencies (fbi; drug enforcement administration; bureau of alcohol, tobaccco, and firearms), and international affairs and intelligence agencies (departments of state and defense, cia).operationally, a single agency could have responsibility for standardssetting, certification of escrow agents, approval of certificate holders forauthentication purposes, public education on information security, definition of òbest practices,ó management of cryptography on the commercecontrol list, and so on. the operating agency could be one with aneconomic policy orientation, such as the department of commerce. analternative point of responsibility might be the treasury department, although its law enforcement responsibilities could detract from the objective of raising the economic policy profile of the information securityfunction.the public advisory committee, which is an essential element of thisstructure, could be made up of representatives of the computing, telecommunications, and banking industries, as well as òpublicó members fromacademia, law, and so on. this committee could be organized along thelines of the presidentõs foreign intelligence advisory board and couldreport to the counselor for dis.7.4 recapthis chapter describes a number of possible policy options but doesnot attempt to pull together how these options might fit together in acoherent policy framework. that is the function of chapter 8.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2938synthesis, findings, andrecommendations8.1 synthesis and findingsin an age of explosive worldwide growth of electronic data storageand communications, many vital national interests require the effectiveprotection of information. especially when used in coordination withother tools for information security, cryptography in all of its applications, including data confidentiality, data integrity, and user authentication, is a most powerful tool for protecting information.8.1.1 the problem of information vulnerabilitybecause digital representations of large volumes of information areincreasingly pervasive, both the benefits and the risks of digital representation have increased. the benefits are generally apparent to users ofinformation technologyñlarger amounts of information, used more effectively and acquired more quickly, can increase the efficiency withwhich businesses operate, open up entirely new business opportunities,and play an important role in the quality of life for individuals.the risks are far less obvious. as discussed in chapter 1, one of themost significant risks of a digital information age is the potential vulnerability of important information as it is communicated and stored. wheninformation is transmitted in computerreadable form, it is highly vulnerable to unauthorized disclosure or alteration:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294cryptographyõs role in securing the information society¥ many communications are carried over channels (e.g., satellites,cellular telephones, and local area networks) that are easily tapped. tapping wireless channels is almost impossible to detect and to stop, andtapping local area networks may be very hard to detect or stop as well.other electronic communications are conducted through data networksthat can be easily penetrated (e.g., the internet).¥ approximately 10 billion words of information in computerreadable form can be scanned for $1 today (as discussed in chapter 1), allowing intruders, the malicious, or spies to separate the wheat from the chaffvery inexpensively. for example, a skilled person with criminal intentions can easily develop a program that recognizes and records all creditcard numbers in a stream of unencrypted data traffic.1 the decreasingcost of computation will reduce even further the costs involved in suchsearches.¥ many users do not know about their vulnerabilities to the theft orcompromise of information; in some instances, they are ignorant of oreven complacent about them. indeed, the insecurity of computer networks today is much more the result of poor operational practices on thepart of users and poor implementations of technology on the part ofproduct developers than of an inadequate technology base or a poor scientific understanding.in the early days of computing, the problems caused by informationvulnerability were primarily the result of relatively innocent trespasses ofamateur computer hackers who were motivated mostly by technical curiosity. but this is no longer true, and has not been true for some time. thefact that the nation is moving into an information age on a large scalemeans that a much larger number of people are likely to have strongfinancial, political, or economic motivations to exploit information vulnerabilities that still exist. for example, electronic interceptions and othertechnical operations account for the largest portion of economic and industrial information lost by u.s. corporations to foreign parties, as notedin chapter 1.today, the consequences of largescale information vulnerability arepotentially quite serious:¥ u.s. business, governmental, and individual communications are1the feasibility of designing a program to recognize text strings that represent credit cardnumbers has been demonstrated most recently by the first virtual corporation. see pressrelease of february 7, 1996, òfirst virtual holdings identifies major flaw in softwarebasedencryption of credit cards; numbers easily captured by automated program,ó first virtual corporation, san diego, calif. available online at http://www.fv.com/gabletxt/release2796.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations295targets or potential targets for intelligence organizations of foreign governments, competitors, vandals, suppliers, customers, and organized crime.businesses send through electronic channels considerable amounts of confidential information, including items such as project and merger proposals, trade secrets, bidding information, corporate strategies for expansionin critical markets, research and development information relevant to costreduction or new products, product specifications, and expected deliverydates. most importantly, u.s. businesses must compete on a worldwidebasis. international exposure increases the vulnerability to compromiseof sensitive information. helping to defend u.s. business interests againstsuch compromises of information is an important function of law enforcement.¥ american values such as personal rights to privacy are at stake.private citizens may conduct sensitive financial transactions electronically or by telephone. data on their medical histories, including mentalillnesses, addictions, sexually transmitted diseases, and personal healthhabits, are compiled in the course of providing medical care. drivingrecords, spending patterns, credit histories, and other financial information are available from multiple sources. all such information warrantsprotection.¥ the ability of private citizens to function in an information economyis at risk. even today, individuals suffer as criminals take over theiridentities and run up huge credit card bills in their names. toll fraud oncellular telephones is so large that some cellular providers have simplyterminated international connections in the areas that they serve. inaccuracies as the result of incorrectly posted information ruin the credit recordsof some individuals. protecting individuals against such problems warrants public concern and is again an area in which law enforcement andother government authorities have a role to play.¥ the federal government has an important stake in assuring that itsimportant and sensitive political, economic, law enforcement, and military information, both classified and unclassified, is protected from misuse by foreign governments or other parties whose interests are hostile tothose of the united states.¥ elements of the u.s. civilian infrastructure such as the bankingsystem, the electric power grid, the public switched telecommunicationsnetwork, and the air traffic control system are central to so many dimensions of modern life that protecting these elements must have a highpriority. defending these assets against information warfare and crimesof theft, misappropriation, and misuse potentially conducted by hostilenations, terrorists, criminals, and electronic vandals is a matter of nationalsecurity and will require high levels of information protection and strongsecurity safeguards.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.296cryptographyõs role in securing the information society8.1.2 cryptographic solutions to information vulnerabilitiescryptography does not solve all problems of information security; forexample, cryptography cannot prevent a party authorized to view information from improperly disclosing that information. although it is not aòsilver bulletó that can stand by itself, cryptography is a powerful tool thatcan be used to protect information stored and communicated in digitalform: cryptography can help to assure confidentiality of data, to detectunauthorized alterations in data and thereby help to maintain its integrity,and to authenticate the asserted identity of an individual or a computersystem (chapter 2). used in conjunction with other information securitymeasures, cryptography has considerable value in helping lawabiding citizens, businesses, and the nation as a whole defend their legitimate interestsagainst information crimes and threats such as fraud, electronic vandalism,the improper disclosure of national security information, or informationwarfare.modern cryptographic techniques used for confidentiality make itpossible to develop and implement ciphers that are for all practical purposes impossible for unauthorized parties to penetrate but that still makegood economic sense to use.¥ strong encryption is economically feasible today. for example,many integrated circuit chips that would be used in a computer or communications device can inexpensively accommodate the extra elementsneeded to implement the data encryption standard (des) encryptionalgorithm. if implemented in software, the cost is equally low, or evenlower.¥ publickey cryptography can help to eliminate the expense of usingcouriers, registered mail, or other secure means for exchanging keys.compared to a physical infrastructure for key exchange, an electronicinfrastructure based on publickey cryptography to exchange keys will befaster and more able to facilitate secure communications between partiesthat have never interacted directly with each other prior to the first communication. publickey cryptography also enables the implementation ofthe digital equivalent of a written signature, enabling safer electroniccommerce.¥ encryption can be integrated by vendors into enduser applicationsand hardware for the benefit of the large majority of users who do nothave the technical skill to perform their own integration. encryption canalso be made automatic and transparent in ways that require no extraaction on the part of the user, thus ensuring that cryptographic protectionwill be present regardless of user complacency or ignorance.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations2978.1.3 the policy dilemma posed by cryptographythe confidentiality of information that cryptography can provide isuseful not only for the legitimate purposes of preventing informationcrimes (e.g., the theft of trade secrets or unauthorized disclosure of sensitive medical records) but also for illegitimate purposes (e.g., shieldingfrom law enforcement officials a conversation between two terrorists planning to bomb a building). although strong automatic encryption implemented as an integral part of data processing and communications provides confidentiality for ògood guysó against òbad guysó (e.g., u.s.business protecting information against economic intelligence efforts offoreign nations), it unfortunately also protects òbad guysó against ògoodguysó (e.g., terrorists evading law enforcement agencies). under appropriate legal authorization such as a court order, law enforcement authorities may gain access to òbad guyó information for the purpose of investigating and prosecuting criminal activity. similarly, intelligence gatheringfor national security and foreign policy purposes depends on having access to information of foreign governments and other foreign entities.(see chapter 3.) because such activities benefit our society as a whole(e.g., by limiting organized crime and terrorist activities), òbad guyó useof cryptography used for confidentiality poses a problem for society as awhole, not just for law enforcement and national security personnel.considered in these terms, it is clear that the development and widespread deployment of cryptography that can be used to deny governmentaccess to information represents a challenge to the balance of power between the government and the individual. historically, all governments,under circumstances that further the common good, have asserted theright to compromise the privacy of individuals (e.g., through openingmail, tapping telephone calls, inspecting bank records); unbreakable cryptography for confidentiality provides the individual with the ability tofrustrate assertions of that right.the confidentiality that cryptography can provide thus creates conflicts. nevertheless, all of the stakes described aboveñprivacy for individuals, protection of sensitive or proprietary information for businessesand other organizations in the prevention of information crimes, ensuringthe continuing reliability and integrity of nationally critical informationsystems and networks, law enforcement access to stored and communicated information for purposes of investigating and prosecuting crime,and national security access to information stored or communicated byforeign powers or other entities and organizations whose interests andintentions are relevant to the national security and the foreign policyinterests of the united statesñare legitimate. informed public discussionof the issues must begin by acknowledging the legitimacy of both inforcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.298cryptographyõs role in securing the information societymation security for lawabiding individuals and businesses and information gathering for law enforcement and national security purposes.a major difficulty clouding the public policy debate regarding cryptography has been that certain elements have been removed from publicview due to security classification. however, for reasons noted in thepreface, the cleared members of the committee (13 of its 16 members)concluded that the debate over national cryptography policy can becarried out in a reasonable manner on an unclassified basis. althoughmany of the details relevant to policy makers are necessarily classified,these details are not central to making policy arguments one way or theother. classified material, while important to operational matters in specific cases, is not essential to the big picture of why policy has the shapeand texture that it does today nor to the general outline of how technology will, and policy should, evolve in the future.to manage the policy dilemma created by cryptography, the unitedstates has used a number of tools to balance the interests described above.for many years, concern over foreign threats to national security has beenthe primary driver of a national cryptography policy that has sought tomaximize the protection of u.s. military and diplomatic communicationswhile denying the confidentiality benefits of cryptography to foreign adversaries through the use of controls on the export of cryptographic technologies, products, and related technical information (chapter 4). morerecently, the u.s. government has aggressively promoted escrowed encryption as the technical foundation for national cryptography policy,both to serve domestic interests in providing strong protection for legitimate uses while enabling legally authorized access by law enforcementofficials when warranted and also as the basis for more liberal exportcontrols on cryptography (chapter 5).both escrowed encryption and export controls have generated considerable controversy. escrowed encryption has been controversial because its promotion by the u.s. government appears to some importantconstituencies to assert the primacy of information access needs of lawenforcement and national security over the information security needs ofbusinesses and individuals. export controls on cryptography have beencontroversial because they pit the interests of u.s. vendors and some u.smultinational corporations against some of the needs of national security.8.1.4 national cryptography policy for the information agein a world of ubiquitous computing and communications, a concertedeffort to protect the information assets of the united states is critical.while cryptography is only one element of a comprehensive approach toinformation security, it is nevertheless an essential element. given thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations299committeeõs basic charge to focus on national cryptography policy ratherthan national policy for information security, the essence of the committeeõsbasic conclusion about policy is summarized by the following principle:basic principle: u.s. national policy should be changed to supportthe broad use of cryptography in ways that take into account competingu.s. needs and desires for individual privacy, international economiccompetitiveness, law enforcement, national security, and world leadership.in practice, this principle suggests three basic objectives for nationalcryptography policy:1. broad availability of cryptography to all legitimate elements ofu.s. society. cryptography supports the confidentiality and integrity ofdigitally represented information (e.g., computer data, software, video)and the authentication of individuals and computer systems communicating with other computer systems; these capabilities are important invarying degrees to protecting the information security interests of manydifferent private and public stakeholders, including law enforcement andnational security. furthermore, cryptography can help to support lawenforcement objectives in preventing information crimes such as economicespionage.2. continued economic growth and leadership of key u.s. industries and businesses in an increasingly global economy, including butnot limited to u.s. computer, software, and communications companies. such leadership is an integral element of national security. u.s.companies in information technology today have undeniable strengths inforeign markets, but current national cryptography policy threatens toerode these advantages. the largest economic opportunities for u.s. firmsin all industries lie in using cryptography to support their critical domestic and international business activities, including international intrafirmand interfirm communications with strategic partners, cooperative effortswith foreign collaborators and researchers in joint business ventures, andrealtime connections to suppliers and customers, rather than in sellinginformation technology (chapter 4).3. public safety and protection against foreign and domestic threats.insofar as possible, communications and stored information of foreignparties whose interests are hostile to those of the united states should beaccessible to u.s. intelligence agencies. similarly, the communicationsand stored information of criminal elements that are a part of u.s. andglobal society should be available to law enforcement authorities as authorized by law (chapter 3).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.300cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyobjectives 1 and 2 argue for a policy that actively promotes the use ofstrong cryptography on a broad front and that places few restrictions onthe use of cryptography. objective 3 argues that some kind of government role in the deployment and use of cryptography may continue to benecessary for public safety and national security reasons. the committeebelieves that these three objectives can be met within a framework recognizing that on balance, the advantages of more widespread use of cryptography outweigh the disadvantages.the committee concluded that cryptography is one important tool forprotecting information and that it is very difficult for governments tocontrol; it thus believes that the widespread nongovernment use of cryptography in the united states and abroad is inevitable in the long run.cryptography is important because when it is combined with other measures to enhance information security, it gives end users significant control over their information destinies. even though export controls havehad a nontrivial impact on the worldwide spread of cryptography inprevious years, over the long term cryptography is difficult to controlbecause the relevant technology diffuses readily through national boundaries; export controls can inhibit the diffusion of products with encryption capabilities but cannot contain the diffusion of knowledge (chapter4). the spread of cryptography is inevitable because in the informationage the security of information will be as important in all countries asother attributes valued today, such as the reliability and ubiquity of information.given the inevitability that cryptography will become widely available, policy that manages how cryptography becomes available can helpto mitigate the deleterious consequences of such availability. indeed,governments often impose regulations on various types of technologythat have an impact on the public safety and welfare, and cryptographymay well fall into this category. national policy can have an importanteffect on the rate and nature of the transition from todayõs world to that ofthe longterm future. still, given the importance of cryptography to amore secure information future and its consequent importance to variousdimensions of economic prosperity, policy actions that inhibit the use ofcryptography should be scrutinized with special care.the committeeõs policy recommendations are intended to facilitate ajudicious transition between todayõs world of high information vulnerability and a future world of greater information security, while to theextent possible meeting governmentõs legitimate needs for informationgathering for law enforcement, national security, and foreign policy purposes. national cryptography policy should be expected to evolve overtime in response to events driven by an era of rapid political, technological, and economic change.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations301the committee recognizes that national cryptography policy is intended to address only certain aspects of a much larger information security problem faced by citizens, businesses, and government. nevertheless, the committee found that current national policy is not adequate tosupport the information security requirements of an information society. cryptography is an important dimension of information security,but current policy discourages the use of this important tool in both intentional and unintentional ways, as described in chapters 4 and 6. forexample, through the use of export controls, national policy has explicitlysought to limit the use of encryption abroad but has also had the effect ofreducing the domestic availability of products with strong encryptioncapabilities to businesses and other users. furthermore, government action that discourages the use of cryptography contrasts sharply with national policy and technological and commercial trends in other aspects ofinformation technology. amidst enormous changes in the technologicalenvironment in the past 20 years, today the federal government activelypursues its vision of a national information infrastructure, and the use ofcomputer and communications technology by private parties is growingrapidly.the committee believes that a mismatch between the speed at whichthe policy process moves and the speed with which new products develop has had a profound impact on the development of the consensusnecessary with respect to cryptography policy (chapters 4 and 6). thismismatch has a negative impact on both users and vendors. for example,both are affected by an export control regime that sometimes requiresmany months or even years to make casebycase decisions on exportlicensing, while highvalue sales to these users involving integrated products with encryption capabilities can be negotiated and consummated ona time scale of days or weeks. since the basic knowledge underlyingcryptography is well known, cryptographic functionality can be implemented into new products on the time scale of new releases of products(several months to a year). both users and vendors are affected by the factthat significant changes in the export control regulations governing cryptography have not occurred for 4 years (since 1992) at a time when needsfor information security are growing, a period that could have accommodated several product cycles. promulgation of cryptographic standardsnot based on commercial acceptability (e.g., the escrowed encryptionstandard (fips 185), the digital signature standard (fips 1801)) raisedsignificant industry opposition (from both vendors and users) and led tocontroversy and significant delays in or outright resistance to commercialadoption of these standards.these examples suggest that the time scales on which cryptographypolicy is made and is operationally implemented are incompatible withcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe time scales of the marketplace. a more rapid and marketresponsivedecisionmaking process would leverage the strengths of u.s. businessesin the international marketplace before significant foreign competitiondevelops. as is illustrated by the shift in market position from ibm tomicrosoft in the 1980s, the time scale on which significant competition canarise is short indeed.attempts to promote a policy regime that runs against prevailingcommercial needs, practice, and preference may ultimately result in adegree of harm to law enforcement and national security interests fargreater than what would have occurred if a more moderate regime hadbeen promoted in the first place. the reason is that proposed policyregimes that attempt to impose marketunfriendly solutions will inevitably lead to resistance and delay; whether desirable or not, this is a political reality. responsible domestic businesses, vendors, and end users arewilling to make some accommodations to u.s. national interests in lawenforcement and national security, but cannot be expected to do so willingly when those accommodations are far out of line with the needs of themarket. such vendors and users are likely to try to move ahead on theirownñand quickly soñif they believe that government requirements arenot reasonable. moreover, foreign vendors may well attempt to step intothe vacuum. the bottom line is that the u.s. government may have onlya relatively small window of time in which to influence the deployment ofcryptography worldwide.the committee also notes that the public debate has tended to drawlines that divide the policy issues in an overly simplistic manner, i.e.,setting the privacy of individuals and businesses against the needs ofnational security and law enforcement. as observed above, such a dichotomy does have a kernel of truth. but viewed in the large, the dichotomy as posed is misleading. if cryptography can protect the tradesecrets and proprietary information of businesses and thereby reduceeconomic espionage (which it can), it also supports in a most importantmanner the job of law enforcement. if cryptography can help protectnationally critical information systems and networks against unauthorized penetration (which it can), it also supports the national security ofthe united states. framing national cryptography policy in this largercontext would help to reduce some of the polarization among the relevantstakeholders.finally, the national cryptography policy of the united states is situated in an international context, and the formulation and implementationof u.s. policy must take into account international dimensions of theproblem if u.s. policy is to be successful. these international dimensions,discussed in chapter 6 and appendix g, include the international scopeof business today; the possibility of significant foreign competition incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations303information technology; an array of foreign controls on the export, import, and use of cryptography; important similarities in the interests ofthe united states and other nations in areas such as law enforcement andantiterrorist activities; and important differences in other areas such asthe relationship between the government and the governed.8.2 recommendationsthe recommendations below address several critical policy areas.each recommendation is cast in broad terms, with specifically actionableitems identified for each when appropriate. in accordance with the committeeõs finding that the broad picture of cryptography policy can beunderstood on an unclassified basis, no findings or recommendationswere held back on the basis of classification, and this report is unclassifiedin its entirety.recommendation 1: no law should bar the manufacture, sale, oruse of any form of encryption within the united states.this recommendation is consistent with the position of the clintonadministration that legal prohibitions on the domestic use of any kind ofcryptography are inappropriate,2 and the committee endorses this aspectof the administrationõs policy position without reservation.for technical reasons described in chapter 7, the committee believesthat a legislative ban on the use of unescrowed encryption would belargely unenforceable. products using unescrowed encryption are in usetoday by millions of users, and such products are available from manydifficulttocensor internet sites abroad. users could preencrypt theirdata, using whatever means were available, before their data were accepted by an escrowed encryption device or system. users could storetheir data on remote computers, accessible through the click of a mousebut otherwise unknown to anyone but the data owner; such practicescould occur quite legally even with a ban on the use of unescrowed encryption. knowledge of strong encryption techniques is available fromofficial u.s. government publications and other sources worldwide, andexperts understanding how to use such knowledge might well be in highdemand from criminal elements. even demonstrating that a given communication or data file is òencryptedó may be difficult to prove, as algo2for example, see òquestions and answers about the clinton administrationõs encryption policy,ó february 4, 1994. reprinted in david banisar (ed.), 1994 cryptography andprivacy sourcebook, electronic privacy information center, washington, d.c., 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.304cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyrithms for data compression illustrate. such potential technical circumventions suggest that even with a legislative ban on the use of unescrowedcryptography, determined users could easily evade the enforcement ofsuch a law.in addition, a number of constitutional issues, especially those relatedto free speech, would be almost certain to arise. insofar as a ban on theuse of unescrowed encryption would be treated (for constitutional purposes) as a limitation on the òcontentó of communications, the government would have to come forward with a compelling state interest tojustify the ban. these various considerations are difficult, and in somecases impossible, to estimate in advance of particular legislation as applied to a specific case, but the first amendment issues likely to arisewith a ban on the use of unescrowed encryption are not trivial. in addition, many people believe with considerable passion that governmentrestrictions on the domestic use of cryptography would threaten basicamerican values such as the right to privacy and free speech. even if theconstitutional issues could be resolved in favor of some type of ban on theuse of unescrowed encryption, these passions would surely result in apolitical controversy that could divide the nation and at the very leastimpede progress on the way to the full use of the nationõs informationinfrastructure.finally, a ban on the use of any form of encryption would directlychallenge the principle that users should be responsible for assessing anddetermining their own approaches to meeting their security needs. thisprinciple is explored in greater detail in recommendation 3.recommendation 2: national cryptography policy should be developed by the executive and legislative branches on the basis of openpublic discussion and governed by the rule of law.in policy areas that have a direct impact on large segments of thepopulation, history demonstrates that the invocation of official government secrecy often leads to public distrust and resistance. such a result iseven more likely where many members of society are deeply skepticalabout government.cryptography policy set in the current social climate is a case in point.when cryptography was relevant mostly to government interests in diplomacy and national security, government secrecy was both necessaryand appropriate. but in an era in which cryptography plays an importantrole in protecting information in all walks of life, public consensus andgovernment secrecy related to information security in the private sectorare largely incompatible. if a broadly acceptable social consensus thatsatisfies the interests of all legitimate stakeholders is to be found regardcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations305ing the nationõs cryptographic future, a national discussion of the issuemust occur.the nationõs best forum for considering multiple views across theentire spectrum is the u.s. congress, and only comprehensive congressional deliberation and discussion conducted in the open can generate thepublic acceptance that is necessary for policy in this area to succeed. inturn, a consensus derived from such deliberations, backed by explicitlegislation when necessary, will lead to greater degrees of public acceptance and trust, a more certain planning environment, and better connections between policy makers and the private sector on which the nationõseconomy and social fabric rest. for these reasons, congressional involvement in the debate over cryptography policy is an asset rather than aliability. moreover, some aspects of cryptography policy will requirelegislation if they are to be properly implemented (as discussed underrecommendation 5.3).this argument does not suggest that there are no legitimate secrets inthis area. however, in accordance with the committeeõs conclusion thatthe broad outlines of national cryptography policy can be analyzed on anunclassified basis, the committee believes that the u.s. congress can alsodebate the fundamental issues in the open. nor is the committee arguingthat all aspects of policy should be handled in congress. the executivebranch is necessarily an important player in the formulation of nationalcryptography policy, and of course it must implement policy. moreover,while working with the congress, the executive branch must develop acoherent voice on the matter of cryptography policyñone that it does notcurrently haveñand establish a process that is efficient, comprehensive,and decisive in bringing together and rationalizing many disparate agencyviews and interests.instances in which legislation may be needed are found in recommendations 4, 5, and 6.recommendation 3: national cryptography policy affecting the development and use of commercial cryptography should be more closelyaligned with market forces.as cryptography has assumed greater importance to nongovernmentinterests, national cryptography policy has become increasingly disconnected from market reality and the needs of parties in the private sector.as in many other areas, national policy on cryptography that runs counterto user needs and against market forces is unlikely to be successful overthe long term. user needs will determine the largescale demand forinformation security, and policy should seek to exploit the advantages ofmarket forces whenever and wherever possible. indeed, many decades ofcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.306cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyexperience with technology deployment suggest that reliance on userchoices and market forces is generally the most rapid and effective way topromote the widespread utilization of any new and useful technology.since the committee believes that the widespread deployment and use ofcryptography will be in the national interest, it believes that nationalcryptography policy should align itself with user needs and market forcesto the maximum feasible extent.the committee recognizes that considerations of public safety andnational security make it undesirable to maintain an entirely laissezfaireapproach to national cryptography policy. but it believes that government intervention in the market should be carefully tailored to specificcircumstances. the committee describes a set of appropriate governmentinterventions in recommendations 4, 5, and 6.a national cryptography policy that is aligned with market forceswould emphasize the freedom of domestic users to determine cryptographic functionality, protection, and implementations according to theirsecurity needs as they see fit. innovation in technologies such as escrowed encryption would be examined by customers for their businessfitness of purpose. diverse user needs would be accommodated; someusers will find it useful to adopt some form of escrowed encryption toensure their access to encrypted data, while others will find that the risksof escrowed encryption (e.g., the dangers of compromising sensitive information through a failure of the escrowing system) are not worth thebenefits (e.g., the ability to access encrypted data the keys to which havebeen lost or corrupted). since no single cryptographic solution or approach will fit the business needs of all users, users will be free to maketheir own assessments and judgments about the products they wish touse. such a policy would permit, indeed encourage, vendors to implement and customers to use products that have been developed within analreadyexisting framework of generally accepted encryption methodsand to choose key sizes and management techniques without restriction.standards are another dimension of national cryptography policywith a significant impact on commercial cryptography and the market(chapter 6). cryptographic standards that are inconsistent with prevailing or emerging industry practice are likely to encounter significant market resistance. thus, to the maximum extent possible, national cryptography policy that is more closely aligned with market forces shouldencourage adoption by the federal government and private parties ofcryptographic standards that are consistent with prevailing industry practice.finally, users in the private sector need confidence that products withcryptographic functionality will indeed perform as advertised. to themaximum degree possible, national cryptography policy should supportcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations307the use of algorithms, product designs, and product implementations thatare open to public scrutiny. information security mechanisms for widespread use that depend on a secret algorithm or a secret implementationinvite a loss of public confidence, because they do not allow open testingof the security, they increase the cost of hardware implementations, andthey may prevent the use of software implementations as described below. technical work in cryptography conducted in the open can exposeflaws through peer review and assure the private sector user communityabout the quality and integrity of the work underlying its cryptographicprotection (chapter 5).government classification of algorithms and product implementations clearly inhibits public scrutiny, and for the nongovernment sector,government classification in cryptography is incompatible with most commercial and business interests in information security. moreover, the useof classified algorithms largely precludes the use of software solutions,since it is impossible to prevent a determined and technically sophisticated opponent from reverseengineering an algorithm implemented insoftware. a similar argument applies to unclassified companyproprietary algorithms and product designs, although the concerns that arisewith classified algorithms and implementations are mitigated somewhatby the fact that it is often easier for individuals to enter into the nondisclosure agreements necessary to inspect proprietary algorithms and productdesigns than to obtain u.s. government security clearances. legally mandated security requirements to protect classified information also add tocosts in a way that protection of companyproprietary information doesnot.recommendation 4: export controls on cryptography should beprogressively relaxed but not eliminated.for many years, the united states has controlled the export of cryptographic technologies, products, and related technical information as munitions (on the u.s. munitions list (usml) administered by the statedepartment). these controls have been used to deny potential adversaries access to u.s. encryption technology that might reveal important characteristics of u.s. information security products and/or be used to thwartu.s. attempts at collecting signals intelligence information. to date, thesecontrols have been reasonably effective in containing the export of u.s.hardwarebased products with encryption capabilities (chapter 4). however, softwarebased products with encryption capabilities and cryptographic algorithms present a more difficult challenge because they canmore easily bypass controls and be transmitted across national borders.in the long term, as the use of encryption grows worldwide, it is probablecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.308cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythat national capability to conduct traditional signals intelligence againstforeign parties will be diminished (as discussed in chapter 3).the current export control regime on strong cryptography is an increasing impediment to the information security efforts of u.s. firms competing and operating in world markets, developing strategic alliancesinternationally, and forming closer ties with foreign customers and suppliers. some businesses rely on global networks to tie together branchoffices and service centers across international boundaries. other businesses are moving from a concept of operations that relies on high degrees of vertical integration to one that relies on the òoutsourcingó ofmany business functions and activities. consistent with rising emphasison the international dimensions of business (for both business operationsand markets), many u.s. companies must exchange important and sensitive information with an oftenchanging array of foreign partners, customers, and suppliers. under such circumstances, the stronger level ofcryptographic protection available in the united states is not meaningfulwhen an adversary can simply attack the protected information throughforeign channels.export controls also have had the effect of reducing the domesticavailability of products with strong encryption capabilities. as noted inchapter 4, the need for u.s. vendors (especially software vendors) tomarket their products to an international audience leads many of them toweaken the encryption capabilities of products available to the domesticmarket, even though no statutory restrictions are imposed on that market.thus, domestic users face a more limited range of options for strongencryption than they would in the absence of export controls.looking to the future, both u.s. and foreign companies have the technical capability to integrate highquality cryptographic features into theirproducts and services. as demand for products with encryption capabilities grows worldwide, foreign competition could emerge at a level significant enough to damage the present u.s. world leadership in this criticalindustry. today, u.s. information technology products are widely usedin foreign markets because foreign customers find the package of featuresoffered by those products to be superior to packages available from other,nonu.s. vendors, even though the encryption capabilities of u.s. products sold abroad are known to be relatively weak. however, for growingnumbers of foreign customers with high security needs, the incrementaladvantage of superior nonencryption features offered by u.s. productsmay not be adequate to offset perceived deficiencies in encryption capability. under such circumstances, foreign customers may well turn tononu.s. sources that offer significantly better encryption capabilities intheir products.overly restrictive export controls thus increase the likelihood thatcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations309significant foreign competition will step into a vacuum left by the inability of u.s. vendors to fill a demand for stronger encryption capabilitiesintegrated into generalpurpose products. the emergence of significantforeign competition for the u.s. information technology industry has anumber of possible longterm negative effects on u.s. national and economic security that policy makers would have to weigh against the contribution these controls have made to date in facilitating the collection ofsignals intelligence in support of u.s. national security interests (a contribution that will probably decline over time). stimulating the growth ofimportant foreign competitors would undermine a number of importantnational interests:¥ the national economic interest, which is supported by continuing andeven expanding u.s. world leadership in information technology supports. today, u.s. information technology vendors have a window ofopportunity to set important standards and deploy an installed base oftechnology worldwide, an opportunity that should be exploited to themaximum degree possible. conversely, strong foreign competition wouldnot be in the u.s. economic selfinterest.¥ traditional national security interests, which are supported by leadership by u.s. vendors in supplying products with encryption capabilitiesto the world market. for example, it is desirable for the u.s. governmentto keep abreast of the current state of commercially deployed encryptiontechnology, a task that is much more difficult to accomplish when theprimary suppliers of such technology are foreign vendors rather than u.s.vendors.¥ u.s. business needs for trustworthy information protection, which aresupported by u.s. encryption products. foreign vendors could be influenced by their governments to offer for sale to u.s. firms products withweak or poorly implemented cryptography. if these vendors were to gainsignificant market share, the information security of u.s. firms could beadversely affected.¥ influence over the deployment of cryptography abroad, which is supported by the significant impact of u.s. export controls on cryptographyas the result of the strength of the u.s. information technology industryabroad. to the extent that the products of foreign competitors are available on the world market, the united states loses influence over cryptography deployments worldwide.the committee believes that the importance of the u.s. informationtechnology industry to u.s. economic interests and national security islarge enough that some prudent risks can be taken to hedge against thepotential damage to that industry, and some relaxation of export controlson cryptography is warranted. in the long term, u.s. signals intelligencecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.310cryptographyõs role in securing the information societycapability is likely to decrease in any case. consequently, the committeebelieves that the benefits of relaxationñnamely helping to promote betterinformation security for u.s. companies operating internationally and toextend u.s. leadership in this critical industryñare worth the shorttermrisk that the greater availability of u.s. products with stronger encryptioncapabilities will further impede u.s. signals intelligence capability.relaxation of export controls on cryptography is consistent with thebasic principle of encouraging the use of cryptography in an informationsociety for several reasons. first, relaxation would encourage the use ofcryptography by creating an environment in which u.s. and multinationalfirms and users are able to use the same security products in the unitedstates and abroad and thus to help promote better information security foru.s. firms operating internationally. second, it would increase the availability of good cryptography products in the united states. third, it wouldexpand u.s. business opportunities overseas for information technologysales incorporating stronger cryptography for confidentiality by allowingu.s. vendors to compete with foreign vendors on a more equal footing,thereby helping to maintain u.s. leadership in fields critical to nationalsecurity and economic competitiveness (as described in chapter 4).some of these thoughts are not new. for example, in referring to adecision to relax export controls on computer exports, thendeputy secretary of defense william perry said that òhowever much we want to control [computers] that are likely to be available on retail mass markets, itwill be impractical to control them,ó and that òwe have to recognize wedonõt have any ability to control computers which are available on themass retail market from noncocom countries.ó3 he further noted thatthe u.s. government can no longer òset the standards and specificationsof computers. theyõre going to be set in the commercial industry, and ourjob is to adapt to those if we want to stay current in the latest computertechnology.ó the committee believes that exports of information technology products with encryption capabilities are not qualitatively different.at the same time, cryptography is inherently dualuse in character(more so than most other items on the usml), with important applicationsto both civilian and military purposes. while this fact suggests to some thatthe export of all cryptography should be regulated under the commercecontrol list (ccl), the fact remains that cryptography is a particularlycritical military application for which few technical alternatives are available. the usml is designed to regulate technologies with such applications for reasons of national security (as described in chapters 3 and 4), andthus the committee concluded that the current export control regime on3william j. perry, deputy secretary of defense, òbreakfast with reporters, friday, october 15, 1993, on computer exports,ó transcript of an ontherecord briefing.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations311cryptography should be relaxed but not eliminated. the committee believes that this action would have two major consequences:¥ relaxation will achieve a better balance between u.s. economicneeds and the needs of law enforcement and national security.¥ retention of some controls will mitigate the loss to u.s. nationalsecurity interests in the short term, allow the united states to evaluate theimpact of relaxation on national security interests before making furtherchanges, and òbuy timeó for u.s. national security authorities to adjust toa new technical reality.consistent with recommendation 3, the committee believes that theexport control regime for cryptography should be better aligned withtechnological and market trends worldwide. recommendations 4.1 and4.2 below reflect the committeeõs judgments about how the present exportcontrol regime should be relaxed expeditiously. however, it should benoted that some explicit relaxations in the export control regime haveoccurred over the last 15 years (see chapter 4), although not to an extentthat has fully satisfied vendor interests in liberalization. for example,under current export rules, the usml governs the export of softwareapplications without cryptographic capabilities per se if they are designedwith òhooksó that would, among other things, make it easy to interface aforeignsupplied, standalone cryptography module to the application(turning it into an integrated product with encryption capability so far asthe user is concerned). however, the u.s. government set a precedent in1995 by placing on the ccl the software product of a major vendor thatincorporates a cryptographic applications programming interface (capi;as described in chapter 7 and appendix k).recommendation 4.3 is intended to provide for other importantchanges in the export control regime that would help to close the profoundgap described in chapter 4 regarding the perceptions of national securityauthorities vis‹vis those of the private sector, including both technologyvendors and users of cryptography; such changes would reduce uncertainty about the export control licensing process and eliminate unnecessaryfriction between the export control regime and those affected by it.recommendations 4.1 and 4.2 describe changes to the current exportcontrol regime, and unless stated explicitly, leave current regulations andproposals in place. however, the committee believes that certain featuresof the current regime are sufficiently desirable to warrant special attention here. specifically,¥ certain products with encryption capabilities are subject to a moreliberal export control regime by virtue of being placed on the ccl ratherthan the usml; these products include those providing cryptographicconfidentiality that are specially designed, developed, or modified for usecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.312cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyin machines for banking or money transactions and are restricted to useonly in such transactions; and products that are limited in cryptographicfunctionality to providing capabilities for user authentication, access control, and data integrity without capabilities for confidentiality. anychange to the export control regime for cryptography should maintain atleast this current treatment for these types of products.¥ since items on the ccl by definition have potential military uses,they are subject to trade embargoes against rogue nations. thus, evenproducts with encryption capabilities that are on the ccl require individual licenses and specific u.s. government approval if they are intendedfor use by a rogue destination. furthermore, u.s. vendors are prohibitedfrom exporting such products even to friendly nations if they know thatthose products will be reexported to rogue nations. maintaining theembargo of products with encryption capabilities against rogue nationssupports the u.s. national interest and should not be relaxed now or inthe future.finally, the committee notes that relaxation of export controls is onlythe first step on the road to greater use of cryptography around the world.as described in chapter 6 and appendix g, foreign nations are sovereignentities with the power and authority to apply import controls on products with encryption capabilities. it is thus reasonable to consider that arelaxation of u.s. export controls on cryptography may well prompt othernations to consider import controls; in such a case, u.s. vendors may befaced with the need to develop products with encryption capabilities on anationbynation basis. anticipating such eventualities as well as potential markets for escrowed encryption in both the united states and abroad,vendors may wish to develop families of òescrowableó products (as discussed in chapter 7) that could easily be adapted to the requirements ofvarious nations regarding key escrow; however, none of the three recommendations below, 4.1 through 4.3, is conditioned on such development.recommendation 4.1ñproducts providing confidentiality at a levelthat meets most general commercial requirements should be easily exportable.4 today, products with encryption capabilities that incorporate the 56bit des algorithm provide this level of confidentiality andshould be easily exportable.4for purposes of recommendation 4.1, a product that is òeasily exportableó will automatically qualify for treatment and consideration (i.e., commodity jurisdiction, or cj) underthe ccl. automatic qualification refers to the same procedure under which software products using rc2 or rc4 algorithms for confidentiality with 40bit key sizes currently qualifyfor the ccl.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations313a collateral requirement for products covered under recommendation 4.1 is that a product would have to be designed so as to preclude itsrepeated use to increase confidentiality beyond the acceptable level (i.e.,today, it would be designed to prevent the use of tripledes). however,recommendation 4.1 is intended to allow product implementations oflayered encryption (i.e., further encryption of alreadyencrypted data, asmight occur when a product encrypted a message for transmission on analwaysencrypted communications link).for secret keys used in products covered by recommendation 4.1,publickey protection should be allowed that is at least as strong as thecryptographic protection of message or file text provided by those products, with appropriate safety margins that protect against possible attackson these publickey algorithms.5 in addition, to accommodate vendorsand users who may wish to use proprietary algorithms to provide encryption capabilities, the committee believes that products incorporatingany combination of algorithm and key size whose cryptographic characteristics for confidentiality are substantially equivalent to the level allowed under recommendation 4.1 (today, 56bit des) should be grantedcommodity jurisdiction (cj) to the ccl on a casebycase basis.an important collateral condition for products covered under recommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) is that steps should be taken to mitigatethe potential harm to u.s. intelligencecollection efforts that may resultfrom the wider use of such products. thus, the u.s. government shouldrequire that vendors of products with cryptographically provided confidentiality features exported under the relaxed export control regime ofrecommendation 4.1 (and 4.2 below) must provide to the u.s. government under strict nondisclosure agreements (a) full technical specifications of their product, including source code and wiring schematics ifnecessary, and (b) reasonable technical assistance upon request in orderto assist the u.s. government in understanding the productõs internaloperations. these requirements are consistent with those that governexport licenses granted under the casebycase review procedure for cjdecisions today, and the nondisclosure agreements would protect proprietary vendor interests.these requirements have two purposes. first, they would enable theu.s. government to validate that the product complies with all of theconditions required for export jurisdiction under the ccl. second, they5for example, the committee believes that a rivestshamiradelman (rsa) or diffiehellman key on the order of 1,024 bits would be appropriate for the protection of a 56bitdes key. the rsa and diffiehellman algorithms are asymmetric. chapter 2 discusses whykey sizes differ for asymmetric and symmetric algorithms.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.314cryptographyõs role in securing the information societywould allow more costeffective use of intelligence budgets for understanding the design of exported cryptographic systems.note that these requirements do not reduce the security provided bywelldesigned cryptographic systems. the reason is that a welldesignedcryptographic system is designed on the principle that all security afforded by the system must reside in the secrecy of an easily changed,userprovided key, rather than in the secrecy of the system design orimplementation. because the disclosure of internal design and implementation information does not entail the disclosure of cryptographickeys, the security afforded by a welldesigned cryptographic system isnot reduced by these requirements.finally, the level of cryptographic strength that determines the threshold of easy exportability should be set at a level that promotes the broaduse of cryptography and should be adjusted upward periodically as technology evolves.the committee believes that today, products that incorporate 56bitdes for confidentiality meet most general commercial requirements andthus should be easily exportable. the ability to use 56bit des abroad willsignificantly enhance the confidentiality available to u.s. multinationalcorporations conducting business overseas with foreign partners, suppliers, and customers and will improve the choice of products with encryption capabilities available to domestic users, as argued in chapter 4.relaxation of export controls in the manner described in recommendation 4.1 will help the united states to maintain its worldwide marketleadership in products with encryption capabilities. the committee believes that many foreign customers unwilling to overlook the perceivedweaknesses of 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption, despite superior noncryptography features in u.s. information technology products, are likely toaccept desbased encryption as being adequate. global market acceptance of u.s. products incorporating desbased encryption is more conducive to u.s. national security interests in intelligence collection than ismarket acceptance of foreign products incorporating even stronger algorithm and key size combinations that may emerge to fill the vacuum ifu.s. export controls are not relaxed.why des? the data encryption standard was promulgated by thenational bureau of standards in 1975 as the result of an open solicitationby the u.s. government to develop an open encryption standard suitablefor nonclassified purposes. over the last 20 years, des has gained widespread acceptance as a standard for secretkey cryptography and is currently being used by a wide range of users, both within the united statesand throughout the world. this acceptance has come from a number ofvery important aspects that make des a unique cryptographic solution.specifically, des provides the following major benefits:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations315¥ des provides a significantly higher level of confidentiality protection than does 40bit rc2 or rc4, the keysize and algorithm combinationcurrently granted automatic commodity jurisdiction to the ccl. in thecommitteeõs judgment, des provides a level of confidentiality adequateto promote broader uses of cryptography, whereas the public perceptionthat 40bit rc2/rc4 is òweakó does not provide such a level (even thoughthe wide use of 40bit rc2/rc4 would have significant benefits for information security in practice).6¥ since its inception, des has been certified by the u.s. governmentas a highquality solution for nonclassified security problems. althoughfuture certification cannot be assured, its historical status has made it apopular choice for private sector purposes. indeed, a large part of theglobal financial infrastructure is safeguarded by products and capabilitiesbased on des. moreover, the u.s. government has developed a processby which specific des implementations can be certified to function properly, increasing consumer confidence in implementations so certified.¥ the analysis of des has been conducted in open forums over arelatively long period of time (20 years). des is one of a handful ofencryption algorithms that has had such public scrutiny, and no flawshave been discovered that significantly reduce the work factor needed tobreak it; no practical shortcuts to exhaustive search for cryptanalytic attacks on des have been found.¥ des can be incorporated into any product without a licensingagreement or fees. this means that any product vendor can include desin its products with no legal or economic impact on its product lines.¥ des has nearly universal name recognition among both productvendors and users. users are more likely to purchase desbased products because they recognize the name.¥ since many foreign products are marketed as incorporating des,u.s. products incorporating des will not suffer a competitive marketdisadvantage with respect to encryption features.these major benefits of des are the result of the open approach takenin its development and its longstanding presence in the industry. thebruteforce decryption of a single message encrypted with a 40bit rc4algorithm has demonstrated to information security managers around6in other words, the market reality is that a sidebyside comparison of two productsidentical except for their domestic vs. exportable encryption capabilities always results in amarket assessment of the stronger product as providing a òbaselineó level of security andthe weaker one as being inferior, rather than the weaker product providing the baseline andthe stronger one being seen as superior.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.316cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe world that such a level of protection may be inadequate for sensitiveinformation, as described in chapter 4. a message encrypted with a 56bit key would require about 216 (65,536) times as long to break, and sincea 40bit decryption has been demonstrated using a single workstation forabout a week, it is reasonable to expect that a major concerted effort,including the cost of design, operation, and maintenance (generally significantly larger than the cost of the hardware itself), would be requiredfor effective and efficient exhaustivesearch decryption with the larger 56bit key (as described in chapter 7).as described in chapter 7, the economics of des make it an attractivechoice for providing protection within massmarket products and applications intended to meet general commercial needs. when integratedinto an application, the cost of using des in practice is relatively small,whereas the cost of cracking des is significantly higher. since most information security threats come from individuals within an enterprise orindividuals or small organizations outside the enterprise, the use of desto protect information will be sufficient to prevent most problems. thatis, des is ògood enoughó for most information security applications andis likely to be good enough for the next decade because only the mosthighly motivated and wellfunded organizations will be capable of sustaining bruteforce attacks on des during that time.some would argue that des is already obsolete and that what isneeded is a completely new standard that is practically impossible tobreak for the foreseeable future. since computer processing speeds doubleevery 1.5 years (for the same component costs), an exhaustive search forcryptographic keys becomes roughly 1,000 times easier every 15 years orso. over time, any algorithm based on a fixed key length (des uses a 56bit key) becomes easier to attack. while the committee agrees that asuccessor to des will be needed in the notsodistant future, only des hastoday the record of public scrutiny and practical experience that is necessary to engender public confidence. developing a replacement for des,complete with such a record, will take years by itself, and waiting for sucha replacement will leave many of todayõs information vulnerabilities without a viable remedy. adopting des as todayõs standard will do much torelieve pressures on the export control regime stemming from commercial users needing to improve security, and will give the united statesand other nations time to formulate a longterm global solution, whichmay or may not include provisions to facilitate authorized governmentaccess to encrypted data, based on the knowledge gained from emergingescrow techniques, digital commerce applications, and certificate authentication systems, which are all in their infancy today.given that a replacement for des will eventually be necessary, product designers and users would be well advised to anticipate the need tocryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations317upgrade their products in the future. for example, designers may need todesign into the products of today the ability to negotiate cryptographicprotocols with the products of tomorrow. without this ability, a transition to a new cryptographic standard in the future might well be veryexpensive and difficult to achieve.the committee recognizes that the adoption of recommendation 4.1may have a negative impact on the collection of signals intelligence. muchof the general intelligence produced today depends heavily on the abilityto monitor and select items of interest from the large volumes of communications sent in the clear. if most of this traffic were encrypted, even atthe levels allowed for liberal export today, the selection process wouldbecome vastly more difficult. increasing the threshold of liberalexportability from 40bit rc2/rc4 to 56bit des will not, in itself, addsubstantially to the difficulties of message selection. foreign users ofselected channels of highinterest communications would, in many cases,not be expected to purchase and use u.s. encryption products under anycircumstances and thus in these cases would not be affected by a changein the u.s. export control regime. however, it is likely that the generaluse of 56bit des abroad will make it less likely that potentially significant messages can be successfully decrypted.the overwhelming acceptance of des makes it the most natural candidate for widespread use, thereby significantly increasing the security ofmost systems and applications. the committee believes that such anincrease in the òflooró of information security outweighs the additionalproblems caused to national security agencies when collecting information. since des has been in use for 20 years, those agencies will at least befacing a problem that has wellknown and wellunderstood characteristics. recommendation 5 addresses measures that should help nationalsecurity authorities to develop the capabilities necessary to deal with theseproblems.recommendation 4.2ñproducts providing stronger confidentialityshould be exportable on an expedited basis to a list of approved companies if the proposed product user is willing to provide access to decrypted information upon legally authorized request.recommendation 4.1 addresses the needs of most general commercial users. however, some users for some purposes will require encryption capabilities at a level higher than that provided by 56bit des. theadministrationõs proposal to give liberal export consideration to softwareproducts with 64bit encryption provided that those products are escrowed with a qualified escrow agent is a recognition that some userscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.318cryptographyõs role in securing the information societymay need encryption capabilities stronger than those available to the general commercial market.the philosophy behind the administrationõs proposal is that the wideforeign availability of strong encryption will not significantly damageu.s. intelligencegathering and law enforcement efforts if the unitedstates can be assured of access to plaintext when necessary. recommendation 4.2 builds on this philosophy to permit liberal export considerationof products with encryption capabilities stronger than that provided by56bit des to users that are likely to be òtrustworthy,ó i.e., willing tocooperate in providing access to plaintext for u.s. law enforcement authorities when a legally authorized request is made to those companies.(how firms are designated as approved companies is described below.)these approved firms will determine for themselves how to ensure accessto plaintext, and many of them may well choose to use escrowed encryption products. a firm that chooses to use escrowed encryption would befree to escrow the relevant keys with any agent or agents of its ownchoosing, including those situated within the firm itself.note that while recommendation 4.2 builds on the philosophy underlying the administrationõs current software encryption proposal, itstands apart from it. in other words, recommendation 4.2 should not beregarded as a criticism of, as a substitute for, or in contrast to theadministrationõs proposal.from the standpoint of u.s. law enforcement interests, continued inclusion on the list of approved firms is a powerful incentive for a company to abide by its agreement to provide access to plaintext under theproper circumstances. while recommendation 4.2 does not stipulate thatcompanies must periodically requalify for the list, a refusal or inability tocooperate when required might well result in a company being droppedfrom the list and publicly identified as a noncooperating company, andsubject the parties involved to the full range of sanctions that are availabletoday to enforce compliance of product recipients with enduse restrictions (as described in chapter 4).recommendation 4.2 also provides a tool with which the united statescan promote escrowed encryption in foreign nations. specifically, thepresence of escrowed encryption products that are in fact userescrowedwould help to deploy a base of products on which the governments of therelevant nations could build policy regimes supporting escrowed encryption. it has the further advantage that it would speed the deployment ofescrowed encryption in other countries because shipment of escrowedencryption products would not have to wait for the completion of formalagreements to share escrowed keys across international boundaries, adelay that would occur under the current u.s. proposal on escrowedencryption software products.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations319u.s. vendors benefit from recommendation 4.2 because the foreigncustomers on the list of approved companies need not wait for the successful negotiation of formal agreements. moreover, since recommendation 4.2 allows approved companies to establish and control their ownescrow agents, it eliminates the presence or absence of escrowing featuresas a competitive disadvantage. a final benefit for the u.s. vendor community is that recommendation 4.2 reduces many bureaucratic impediments to sales to approved companies on the list, a benefit particularlyvaluable to smaller vendors that lack the legal expertise to negotiate theexport control regime.customers choosing products covered under recommendation 4.2benefit because they retain the choice about how they will provide accessto decrypted information. potential customers objecting to administration proposals on the export of escrowed encryption because their cryptographic keys might be compromised can be reassured that keys to products covered by recommendation 4.2 could remain within their fullcontrol. if these customers choose to use escrowed encryption productsto meet the need for access, they may use escrow agents of their ownchoosing, which may be the u.s. government, a commercial escrow agentas envisioned by the administrationõs proposal, or an organization internal to the customer company.recommendation 4.2 is silent on how much stronger the encryptioncapabilities of covered products would be as compared to the capabilitiesof the products covered by recommendation 4.1. the administration hasargued that the 64bit limit on its current proposal is necessary becauseforeign parties with access to covered products might find a way to bypass the escrowing features. however, recommendation 4.2 covers products that would be used by approved firms that, by assumption, wouldnot be expected to tamper with products in a way that would preventaccess to plaintext when necessary or would bypass the escrowing features of an escrowed encryption product. (the risks inherent in thisassumption are addressed below in requirements 1 through 3 for approved companies.) in addition, the committee observes that providingmuch stronger cryptographic confidentiality (e.g., 80 or 128 bits of key sizerather than 56 or 64) would provide greater incentives for prospectiveusers to adopt these products.what firms constitute the list of approved companies? under currentpractice, it is generally the case that a u.s.controlled firm (i.e., a u.s. firmoperating abroad, a u.s.controlled foreign firm, or a foreign subsidiaryof a u.s. firm) will be granted a usml license to acquire and export for itsown use products with encryption capabilities stronger than that provided by 40bit rc2/rc4 encryption. banks and financial institutions(including stock brokerages and insurance companies), whether u.s.concryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytrolled/owned or foreignowned, are also generally granted usml licenses for stronger cryptography for use in internal communications andcommunications with other banks even if these communications are notlimited strictly to banking or money transactions. such licenses aregranted on the basis of an individual review rather than through a categorical exemption from the usml.building on this practice, the committee believes that this categoryshould be expanded so that a u.s.controlled firm is able to acquire andexport products covered under recommendation 4.2 to its foreign suppliers and customers for the purpose of regular communications with theu.s.controlled firm. a number of usml licenses for cryptography haveimplemented just such an arrangement, but the purpose of recommendation 4.2 is to make these arrangements far more systematic and routine.in addition, foreign firms specifically determined by u.s. authoritiesto be major and trustworthy firms should qualify for the list of approvedcompanies. to minimize delay for u.s. information technology vendorsand to help assure their competitiveness with foreign vendors, a list of thefirms eligible to purchase u.s. products with encryption capabilities and/or the criteria for inclusion on the list should be made available uponrequest. over time, it would be expected that the criteria would grow tobe more inclusive so that more companies would qualify.all firms on this list of approved companies would agree to certainrequirements:¥ requirement 1ñthe firm will provide an enduser certification thatthe exported products will be used only for intrafirm business or by foreign parties in regular communications with the u.s. or approved foreignfirm involved.¥ requirement 2ñthe firm will take specific measures to prevent thetransfer of the exported products to other parties.¥ requirement 3ñthe firm agrees to provide the u.s. governmentwith plaintext of encrypted information when presented with a properlyauthorized law enforcement request and to prove, if necessary, that theprovided plaintext does indeed correspond to the encrypted informationof interest. the use of escrowed encryption products would not be required, although many companies may find such products an appropriate technical way to meet this requirement.the firms on the list of approved companies are likely to have needsfor information security products of the highest strength possible for theenvironment in which they operate, because they are more likely to be thetargets of the major concerted cryptanalytic effort described in recommendation 4.1. on the other hand, some risks of diversion to unintendedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations321purposes do remain, and a firmõs obligation to abide by requirements 1through 3 is a reasonable precaution that protects against such risks. notealso that the approved companies are defined in such a way as to increasethe likelihood that they will be responsible corporate citizens, and as suchresponsive to relevant legal processes that may be invoked if access toplaintext data is sought. further, they are likely to have assets in theunited states that could be the target of appropriate u.s. legal actionshould they not comply with any of the three requirements above.recommendation 4.3ñthe u.s. government should streamline andincrease the transparency of the export licensing process for cryptography.as discussed in chapters 4 and 6, the committee found a great deal ofuncertainty regarding rules, time lines, and the criteria used in makingdecisions about the exportability of particular products. to reduce suchuncertainty, as well as to promote the use of cryptography by legitimateusers, the following changes in the export licensing process should occur.a. for cryptography submitted to the state department for exportlicensing, the presumptive decision should be for approval rather thandisapproval. licensing decisions involving cryptography should be presumed to be approvable unless there is a good reason to deny the license.the committee understands that foreign policy considerations may affectthe granting of export licenses to particular nations, but once nationalsecurity concerns have been satisfied with respect to a particular export,cryptography should not be regarded for export control purposes as differing from any other item on the ccl. thus, if telephone switches wereto be embargoed to a particular nation for foreign policy reasons, cryptography should be embargoed as well. but if telephone switches are allowed for export, cryptography should be allowed if national securityconcerns have been satisfied, even if other items on the usml are embargoed.b. the state departmentõs licensing process for cryptography exports should be streamlined to provide more expeditious decision making. a streamlined process would build on procedural reforms alreadyachieved and might further include the imposition of specific deadlines(e.g., if a license approved by the national security agency (nsa) is notdenied by the state department within 14 days, the license is automatically approved) or the establishment of a special desk within the statedepartment specifically with the expertise for dealing with cryptography; such a desk would consult with country or regional desks but wouldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.322cryptographyõs role in securing the information societynot be bound by their decisions or schedules for action. such streamliningwould greatly reduce the friction caused by exports determined to be consistent with u.s. national security interests but denied or delayed for reasons unrelated to national security.c. the u.s. government should take steps to increase vendor anduser understanding of the export control regime with the intent of bridging the profound gap in the perceptions of national security authoritiesand the private sector, including both technology vendors and users ofcryptography. these steps would build on the efforts already undertakenover the last several years in this area. possible additional steps thatmight be taken to reduce this gap include:¥ sponsorship of an annual briefing regarding the rules and regulations governing the export of cryptography. while established information technology vendors have learned through experience aboutmost of the rules and regulations and informal guidelines that channeldecision making regarding export licenses, newer firms lack a comparable base of experience. the u.s. government should seek a higherdegree of clarity regarding what exporting vendors must do to satisfynational security concerns.¥ clarification of the rules regarding export of technical data. forexample, foreign students attending u.s. universities can be exposedto any cryptographic source code without consequence, whereas u.s.vendors violate the law in developing products with encryption capabilities if they hire nonu.s. citizens to work as designers orimplementors. for very complex products, it is very difficult if notimpossible to òpartitionó the projects so that the nonu.s. citizen isunable to gain access to the cryptographic code. such apparent inconsistencies should be reconciled, keeping in mind practicality and enforceability.recommendation 5: the u.s. government should take steps to assist law enforcement and national security to adjust to new technicalrealities of the information age.for both law enforcement and national security, cryptography is atwoedged sword. in the realm of national security, the use of cryptography by adversaries impedes the collection of signals intelligence. managing the damage to the collection of signals intelligence is the focus ofexport controls, as discussed in chapter 4 and in the text accompanyingrecommendation 4. at the same time, cryptography can help to defendvital information assets of the united states; the use of cryptography inthis role is discussed in recommendations 5.1 and 5.2 below.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations323from the standpoint of law enforcement, cryptography provides toolsthat help to prevent crime, e.g., by helping lawabiding businesses andindividuals defend themselves against information crimes, such as thetheft of proprietary information and the impersonation of legitimate parties by illegitimate ones. crime prevention is an important dimension oflaw enforcement, especially when the crimes prevented are difficult todetect. nevertheless, the public debate to date has focused primarily onthe impact of cryptography on criminal prosecutions and investigations.the committee accepts that the onset of an information age is likely tocreate many new challenges for public safety, among them the greater useof cryptography by criminal elements of society. if law enforcement authorities are unable to gain access to the encrypted communications andstored information of criminals, some criminal prosecutions will be significantly impaired, as described in chapter 3.the administrationõs response to this law enforcement problem hasbeen the aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption as a pillar of thetechnical foundation for national cryptography policy. the committeeunderstands the administrationõs rationale for promoting escrowed encryption but believes that escrowed encryption should be only one part ofan overall strategy for dealing with the problems that encryption posesfor law enforcement and national security.in the context of an overall strategy, it is important to examine thespecific problems that escrowed encryption might solve. for example,administration advocates of escrowed encryption have argued that theprivate sector needs techniques for recovering the plaintext of stored encrypted data for which the relevant keys have been lost. to the extent thatthis is true, the law enforcement need for access to encrypted recordscould be substantially met by the exercise of the governmentõs compulsory process authority (including search warrants and subpoenas) forinformation relevant to the investigation and prosecution of criminal activity against both the encrypted records and any relevant cryptographickeys, whether held by outside escrow agents or by the targets of thecompulsory process. in this way, law enforcement needs for access toencrypted files, records, and stored communications such as email arelikely to be met by mechanisms established to serve private sector needs.communications (i.e., digital information in transit) pose a differentproblem from that of data storage. neither private individuals nor businesses have substantial needs for exceptional access to the plaintext ofencrypted communications. thus, it is unlikely that users would voluntarily adopt on a large scale measures intended to ensure exceptionalaccess to such communications. law enforcement authorities are understandably concerned that they will be denied information vital for theinvestigation and prosecution of criminal activity. at the same time, it iscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.324cryptographyõs role in securing the information societynot clear that encrypted digital communications will in fact be the mostimportant problem for law enforcement authorities seeking to gain accessto digital information.in the short term, voice communications are almost certainly moreimportant to law enforcement than are data communications, a problemaddressed through recommendation 5.2. over the longer term, the challenges to law enforcement authorities from data communications arelikely to grow as data communications become more ubiquitous and asthe technical distinction between voice and data blurs. the committeebelieves that advanced information technologies are likely to lead to explosive increases in the amount of electronic information being transmitted (e.g., email); given the likelihood that the spread of encryption capabilities will be much slower than the rate at which the volume of electroniccommunications increases, the opportunities for authorized law enforcement exploitation of larger amounts of unprotected computerreadableinformation may well increase in the short run. nevertheless, when encrypted data communications do become ubiquitous, law enforcementmay well face a serious challenge. for this reason, recommendation 5.3,dealing with an exploration of escrowed encryption, sets into motion aprudent òhedgeó strategy against this eventuality; recommendation 5.4begins the process of seeking to discourage criminal use of cryptography;and recommendation 5.5 addresses the development of new technicalcapabilities to meet the challenge of encryption.against this backdrop, recommendation 5.3 is only one part of anoverall strategy for dealing with the problems that encryption poses forlaw enforcement and national security.recommendation 5.1ñthe u.s. government should actively encourage the use of cryptography in nonconfidentiality applications suchas user authentication and integrity checks.the nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography (e.g., digital signatures, authentication and access controls, nonrepudiation, secure time/date stamps, integrity checks) do not directly threaten law enforcement ornational security interests and do not in general pose the same policydilemma as confidentiality does. since the deployment of infrastructuresfor the nonconfidentiality uses of cryptography is a necessary (though notsufficient) condition for the use of cryptography for confidentiality, thenation may take large steps in this area without having to resolve thepolicy dilemmas over confidentiality, confident that those steps will bebeneficial to the nation in their own right. policy can and should promotenonconfidentiality applications of cryptography in all relevant areas.one of the most important of these areas concerns protection againstcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations325systemic national vulnerabilities. indeed, in areas in which confidence inand availability of a national information network are most critical, nonconfidentiality uses of cryptography are even more important than arecapabilities for confidentiality. for example, ensuring the integrity of datathat circulates in the air traffic control system is almost certainly moreimportant than ensuring its confidentiality; ensuring the integrity (accuracy) of data in the banking system is often more important than ensuringits confidentiality.7nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography support reliable userauthentication. authentication of users is an important crimefightingmeasure, because authentication is the antithesis of anonymity. criminals in general seek to conceal their identities; reliable authentication capabilities can help to prevent unauthorized access and to audit improperaccesses that do occur. nonconfidentiality applications of cryptographysupport reliable integrity checks on data; used properly, they can help toreduce crimes that result from the alteration of data (such as changing thepayable amount on a check).to date, national cryptography policy has not fully supported thesenonconfidentiality uses. some actions have been taken in this area, butthese actions have run afoul of government concerns about confidentiality. for example, the government issued a federal information processing standard (fips) for the digital signature standard in 1993, based onan unclassified algorithm known as the digital signature algorithm. thisfips was strongly criticized by industry and the public, largely because itdid not conform to the de facto standard already in use at the time, namelyone based on the rivestshamiradelman (rsa) algorithm. governmentsources told the committee that one reason the government deemed thersa algorithm inappropriate for promulgation as a fips was that it iscapable of providing strong confidentiality (and thus is not freely exportable) as well as digital signature capability. the two other reasons werethe desire to promulgate an approach to digital signatures that would beroyaltyfree (rsa is a patented algorithm) and the desire to reduce overallsystem costs for digital signatures.8 export controls on cryptography forconfidentiality have also had some spillover effect in affecting the foreign7this is not to say that confidentiality plays no role in protecting national informationsystems from unauthorized penetration. as noted in chapter 2, cryptographically provided confidentiality can be one important (though secondary) dimension of protectinginformation systems from unauthorized penetration.8for a discussion of the patent issues involved in the decision regarding the digital signature standard and the concern over confidentiality, see office of technology assessment,information security and privacy in network environments, otatct606, u.s. governmentprinting office, washington, d.c., 1994, pp. 167168 and pp. 217222.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.326cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyavailability of cryptography for authentication purposes, as described inchapter 4.the government has expressed considerably more concern in the public debate regarding the deleterious impact of widespread cryptographyused for confidentiality than over the deleterious impact of not deployingcryptographic capabilities for user authentication and data integrity. thegovernment has not fully exercised the regulatory influence it does haveover certain sectors (e.g., telecommunications, air traffic control) to promote higher degrees of information security that would be met throughthe deployment of nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography. finally, the committee believes that since todayõs trend among vendors andusers is to build and use products that integrate multiple cryptographiccapabilities (for confidentiality and for authentication and integrity) withgeneralpurpose functionality, government actions that discourage capabilities for confidentiality also tend to discourage the development anduse of products with authentication and integrity capabilities even if thereis no direct prohibition or restriction on products with only capabilitiesfor the latter (chapter 4).what specific actions can the government take to promote nonconfidentiality applications of cryptography? for illustrative purposes only,the committee notes that the government could support and foster technical standards and/or standards for business practices that encouragenonconfidentiality uses based on de facto commercial standards. oneexample would be the promulgation of a business requirement that alldata electronically provided to the government be certified with an integrity check and a digital signature. a second example would be enactmentof legislation and associated regulations setting standards to which allcommercial certification authorities should conform; greater clarity regarding the liabilities, obligations, and responsibilities for certificate authorities would undoubtedly help to promote applications based on certification authorities. a third example is that the u.s. government has agreat deal of expertise in the use of cryptography and other technologiesfor authentication purposes; an aggressive technology transfer effort inthis domain would also help to promote the use of reliable authenticationmethods.a final dimension of this issue is that keys used in nonconfidentialityapplications of cryptography, especially ones that support establishedand essential business practices or legal constructs (e.g., digital signatures, authentication, integrity checks), must be controlled solely by theimmediate and intended parties to those applications. without such assurances, outside access to such keys could undermine the legal basis andthreaten the integrity of these practices carried out in the electronic domain. whatever benefits might accrue to government authorities actingcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations327in the interests of public safety or national security from being able toforge digital signatures or alter digital data clandestinely would pale bycomparison to the loss of trust in such mechanisms that would result fromeven a hint that such activities were possible.recommendation 5.2ñthe u.s. government should promote thesecurity of the telecommunications networks more actively. at a minimum, the u.s. government should promote the link encryption of cellular communications9 and the improvement of security at telephoneswitches.as described in chapter 1, the public switched telecommunicationsnetwork (pstn) is both critical to many sectors of the national economyand is undergoing rapid evolution. while the u.s. government has takensome steps to improve the security of the pstn, much more could bedone based on the regulatory authority that the u.s. government has inthis area.the encryption of wireless voice communications would prevent eavesdropping that is all too easy in todayõs largely analog cellular telephonemarket. as wireless communications shift from analog to digital modes oftransport, encryption will become easier even as the traffic itself becomesharder to understand. a requirement to encrypt wireless communicationsmay also accelerate the shift to wireless modes of digital transport. however, because of the cost of retrofitting existing cellular services, this recommendation is intended to apply only to the deployment of future cellularservices.security in telephone switches could be improved in many ways. forexample, a requirement for adequate authentication to access such switcheswould prevent unauthorized access from maintenance ports; such portsoften provide remote access to all switch functions, a level of access equal towhat could be obtained by an individual standing in the control center. yetsuch ports are often protected with nothing more than a single password.telecommunications service providers could also provide services for linkencryption of traffic on wired landlines (chapter 7).by addressing through the telecommunications service providers thepublicõs demands for greater security in voice communications (especially9òlink encryptionó refers to the practice of encrypting information being communicatedin such a way that it is encrypted only in between the node from which it is sent and thenode where it is received; while the information is at the nodes themselves, it isunencrypted. in the context of link encryption for cellular communications, a cellular callwould be encrypted between the mobile handset and the ground station. when carried onthe landlines of the telephone network, the call would be unencrypted.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.328cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythose such as cellular telephone traffic) that are widely known to benonsecure, government would maintain law enforcement access for lawfully authorized wiretaps through the requirements imposed on carrierstoday to cooperate with law enforcement in such matters. for example, acellular telephone connects to the pstn through a ground station; since ingeneral, the cellular telephone service provider must feed its traffic to thepstn in unencrypted form, encrypted cellular telephone traffic from themobile handset would be decrypted at the ground station, at which pointlaw enforcement could gain authorized access. thus, legitimate law enforcement access would not, in general, be impeded by link encryption ofcellular traffic until communications systems that bypass the pstn entirely become common.recommendation 5.2 is an instance of a general philosophy that link(or node) security provided by a service provider offers more opportunities for providing law enforcement with legally authorized access thandoes security provided by the end user. in the case of voice communications, improved security over the telecommunications network used forvoice communications and provided by the owners and operators of thatnetworkña good thing in its own right and consistent with the basicprinciple of this reportñwould also reduce the demand for (and thus theavailability of) devices used to provide endtoend encryption of voicecommunications. without a ready supply of such devices, a criminal userwould have to go to considerable trouble to obtain a device that couldthwart a lawfully authorized wiretap.recommendation 5.2 focuses on voice communications, given thatfor the foreseeable future, voice is likely to be the most common form ofcommunication used by the general public (and hence by criminals aswell). the committee recognizes that data communications will posecertain problems for law enforcement, and this is the focus of recommendation 5.3.recommendation 5.3ñto better understand how escrowed encryption might operate, the u.s. government should explore escrowed encryption for its own uses. to address the critical international dimensions of escrowed communications, the u.s. government should workwith other nations on this topic.as described in chapter 5, escrowed encryption (as a generic concept,not limited to the clipper/capstone initiatives of the u.s. government)has both benefits and risks from a public policy standpoint. the purposeof encryption is to provide users with high degrees of assurance that theirsensitive information will remain secure. the primary benefit of escrowedencryption for law enforcement and national security is that when propcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations329erly implemented and widely deployed, it provides such assurance butnevertheless enables law enforcement and national security authorities toobtain access to escrowencrypted data in specific instances when authorized by law. escrowed encryption also enables businesses and individuals to recover encrypted stored data to which access has been inadvertently lost, and businesses to exercise a greater degree of control over theirencrypted communications. finally, by meeting demands for better information security emanating from legitimate business and private interests,escrowed encryption may dampen the market for unescrowed encryptionproducts that would provide similar security but without features for government exceptional access that law enforcement and national security authorities could use for legitimate and lawfully authorized purposes.the risks of escrowed encryption are also considerable. escrowedencryption provides a potentially lower degree of confidentiality thandoes properly implemented unescrowed encryption, because escrowedencryption is specifically designed to permit external access and thenrelies on procedures and technical controls implemented and executed byhuman beings to prevent unauthorized use of that access. while policymakers have confidence that procedures can be established and implemented without a significant reduction of information security, skepticsplace little faith in such procedural safeguards. maintaining system security is difficult enough without the deliberate introduction of a potentialsecurity hole, and the introduction of another route of attack on proceduressimply complicates the job of the information defender. in addition, thewidespread adoption of escrowed encryption, even on a voluntary basis,would lay into place mechanisms, procedures, and organizations that couldbe used to promulgate and/or enforce more restrictive cryptography policies. with such elements in place, some critics of escrowed encryption fearthat procedural safeguards against government abuse that are administrative in nature, or that rest on the personal assurances of government officials, could be eviscerated by a future administration or congress.the committee believes that many policy benefits can be gained by anoperational exploration of escrowed encryption by the u.s. government,but also that aggressive promotion of the concept is not appropriate atthis time for four reasons.first, not enough is yet known about how best to implement escrowedencryption on a large scale. the operational complexities of a largescaleinfrastructure are significant (especially in an international context ofcrossborder communications), and approaches proposed today for dealing with those complexities are not based on real experience. a moreprudent approach to setting policy would be to develop a base of experience that would guide policy decisions on how escrowed encryptionmight work on a large scale in practice.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.330cryptographyõs role in securing the information societysecond, because of the ease with which escrowed encryption can becircumvented technically, it is not at all clear that escrowed encryptionwill be a real solution to the most serious problems that law enforcementauthorities will face. administration officials freely acknowledge thattheir various initiatives promoting escrowed encryption are not intendedto address all criminal uses of encryption, but in fact those most likely tohave information to conceal will be motivated to circumvent escrowedencryption products.third, information services and technologies are undergoing rapidevolution and change today, and nearly all technology transitions arecharacterized by vendors creating new devices and services. imposing aparticular solution to the encryption dilemma at this time is likely to havea significant negative impact on the natural market development of applications made possible by new information services and technologies.while the nation may choose to bear these costs in the future, it is particularly unwise to bear them in anticipation of a largescale need that maynot arise and in light of the nationõs collective ignorance about how escrowed encryption would work on a large scale.fourth and most importantly, not enough is yet known about howthe market will respond to the capabilities provided by escrowed encryption, nor how it will prefer the concept to be implemented, if at all. giventhe importance of market forces to the longterm success of national cryptography policy, a more prudent approach to policy would be to learnmore about how in fact the market will respond before advocating aspecific solution driven by the needs of government.for these reasons, the committee believes that a policy of deliberateexploration of the concept of escrowed encryption is better suited to thecircumstances of today than is the current policy of aggressive promotion.the most appropriate vehicle for such an exploration is, quite naturally,government applications. such exploration would enable the u.s. government to develop and document the base of experience on which tobuild a more aggressive promotion of escrowed encryption should circumstances develop in such a way that encrypted communications cometo pose a significant problem for law enforcement. this base would include significant operating experience, a secure but responsive infrastructure for escrowing keys, and devices and products for escrowed encryption whose unit costs have been lowered as the result of large governmentpurchases.in the future, when experience has been developed, the u.s. government, by legislation and associated regulation, will have to clearly specifythe responsibilities, obligations, and liabilities of escrow agents (chapter5). such issues include financial liability for the unauthorized release ornegligent compromise of keys, criminal penalties for the deliberate andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations331knowing release of keys to an unauthorized party, statutory immunization of users of escrowed encryption against claims of liability that mightresult from the use of such encryption, and the need for explicit legalauthorization for key release. such legislation (and regulations issuedpursuant to such legislation) should allow for and, when appropriate,distinguish among different types of escrow agents, including organizations internal to a user company, private commercial firms for those firmsunwilling or unable to support internal organizations for key holding,and government agencies.such government action is a necessary (but not sufficient) conditionfor the growth and spread of escrowed encryption in the private sector.parties whose needs may call for the use of escrowed encryption willneed confidence in the supporting infrastructure before they will entrustencryption keys to the safekeeping of others. moreover, if the government is to actively promote the voluntary use of escrowed encryption inthe future, it will need to convince users that it has taken into accounttheir concerns about compromise and abuse of escrowed information.the best way to convince users that these agents will be able to live up totheir responsibilities is to point to a body of experience that demonstratestheir ability to do so. in a marketdriven system, this body of experiencewill begin to accrue in small stepsñsome in small companies, some inbigger onesñrather than springing up fully formed across the country inevery state and every city. as this body of experience grows, governmentwill have the ability to make wise decisions about the appropriate standards that should govern escrow agents.in addition, the u.s. government should pursue discussions withother nations on how escrowed encryption might operate internationally(appendix g). the scope of business and law enforcement today crossesnational borders, and a successful u.s. policy on cryptography will haveto be coordinated with policies of other nations. given that the developednations of the world have a number of common interests (e.g., in preserving authorized law enforcement access to communications, in protectingthe information assets of their domestic businesses), the process begun atthe organization for economic cooperation and development in december 1995 is a promising forum in which these nations can bring togetherrepresentatives from business, law enforcement, and national security todiscuss matters related to cryptography policy over national borders.fruitful topics of discussion might well include how to expand the network of mutual law enforcement assistance treaties that bind the unitedstates and other nations to cooperate on law enforcement matters.broader cooperation should contribute to the sharing of information regarding matters that involve the criminal use of encryption; national policies that encourage the development and export of òescrowableó encrypcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.332cryptographyõs role in securing the information societytion products; understanding of how to develop a significant base of actual experience in operating a system of escrowed encryption for communications across national borders; and the negotiation of sectorspecificarrangements (e.g., a specific set of arrangements for banks) that crossinternational boundaries.recommendation 5.4ñcongress should seriously consider legislation that would impose criminal penalties on the use of encrypted communications in interstate commerce with the intent to commit a federalcrime.the purpose of such a statute would be to discourage the use ofcryptography for illegitimate purposes. criminalizing the use of cryptography in this manner would provide sanctions analogous to the existingmail fraud statutes, which add penalties to perpetrators of fraud who usethe mail to commit their criminal acts. such a law would focus the weightof the criminal justice system on individuals who were in fact guilty ofcriminal activity, whereas a mandatory prohibition on the use of cryptography would have an impact on lawabiding citizens and criminals alike.a concern raised about the imposition of penalties based on a peripheral aspect of a criminal act is that it may be used to secure a convictioneven when the underlying criminal act has not been accomplished. thestatute proposed for consideration in recommendation 5.4 is not intendedfor this purpose, although the committee understands that it is largely theintegrity of the judicial and criminal justice process that will be the ultimate check on preventing its use for such purposes.as suggested in chapter 7, any statute that criminalizes the use ofencryption in the manner described in recommendation 5.4 should bedrawn narrowly. the limitation of recommendation 5.4 to federal crimesrestricts its applicability to major crimes that are specifically designatedas such; it does not extend to the much broader class of crimes that arebased on common law. under recommendation 5.4, federal jurisdictionarises from the limitation regarding the use of communications in interstate commerce. the focus of recommendation 5.4 on encrypted communications recognizes that private sector parties have significant incentivesto escrow keys used for encrypting stored data, as described in recommendation 5.3. a statute based on recommendation 5.4 should also makeclear that speaking in foreign languages unknown to many people wouldnot fall within its reach. finally, the use of òencryptedó communicationsshould be limited to communications encrypted for confidentiality purposes, not for user authentication or data integrity purposes. the draftersof the statute would also have to anticipate other potential sources ofambiguity such as the use of data compression techniques that also obcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations333scure the true content of a communication and the lack of a commonunderstanding of what it means to òuse encrypted communicationsó whenencryption may be a ubiquitous and automatic feature in a communications product.finally, the committee recognizes the existence of debate over theeffectiveness of laws targeted against the use of certain mechanisms (e.g.,mail, guns) to commit crimes. such a debate should be part of a seriousconsideration of a law such as that described in recommendation 5.4.however, the committee is not qualified to resolve this debate, and thecommittee takes no position on this particular issue.a second aspect of a statutory approach to controlling the sociallyharmful uses of encryption could be to expand its scope to include thecriminalization of the intentional use of cryptography in the concealmentof a crime. with such an expanded scope, the use of cryptography wouldconstitute a prima facie act of concealment, and thus law enforcementofficials would have to prove only that cryptography was used intentionally to conceal a crime. on the other hand, its more expansive scopemight well impose additional burdens on businesses and raise other concerns, and so the committee takes no stand on the desirability of such anexpansion of scope.the committee notes the fundamental difference between recommendation 5.4 and recommendation 1. recommendation 1 says that the useof any type of encryption within the united states should be legal, but notthat any use of encryption should be legal. recommendation 5.4 says thatthe nation should consider legislation that would make illegal a specificuse of encryption (of whatever type), namely the use of encrypted communications in interstate commerce with the intent of committing a federal crime.recommendation 5.5ñhigh priority should be given to research,development, and deployment of additional technical capabilities forlaw enforcement and national security for use in coping with new technological challenges.over the past 50 years, both law enforcement and national securityauthorities have had to cope with a variety of changing technologicalcircumstances. for the most part, they have coped with these changesquite well. this record of adaptability provides considerable confidencethat they can adapt to a future of digital communications and stored dataas well, and they should be strongly supported in their efforts to developnew technical capabilities.moreover, while the committeeõs basic thrust is toward a wider use ofcryptography throughout society, considerable time can be expected tocryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.334cryptographyõs role in securing the information societyelapse before cryptography is truly ubiquitous. for example, recommendation 4.1 is likely to accelerate the widespread use of des, but marketforces will still have the dominant effect on its spread. even if exportcontrols were removed tomorrow, vendors would still take time to decidehow best to proceed, and the use of des across the breadth of society willtake even longer. thus, law enforcement and national security authorities have a window in which to develop new capabilities for addressingfuture challenges. such development should be supported, because effective new capabilities are almost certain to have a greater impact on theirfuture information collection efforts than will aggressive attempts to promote escrowed encryption to a resistant market.an example of such support would be the establishment of a technicalcenter for helping federal, state, and local law enforcement authorities withtechnical problems associated with new information technologies.10 such acenter would of course address the use by individuals of unescrowed encryption in the commission of criminal acts, because capabilities to dealwith this problem will be necessary whether or not escrowed encryption iswidely deployed. moreover, for reasons of accessibility and specific tailoring of expertise to domestic criminal matters, it is important for domesticlaw enforcement to develop a source of expertise on the matter. a secondproblem of concern to law enforcement authorities is obtaining the digitalstream carrying the targeted communications. the task of isolating theproper digital stream amidst multiple applications and multiplexed channels will grow more complex as the sophistication of applications and technology increases, and law enforcement authorities will need to have (orprocure) considerable technical skill to extract useful information out of thedigital streams involved. these skills will need to be at least as good asthose possessed by product vendors.compared to the use of nsa expertise, a technical center for lawenforcement would have a major advantage in being dedicated to servinglaw enforcement needs, and hence its activities and expertise relevant toprosecution would be informed and guided by the need to discuss analytical methods in open court without concern for classification. moreover, such a center could be quite useful to state and local law enforcement authorities who currently lack the level of access to nsa expertiseaccorded the federal bureau of investigation (fbi).10this example is consistent with the fbi proposal for a technical support center (tsc)to serve as a central national law enforcement resource to address problems related toencryption and to technological problems with an impact on access to electronic communications and stored information. the fbi proposes that a tsc would provide law enforcement with capabilities in signals analysis (e.g., protocol recognition), mass media analysis(e.g., analysis of seized computer media), and cryptanalysis on encrypted data communications or files.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations335national security authorities recognize quite clearly that future capabilities to undertake traditional signals intelligence will be severely challenged by the spread of encryption and the introduction of new communications media. in the absence of improved cryptanalytic methods,cooperative arrangements with foreign governments, and new ways ofapproaching the information collection problem, losses in traditional signals intelligence capability would likely result in a diminished effectiveness of the u.s. intelligence community. to help ensure the continuingavailability of strategic and tactical intelligence, efforts to develop alternatives to traditional signals intelligence collection techniques should begiven high priority in the allocation of financial and personnel resourcesbefore products covered by recommendation 4.1 become widely used.recommendation 6: the u.s. government should develop a mechanism to promote information security in the private sector.although the committee was asked to address national cryptographypolicy, any such policy is necessarily only one component of a nationalinformation security policy. without a forwardlooking and comprehensive national information security policy, changes in national cryptographypolicy may have little operational impact on u.s. information security.thus, the committee believes it cannot leave unaddressed the question of anational information security policy, although it recognizes that it was notspecifically chartered with such a broad issue in mind.the committee makes recommendation 6 based on the observationthat the u.s. government itself is not well organized to meet the challenges posed by an information society. indeed, no government agencyhas the responsibility to promote information security in the private sector. the information security interests of most of the private sector haveno formal place at the policymaking table: the national security agencyrepresents the classified government community, while the charter of thenational institute of standards and technology directs it to focus on theunclassified needs of the government (and its budget is inadequate to domore than that). other organizations such as the information infrastructure task force and the office of management and budget have broadinfluence but few operational responsibilities. as a result, business andindividual stakeholders do not have adequate representation in the development of information security standards and export regimes.for these reasons, the nation requires a mechanism that will provideaccountability and focus for efforts to promote information security in theprivate sector. the need for information security cuts across many dimensions of the economy and the national interest, suggesting that absentcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.336cryptographyõs role in securing the information societya coordinated approach to promoting information security, the needs ofmany stakeholders may well be given inadequate attention and notice.the importance of close cooperation with the private sector cannot beoveremphasized. while the u.s. government has played an importantrole in promoting information security in the past (e.g., in its efforts topromulgate des, its stimulation of a market for information security products through the government procurement process, its outreach to increase the level of information security awareness regarding soviet collection attempts, and the stimulation of national debate on this criticalsubject), information security needs in the private sector in the information age will be larger than ever before (as argued in recommendation 3).thus, close consultations between government and the private sector areneeded before policy decisions are made that affect how those needs canbe addressed. indeed, many stakeholders outside government have criticized what they believe to be an inadequate representation of the privatesector at the decisionmaking table. while recognizing that some part ofsuch criticism simply reflects the fact that these stakeholders did not getall that they wanted from policy makers, the committee believes that thepolicymaking process requires better ways for representing broadly bothgovernment and nongovernment interests in cryptography policy. thosewho are pursuing enhanced information security and those who have aneed for legal access to stored or communicated information must both beincluded in a robust process for managing the oftencompeting issues andinterests that will inevitably arise over time.how might the policymaking process include better representationof nongovernment interests? experiences in trade policy suggest the feasibility of private sector advisors, who are often needed when policy cutsacross many functional and organizational boundaries and interests bothinside and outside government. national policy on information securitycertainly falls into this crosscutting category, and thus it might makesense for the government to appoint parties from the private sector toparticipate in government policy discussions relevant to export controldecisions and/or decisions that affect the information security interests ofthe private sector. despite the committeeõs conclusion that the broadoutlines of national cryptography policy can be argued on an unclassifiedbasis, classified information may nevertheless be invoked in such discussions and uncleared participants asked to leave the room. to precludethis possibility, these individuals should have the clearances necessary toengage as full participants in order to promote an effective interchange ofviews and perspectives. while these individuals would inevitably reflectthe interests of the organizations from which they were drawn, their essential role would be to present to the government their best technicalcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations337and policy advice, based on their expertise and judgment, on how government policy would best serve the national interest.how and in what areas should the u.s. government be involved inpromoting information security? one obvious category of involvement isthose areas in which the secure operation of information systems is critical to the nationõs welfareñinformation systems that are invested withthe public trust, such as those of the banking and financial system, thepublic switched telecommunications network, the air traffic control system, and extensively automated utilities such as the electric power grid.indeed, the u.s. government is already involved to some extent in promoting the security of these systems, and these efforts should continueand even grow.in other sectors of the economy, the committee sees no particularreason for government involvement in areas in which businesses areknowledgeable (e.g., their own operational practices, their own riskbenefit assessments), and the role of the u.s. government is most properlyfocused on providing information and expertise that are not easily available to the private sector. specifically, the government should build onexisting privatepublic partnerships and private sector efforts in disseminating information (e.g., the forums of incident response and securityteams (first), the computer emergency response team (cert), the i4group, the national counterintelligence center) to take a vigorous andproactive role in collecting and disseminating information to promoteawareness of the information security threat. for illustrative purposesonly, some examples follow. the government might:¥ establish mechanisms in which the sharing of sanitized securityrelated information (especially information related to security breaches)could be undertaken without disadvantaging the companies that revealsuch information. such efforts might well build on efforts in the privatesector to do the same thing.¥ undertake a program to brief senior management in industry onthe information security threat in greater detail than is usually possible inopen forums but without formal security clearances being required forthose individuals. such briefings would mean that specific threat information might have to be declassified or treated on a òfor official use onlyóbasis.¥ expand the nist program that accredits firms to test productsinvolving cryptography for conformance to various federal informationprocessing standards. as of this writing, three private companies todayhave been accredited to evaluate and certify compliance of products claiming to conform to fips 1401, the fips for cryptographic modules; bothcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.338cryptographyõs role in securing the information societythe range of fipss subject to such evaluation and the number of certifyingcompanies could be increased.¥ help industry to develop common understandings regarding cryptography and information security standards that would constitute fairdefenses against damages. these common understandings would help toreduce uncertainty over liability and òresponsible practice.ó¥ undertake technology transfer efforts that would help the privatesector to use powerful and capable authentication technologies developed by government. as noted elsewhere in this section, authenticationis an application of cryptography that poses a minimal public policy dilemma, and so the use of such governmentdeveloped technology shouldnot be particularly controversial.finally, in describing the need for a mechanism to promote information security in the private sector, the committee does not make a recommendation on its specific form because its charter did not call for it toaddress the question of government organization. as discussed in chapter 7, such a mechanism could be a new coordinating office for information security in the executive office of the president. it could be one ormore existing agencies or organizations with a new charter or set of responsibilities. it could be a new government agency or organization,although in the current political climate such an agency would demandthe most compelling justification. it could be a quasigovernmental bodyor a governmentally chartered private organization, examples of whichare described in chapter 6. because of nsaõs role within the defense andintelligence communities and its consequent concern about defense andintelligence threats and systems, the committee believes the nsa is notthe proper agency to assume primary responsibility for a mission that isprimarily oriented toward the needs of the private sector. at the sametime, experts from all parts of the u.s. government should be encouragedto assist in analyzing vulnerabilities; if such assistance requires new legislative authority, such authority should be sought from congress.8.3 additional work neededthe committee recognizes that a number of important areas wereoutside the scope of this study. two of these areas are described below:¥ as noted in chapter 2, the creation of an infrastructure (or infrastructures) to support user authentication is a central aspect of any widespread use of various forms of cryptography. the nature of these infrastructures is a matter of public policy; however, since the committee wasconcerned primarily with addressing issues related to cryptographic concryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis, findings, and recommendations339fidentiality, it did not address infrastructure issues in the depth that wouldbe necessary to provide detailed advice to federal decision makers.¥ as noted in chapter 7 and discussed in appendix l, digital cashand electronic money pose many issues for public policy. these issuesconsiderably transcend what could be examined within the scope of thecurrent study.although the committee realized that these areas were important, anindepth study in each would require a committee with a different membership, a different charge, and a different time line. problems in theseareas will become relevant in the near future, and policy makers maywish to anticipate them by commissioning additional examination.8.4 conclusionthe committee believes that its recommendations will lead to enhanced confidentiality and protection of information for individuals andcompanies, thereby reducing economic and financial crimes and economicespionage from both domestic and foreign sources. while the recommendations will to that extent contribute to the prevention of crime and enhance national security, the committee recognizes that the spread of cryptography will increase the burden of those in government charged withcarrying out certain specific law enforcement and intelligence activities.it believes that widespread commercial and private use of cryptographyin the united states and abroad is inevitable in the long run and that itsadvantages, on balance, outweigh its disadvantages. the committee concluded that the overall interests of the government and the nation wouldbest be served by a policy that fosters a judicious transition toward thebroad use of cryptography.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixescryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.343acontributors to the nrc project onnational cryptography policya.1 committee memberskenneth w. dam, chair, is the max pam professor of american andforeign law at the university of chicago law school, where he is alsodirector of the john m. olin program in law and economics. mr. damreceived his bachelorõs degree from the university of kansas and completed his graduate work at the university of chicago law school. during the period from 1985 to 1992, he held the post of corporate vice president for law and external relations at ibm. mr. dam served as deputysecretary of state (19821985) and as provost of the university of chicago(19801982). mr. dam currently serves on the board of alcoa and on theboards of a number of nonprofit institutions, including the brookingsinstitution and the council on foreign relations. he is also cochairman(with senator sam nunn) of the aspen strategy group. he has writtenbooks on the general agreement on tariffs and trade, the internationalmonetary system, u.s. economic policy, and the development of oil resources, as well as many articles on economic policy and antitrust law.w.y. smith, vice chair, is president emeritus and a trustee of the institutefor defense analyses; he was its president from 1985 to 1991. prior to thathe was a fellow at the woodrow wilson international center for scholarsat the smithsonian institution, 1983 to 1984. his military posts includedeputy commander in chief of the european command in germany, 1981cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.344appendix ato 1983; chief of staff of shape, belgium, 1979 to 1981; assistant to thechairman of the joint chiefs of staff, 1975 to 1979; and director of policyplans and national security affairs at the office of the assistant secretaryfor international security affairs. he has a bs from the u.s. militaryacademy, 1948, and an mpa and a phd from harvard university, 1961.he is director and treasurer of the atlantic council of the united statesand a member of the executive committee of the national security archives board of directors.lee bollinger has been provost of dartmouth college since july 1994.previously, he was a professor at the university of michigan law schoolfrom 1973 and served as dean of the law school from 1987 to 1994. in 1983he was a visiting associate at clare hall, cambridge university. mr.bollinger received his bachelorõs degree from the university of oregonand a law degree from columbia university school of law. in 19721973,he served as a law clerk to supreme court justice warren e. burger. hisbooks include images of a free press (university of chicago press, 1991)and the tolerant society: freedom of speech and extremist speech in america(oxford university press, 1987). he has published numerous articles onfreedom of the press and free speech, including òthe first amendmentand national securityó and òthe first amendment and new communications technologies.ó he was coauthor of the national research council publication òconstitutional issues in regulating televised presentations of violenceó in 1982. mr. bollinger is a fellow of the americanacademy of arts and sciences.ann caracristi was appointed a member of president clintonõs foreignintelligence advisory board in september 1993. she was deputy directorof the national security agency from january 1980 to august 1982. ms.caracristi holds a ba from russell sage college and is a graduate of thefederal executive institute. she has received the department of defensedistinguished civilian service award, the national intelligence distinguished service medal, and the united states national security award.currently she is a consultant to the nsa scientific advisory board and amember of the board of visitors of the defense language institute foreign language center. she served as a member of the chief of navaloperations executive panel from october 1982 to september 1991. shewas a twoterm president of the association of former intelligence officers from 1989 to 1991. most recently she was a member of the commission on the roles and capabilities of the u.s. intelligence community.benjamin r. civiletti has been in private law practice with venable,baetjer, howard & civiletti in baltimore and washington, d.c., sincecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contributors to the nrc project on national cryptography policy3451981. he is chairman of that firm. prior to 1981, he was u.s. attorneygeneral from 1979 to 1981, deputy u.s. attorney general from 1978 to 1979,and assistant attorney general for the criminal division of the department of justice, 1977 and 1978. he has an ab from johns hopkins university, 1957, and an llb from the university of maryland, 1961. he ischairman of the board of directors of maryland healthcorp; a director ofmbna corporation, mbna international, wackenhut corrections corporation, and the bethlehem steel corporation; a trustee of johns hopkinsuniversity; former chairman of maryland legal services corporation;and a chairman of the governors task force for funding of public education.colin crook is the senior technology officer of citicorp. he has governance and oversight responsibility for technology at citicorp, includingoperational management of the global information network. mr. crook isa graduate of the united kingdomõs liverpool polytechnic, where heearned his degrees (electrical engineering) while working as a computerdesigner for the plessey company. mr. crook has held various positionsin top management for the motorola corporation in the united states andeurope, as well as positions with rank precision industries, zynar, ltd.,and british telecom. he also was senior vice president with data general(usa). mr. crook has been a key speaker at international industry conferences, has published in scholarly and professional journals, and hasbeen the subject of numerous interviews. he is a member of the association for computing machinery, the institute of electrical and electronicsengineers, and the institution of electrical engineers (united kingdom).in 1981, mr. crook was elected to the united kingdomõs royal academyof engineering, the youngest person to be so honored at the time.samuel h. fuller is currently a vice president and the chief scientist ofdigital equipment corporation. prior to joining digital in 1978, dr. fullerwas an associate professor of computer science and electrical engineeringat carnegie mellon university (cmu). while at cmu, he was involved inthe performance evaluation and design of several experimental multiprocessor computer systems. his fields of interest include computer scienceand electrical engineering. dr. fuller received his bs from the universityof michigan (1968) and his ms (1969) and phd (1972) in electrical engineering and computer science from stanford university. he is a memberof the national academy of engineering, institute of electrical and electronics engineers, and association for computing machinery. dr. fullerwas a founding member of the computer science and telecommunications board (19861992) and served on the steering committee for thecompetitiveness colloquium followup workshop on systems integracryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.346appendix ation (19891991). dr. fuller is on the board of directors of analog deviceinc. and inso corporation.leslie h. gelb has been president of the council on foreign relationssince 1993. he is a trustee of the carnegie endowment for internationalpeace and of tufts university, a board member of columbia universityõsschool of international and public affairs, and an advisory board member for the center on press, politics and public policy at harvard universityõs john f. kennedy school of government. he is a member of theinternational institute for strategic studies and a fellow of the americanacademy of arts and sciences. in 1985, mr. gelb shared in the winning ofthe pulitzer prize for explanatory journalism. he was a senior associatefor the carnegie endowment for international peace from 1980 to 1981,and from 1977 to 1979, he served as director of the bureau of politicomilitary affairs, where he received the distinguished honor award. hewas a senior fellow at the brookings institution from 1969 to 1973 and alsoa visiting professor at georgetown university. he was director of policyplanning and arms control for international security affairs at the department of defense from 1967 to 1969, where he also served as directorof the pentagon papers project. while at the defense department, mr.gelb won the pentagonõs distinguished service award. mr. gelb wasexecutive assistant to u.s. senator jacob k. javits from 1966 to 1967 and anassistant professor at wesleyan university from 1964 to 1966. mr. gelbreceived a ba from tufts university in 1959, and his ma in 1961 and phdin 1964 from harvard university. he is an author and a coauthor ofseveral foreign policy studies.ronald graham is director of information sciences research at at&tlaboratories, which he joined in 1962, and has also been a professor atrutgers university since 1987. concurrently, he has been a regentsõ professor of mathematics at the university of california, los angeles, and afrequent visiting professor of computer science at stanford universityand princeton university. he was a fairchild distinguished scholar atthe california institute of technology in 1982. dr. grahamõs research isin combinatorics, number theory, graph theory, algorithms, and combinatorial geometry. he has a bs in physics from the university of alaska,1958, and an ma and a phd in mathematics from the university of california, berkeley, 1962. dr. graham was awarded the polya prize in combinatorics in 1972 and the euler medal in combinatorics in 1994. he is amember of the national academy of sciences and a past president of theamerican mathematical society, and he is a fellow of the american acadcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contributors to the nrc project on national cryptography policy347emy of arts and sciences, the new york academy of sciences, and theamerican association for the advancement of science.martin hellman is a professor of electrical engineering at stanford university, where he has been since 1971. previously, he was an assistantprofessor at the massachusetts institute of technology from 1969 to 1971and a staff member at the ibm t.j. watson research center from 1968 to1969. dr. hellmanõs specialties are information and communication theory,cryptography and data security, and international security. his be is fromnew york university and his ms and phd in electrical engineering arefrom stanford university. he is a fellow of the institute of electrical andelectronics engineers and the institute of mathematical statistics.ambassador julius katz is president of hills & company, internationalconsultants. the firm provides clients with strategic advice and riskanalysis on trade and investment interests abroad. ambassador katzheld the position of deputy u.s. trade representative from 1989 to 1993.during this period, he was the u.s chief negotiator for the north american free trade agreement. he also had senior management responsibility for bilateral and regional negotiations with europe and the westernhemisphere and for the multilateral trade negotiations known as the uruguay round. ambassador katz previously worked as a public policyconsultant and from 1987 to 1989 was chairman of the government research corporation in washington, d.c. from 1980 to 1985, he worked inthe financial services industry, where he was chairman of donaldson,lufkin & jenrette futures inc. ambassador katz joined the u.s. department of state in 1950 and on his retirement from the state departmentafter 30 years of service held the position of assistant secretary of state foreconomic and business affairs. while at the state department, ambassador katz led numerous u.s. delegations in negotiations on trade, commodity, and transport matters.peter g. neumann is principal scientist in the computer science laboratory at sri, where he has worked since 1971. his projects have involvedcomputer systems security, high assurance, human safety, and reliability.he was a member of the air force studies board database security studyand of the national research councilõs system security study committeethat produced the report computers at risk (national academy press,1991). he also served on an expert panel for the u.s. house judiciarycommitteeõs subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights. dr.neumann received his ab, sm, and phd from harvard university in1954, 1955, and 1961, respectively. in 1960 he received a dr. rerumnaturarum from the technische hochschule, darmstadt, germany, wherecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.348appendix ahe was a fulbright scholar for 2 years. from 1976 to 1994, he was editor ofsigsoft software engineering notes for the association for computingmachinery (acm), and since 1985 he has been chairman of the acmcommittee on computers and public policy. dr. neumann was awardedan acm outstanding contribution award in 1992 and the first sri exceptional performance award for leadership in community service, alsoin 1992. he is a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, the acm, and the american association for the advancement ofscience.raymond ozzie is the founder and president of iris associates, the developer of lotus notes. iris, which began operations in 1984, is a whollyowned subsidiary of lotus development corporation and ibm corporation. before founding iris, mr. ozzie worked at lotus, where he was thelead architect and developer of lotusõ symphony product. prior to lotus,he was an engineering manager at software arts, the developer of thefirst electronic spreadsheet, visicalc. mr. ozzie received his degree incomputer science in 1978 from the university of illinois in urbanachampaign, where he did research in distributed computing and was asystems programmer for plato, a pioneering distributed computerbased education and collaboration system connecting students and researchers at hundreds of locations worldwide.edward c. schmults was senior vice president of external affairs andgeneral counsel of gte corporation from 1984 to 1995. previously heserved as a deputy attorney general of the united states from 1981 to1984, deputy counsel to the president from 1975 to 1976, and undersecretary of the treasury department from 1974 to 1975. mr. schmults was apartner of the new york law firm of white & case from 1965 to 1973 andfrom 1977 to 1981. he sits on the board of directors of the greenpointbank, the germany fund, and the central european equity fund and ischairman of the board of trustees of the refugee policy group. he servedwith the u.s. marine corps from 1953 to 1955. mr. schmults has a bsfrom yale university and a jd from harvard university, 1958.elliot m. stone has been executive director of the massachusetts healthdata consortium since it was established in 1978 as a private, nonprofitcorporation and a nonpartisan setting for the collection and analysis ofthe stateõs large health care databases. the consortium publishes annualreports and sets data standards for a broad constituency of health careorganizations and business coalitions. previously, mr. stone served asdirector of the stateõs center for health statistics in the massachusettsdepartment of public health. mr. stone has been an advisor to thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contributors to the nrc project on national cryptography policy349agency for health care policy & research, the national center for healthcare statistics, the health care financing administration, and the robertwood johnson foundation. he is an active member of the national association of health data organizations and the association for health services research. mr. stone received his ba and ms degrees from bostonuniversity. he was a member of the institute of medicine study thatproduced the report health data in the information age: use, disclosure, andprivacy (national academy press, 1994).willis h. ware is a member (emeritus) of the corporate research staff atthe rand corporation. his career has spanned all aspects of computerscienceñhardware, software, architecture, software development, federalagency and military applications, realtime systems, networks, management of computerintensive projects, and public policy. in the late 1960she developed a research interest in the security of computer systems andnetworks, and shortly thereafter, a corresponding interest in the personalprivacy consequences of recordkeeping systems. he has written extensively on both topics. he was the first chairman of the american federation of information processing societies (afips) and in the early 1970schaired the secretaryõs advisory committee on automated personal datasystems of the department of health, education, and welfare. its reportwas the foundation for the federal privacy act of 1974. subsequently, hewas appointed to the privacy protection study commission by presidentford and served as both commissioner and vice chairman. its reportremains the most extensive examination of private sector recordkeepingpractices. he currently chairs the statutory computer system securityand privacy advisory board. dr. ware received his bs from the university of pennsylvania, an sm from the massachusetts institute of technology, and a phd from princeton universityñall in electrical engineering.he is a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, theassociation for computing machinery, and the american association forthe advancement of science, and he was elected to the national academyof engineering in 1985.a.2 additional contributors to the projectthe following individuals provided the committee with briefings,discussion, position papers, personal views, and background materials.they are listed alphabetically. individuals who explicitly requested complete anonymity are not listed.edward allen, federal bureau of investigation; edward j. appel, national security council; john a. armstrong, ibm (retired); wendell bailey,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.350appendix anational cable television association; stewart baker, steptoe andjohnson; richard c. barth, motorola; bill bauriedel; david c. bedard;sheldon r. bentley, boeing computer services; jerry berman, center fordemocracy and technology; tom berson, anagram laboratories; rosebiancinello, department of state; robert blandford; matt blaze; eric blossom; william earl boebert, sandia national laboratories; barry briggs, lotus development corporation; david brin; ken bronstein, hewlettpackard; clinton brooks, national security agency; melinda brown, lotusdevelopment corporation; robert e. bruccoleri, bristolmyers squibb pharmaceutical research institute; james carr, u.s. district court of toledo;vinton g. cerf, mci telecommunications corporation; jesse choper, university of california, berkeley; anthony clark, house science committee;judi clark; floyd i. clarke, macandrews & forbes; david cohen, centralintelligence agency; leroy l. cook, mitre corporation; daniel corcoran,electronic data systems; aaron w. cross, ibm; william crowell, nationalsecurity agency; walter curtis, national semiconductor corporation;david decker, gte laboratories; philippe dejean, service central de las”curit” des syst‘mes dõinformation, service du premier ministre (france);james x. dempsey, center for national security studies; dorothy denning,georgetown university;whitfield diffie, sun microsystems; m. nanette ditosto, u.s. council forinternational business; esther dyson, edventure holdings inc.; robert i.eachus; carl ellison, cybercash inc.; glenn everhart; lincoln d. faurer,national security agency (retired); c. william ferguson, semaphore corporation; robert fielding, national security agency; hal finney; cliffords. fishman, catholic university of america; william flanagan, lotus development corporation; martin l. fogelman; greg frazier, house intelligence committee; paul freedenberg, baker and botts; louis freeh, federalbureau of investigation; roger e. french, digital equipment corporation;a. michael froomkin, university of miami law school; robert gallagher,department of commerce; roby gamboa; richard garwin, ibm t.j. watson research center; toby gati, department of state; jeffrey gaynor,department of defense; kenneth geide, federal bureau of investigation;thomas a. gilbert, network systems corporation; louis giles, nationalsecurity agency; john gilmore, cygnus support; ronald goldstock, krollassociates; jamie s. gorelick, department of justice; rebecca gould, business software alliance; graham greenleaf, university of new south wales;william f. hagerty iv, management advisory group; keith hall, department of defense; bruce hamilton; martha harris, department of state;matthew d. healy, yale center for medical informatics; bruce heiman,business software alliance; david a. hendon, department of trade andindustry (united kingdom); david henry, national security agency;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contributors to the nrc project on national cryptography policy351richard hertling, senate judiciary committee; r.s. (bob) heuman; mackhicks, bank of america;richard hill; k. mignon hoffman, boeing computer services; lancehoffman, george washington university; robert hood, congressmannewt gingrichõs office; eric hughes; deborah hurley, organization foreconomic cooperation and development; rick jinelsky, hewlettpackard;michael paul johnson; thomas kalil, national economic council; raymondkammer, national institute of standards and technology; phil karn; sallykatzen, office of management and budget; elizabeth kaufman, citibank;stephen t. kent, bbn communications; gordon kettler, general motors;raymond khan, general motors; joseph kielman, federal bureau of investigation; steve killion, federal bureau of investigation; julie krueger, atmelcorporation; susan landau, university of massachusetts, amherst; p.e.(pat) lanthier, pacific bell; tony lauck; joshua lederberg, rockefeller university; ronald lee, national security agency; james leinweber, university of wisconsin, madison; blaise liffick, computer professionals for social responsibility; steven b. lipner, mitre corporation; myles losch;robert lucky, bell communications research; deborah malamud, university of michigan law school; noel matchett, information security inc.;timothy may; bruce mcconnell, office of management and budget; kirkmcconnell, senate armed services committee; kate mcgee, oracle corporation; f. lynn mcnulty, mcnulty and associates;catherine medich, commercenet; ken mendelson, house judiciary committee; douglas miller, software publishers association; john millis, houseselect committee on intelligence; william mockler, drug enforcementadministration; vera a. murray, ibm; michael nelson, office of scienceand technology policy; robert nieves, drug enforcement administration;edward oõmalley, oso group; christopher padilla, at&t governmentaffairs; donn parker, sri international inc.; kumar patel, university ofcalifornia, los angeles; bill patterson; nick patterson, renaissance technologies; craig paul, university of kansas; paul j.j. payack, network systems corporation; mona peglow, novell; david pensak, dupont corporation; henry h. perritt, jr., villanova university; john pescatore,international data corporation government; charles c. philipp, department of energy; john pignataro, new york city police department; johnpodesta, the white house; carl pomerance, university of georgia;william poulos, electronic data systems; william press, harvard college;robert prestel, national security agency (retired); todd quinto, tufts university; jim ray; alfred reifman, congressional research service; robertrich, national security agency (retired); ed roback, national institute ofcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.352appendix astandards and technology; bruce roberts, unisys; cesare rosati, department of state;sholom rosen, citibank; howard rosenblum, national security agency(retired); marc rotenberg, electronic privacy information center; lee d.rothstein, veritech; ira rubenstein, microsoft corporation; clint sare; johnscheibel, house foreign affairs committee; roger schell, novell; jeffschiller, massachusetts institute of technology; james schindler, hewlettpackard; kurt schneckenburger; william richard scruggs, department ofjustice; raymond r. semko, department of energy; william s. sessions,sessions & sessions, l.c.; edward sheehan, electronic data systems; alanshipman, enterprise integration technology, commercenet; gursharansidhu, apple computer; cheryl simmons, computer and communications industry association; lori s. sinton, national semiconductor corporation; landgrave t. smith, jr., institute for defense analyses; peter smith,member of parliament, united kingdom; teresa smith, central intelligenceagency; oliver smoot, information technology industry council; carlsnyder, hewlettpackard; bill sommerfeld; george spix, microsoft corporation; edward springer, office of management and budget; rossstapletongray, telediplomacy inc.;vicki stearn, discovery communications inc.; shari steele, electronic frontier foundation; john d. steinbruner, brookings institution; barry steinhardt, american civil liberties union; ivan sutherland, sun microsystemslaboratories; raymond tate, national security agency (retired); duanethompson; george b. trubow, john marshall law school; roger ulbrich,chevron corporation; paul walker, house armed services committee;stephen walker, trusted information systems inc.; lester waters, microsoftcorporation; daniel weitzner, center for democracy and technology; william whitehurst, ibm; daniel whiteman, general motors; randy whiting,hewlettpackard; philip wilcox, department of state; janice williams, central intelligence agency; charity wilson, senate judiciary committee; joand. winston, office of technology assessment; r. james woolsey, shey &gardner.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.353bglossaryaccess (to a system, to data, to a software process)ñ(n.) in general, theright to enter or make use of. in a computer context, entry granted to asoftware path that establishes the right to use a system and its resources;to read, write, modify, or delete data; and/or to use software processeswith various capabilities. (v.) to achieve the status of having access.access controlñthe granting or denying to a subject of certainpermissions to access a resource (e.g., to view a certain file, to run acertain program).algorithm and key lengthñthe combination of cryptographicalgorithm and its key length(s) often used to establish the strength of anencryption process.assuranceñconfidence that a system design meets its requirements,or that its implementation meets its specification, or that some specificproperty is satisfied.asymmetric cryptography (also publickey cryptography)ñcryptography based on algorithms that enable the use of one key (a publickey) to encrypt a message and a second, different, but mathematicallyrelated, key (a private key) to decrypt a message. asymmetric cryptography can also be used to perform digital signatures and key exchange.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.354appendix bauditingñthe process of making and keeping the records necessaryto support accountability. see audit trail.audit trailñthe results of monitoring each operation of subjects onobjects; for example, an audit trail might be a record of all actions takenon a particularly sensitive file or a record of all users who viewed that file.authentication (of identity)ñan adjunct step to identificationthat confirms an asserted identity with a specified, or understood, level ofconfidence. authentication can be used to provide high assurance thatthe purported identity is, in fact, the correct identity associated with theentity that provides it. the authentication mechanism can be based onsomething that the entity knows, has, or is (e.g., a password, a smart cardthat uses some encryption or random number for a challengeresponsescheme, or a fingerprint).authentication of a message (or a file)ñthe process ofadding one or more additional data elements to communications traffic(or files) to ensure the integrity of the traffic (or files). such additionalelements are often called òmessage authenticator(s)ó and would be anexample of an integrity lock.authenticityña security service that provides a user with a meansof verifying the identity of the sender of a message, a file, a computersystem, a software process, or even a database or individual softwarecomponent.authorizationñdetermining whether a subject (a user or system)is trusted to act for a given purpose, for example, allowed to read a particular file.availabilityñthe property that a given resource will be usable during a given time period, for example, that an encrypted file can be decrypted when necessary.back doorñan aspect of a systemõs mechanism that can be exploitedto circumvent the systemõs security.binary digitñone of the two symbols (0 and 1) that are commonlyused to represent numerical entries in the binary number system.bitña contraction of the term òbinary digit.ócryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossary355bit stream (also digital stream)ñthe running stream of binary symbols representing digitized information; the term is commonly used torefer to digital communications.capstone chipñan integrated circuit chip that implements the skipjack algorithm and also includes the digital signature algorithm, thesecure hash standard, the classified key exchange algorithm, circuitryfor efficient exponentiation of large numbers, and a random number generator using a pure noise source.capstone/fortezza initiativeña government initiative to promote and support escrowed encryption for data storage and communications.certificate authorityñsynonym for certification authority.certificate managementñthe overall process of issuing, storing, verifying, and generally accepting responsibility for the accuracy ofcertifications and their secure delivery to appropriate consumers.certificationñthe administrative act of approving a computer system or component for use in a particular application.certification authorityña specially established trusted organization or part of a larger organization that accepts the responsibilities ofmanaging the certificate process by issuing, distributing, and verifyingcertificates.ciphertextñliterally, text material that has been encrypted; also usedin a generic sense for the output of any encryption process, no matterwhat the original digitized input might have been (e.g., text, computerfiles, computer programs, or digitized graphical images).cleartext (also plaintext)ñthe material entering into an encryptionprocess or emerging from a decryption process. òtextó is used categorically for any digitized material.clipper chipñan escrowed encryption chip that implements the skipjack algorithm to encrypt communications conducted over the publicswitched network (e.g., between telephones, modems, or facsimile equipment).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.356appendix bclipper initiative ña voluntary program to improve the security oftelephone communications while meeting the legitimate needs of lawenforcement.cocomñcoordinating committee for multilateral export controls, began operations in 1950 to control export of strategic materials and technology to communist countries; participants include australia, belgium,canada, denmark, france, germany, greece, italy, japan, luxembourg,the netherlands, norway, portugal, spain, turkey, the united kingdom,and the united states.collateral cryptographyña collective term used in this reportto include uses of encryption for other than confidentiality; it includessuch services as authentication, integrity checks, authoritative date/timestamping, and digital signatures.competitive access providersñtelephone carriers that compete with local monopoly carriers.confidentiality (communications)ñthe protection of communications traffic against interception or receipt by unauthorized third parties.confidentiality (data)ñan assertion about a body of data that issensitive and must be protected against loss, misuse, destruction, unintended change, and unauthorized access or dissemination.countermeasureña mechanism that reduces vulnerability to athreat.cryptanalysisñthe study and practice of various methods to penetrate ciphertext and deduce the contents of the original cleartext message.cryptographic algorithmña mathematical procedure, used inconjunction with a closely guarded secret key, that transforms originalinput into a form that is unintelligible without special knowledge of thesecret information and the algorithm. such algorithms are also the basisfor digital signatures and key exchange.cryptographyñoriginally, the science and technology of keepinginformation secret from unauthorized parties by using a code or a cipher.today, cryptography can be used for many applications that do not involve confidentiality.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossary357data encryption standard (des)ña u.s. government standard (fips 461) describing a cryptographic algorithm to be used in asymmetric cryptographic application.date/time stampñthe date and time a transaction or document isinitiated or submitted to a computer system, or the time at which a transaction is logged or archived. often it is important that the stamp becertified by some authority to establish legal or other special status. sucha service can be provided by a cryptographic procedure.decompilingña process through which object code consisting of onesand zeros can be converted into source code in a highlevel computerlanguage such as c or pascal.decryptionñthe cryptographic procedure of transforming ciphertextinto the original message cleartext.denial of serviceñreducing the availability of an object below thelevel needed to support critical processing or communication, as can happen, for example, in a system crash.digestña much condensed version of a message produced by processing the message by a hash algorithm. commonly, the digest has a fixedlength and is not dependent on the length of the original message.digital signatureña digitized analog of a written signature, produced by a cryptographic procedure acting (commonly) on a digest of themessage to be signed.digital signature standard (dss)ña u.s. government standard (fips 186) describing a cryptographic algorithm for producing adigital signature.digital telephony act of 1995ña law requiring that the telephone industry make such technical changes to its installed equipment asare needed to comply with courtauthorized wiretap orders.disassemblyña process through which object code consisting of onesand zeros can be converted into its lowlevel assembly language representation.disclosure (of data)ñthe act of making available; the instance ofrevealing.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.358appendix bdualuse systemña system with both military and civilian applications.escrowed encryption standard (ees)ña voluntary u.s. government standard for keyescrowed encryption of voice, fax, or computerdata transmitted over circuitswitched telephone systems.evaluationñ(1) the process of examining a computer product orsystem with respect to certain criteria; (2) the results of that process.exceptional accessñaccess to encrypted data granted to a recipient other than the originally intended recipient.federal information processing standard (fips)ña categorical term for u.s. government standards applying to computerbasedsystems.firmwareñthe programmable information used to control the lowlevel operations of hardware. firmware is commonly stored in read onlymemory (rom), which is initially installed in the factory and may bereplaced in the field to fix mistakes or to improve system capabilities.first partyñthe originator of a transaction (e.g., an electronic message or telephone call).functionalityñthe functional behavior of a system. functionalityrequirements include, for example, confidentiality, integrity, availability,authentication, and safety.identificationñthe assertion by a person, process, or system wishing to communicate with another person, process, or system of the nameby which it is known within the process(es) or system(s) in question.identification keyña key registered or issued to a specific user.implementationñthe mechanism that (supposedly) realizes thespecified design.integrated productña product designed to provide the user acapability useful in its own right (e.g., word processing) and integratedwith encryption capabilities that a user may or may not employ; a product in which the cryptographic capability is fully integrated with the othercapabilities of the product.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossary359integrityñthe property that an object meets an a priori establishedset of expectations. one example of integrity is that changes must beaccomplished in a specified and authorized manner. data integrity, program integrity, system integrity, and network integrity are all relevant toconsideration of computer and system security.integrity checkña quantity derived algorithmically from the running digital stream of a message and appended to it for transmission, orfrom the entire contents of a stored data file and appended to it. someintegrity checks are not cryptographically based (e.g., cyclic redundancychecks), but others are.interceptorña party eavesdropping on communications.itarñinternational traffic in arms regulations.keyña sequence of easily changed symbols that, used with a cryptographic algorithm, provides a cryptographic process.key distributionña secure method for two distant parties to exchange keys or to receive keys from a central authoritative source.key escrow encryption (also escrowed encryption)ñan encryption system that enables exceptional access to encrypted data throughspecial data recovery keys held by a trusted party.key managementñthe overall process of generating and distributing cryptographic keys to authorized recipients in a secure manner.monitoringñrecording of relevant information about each operation by a subject on an object, maintained in an audit trail for subsequentanalysis.nodeña computer system that is connected to a communications network and participates in the routing of messages within that network.networks are usually described as a collection of nodes that are connected by communications links.nonrepudiation (of a signed digital message, data, or software)ñthe status achieved by employing a digitalsignature procedure to affirmthe identity of the signer of a digital message with extremely high confidence and, hence, to protect against a subsequent attempt to deny authenticity, whether or not there had been an initial authentication.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.360appendix bobject codeñthe òexecutableó code of ones and zeros that provides acomputer with instructions on what steps to perform. contrast with sourcecode.object linking and embedding (ole)ñmicrosoftõs objectoriented software technology.oneway hash functionña function that produces a message digest that cannot be reversed to obtain the original.operating systemña program that runs on a computer whose purpose is to provide basic services that can be used by applications runningon that computer. such functions might include screen displays, filehandling, and encryption. msdos and windows ô95 are examples ofoperating systems that run on intel microprocessors.passwordña sequence of characters or words that a subject presentsto a system for purposes of validation or verification. see authentication.pcmcia cardñthe industrystandard personal computer memorycard industry association card and associated electrical interface for various computer components (e.g., memory, hard disks, and cryptographicprocesses). also known as a pc card.pen registerña device that records numbers dialed from a telephone.pin (personal identification number)ña (generally numeric) quantitythat has to be keyed into some device or process to authenticate an individual. a common example is the 4digit pin associated with the use ofautomated teller machines; another, the 4digit pin associated with atelephone calling card.plaintextña synonym for cleartext.private keyñthe private (secret) key associated with a given personõspublic key for a publickey cryptographic system.public keyñthe publicly known key associated with a given personõsuse of a publickey cryptographic system.publickey certificateña statement, possibly on paper but moreoften transmitted electronically over an information network, that establishes the relationship between a named individual (or organization) andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossary361a specified public key. in principle, it could (but need not) include collateral information such as mailing address, organizational affiliation, andtelephone number.rc2/rc4 algorithmsñtwo variablekeylength cryptographic algorithms designed by ronald rivest of the massachusetts institute of technology. both are symmetric algorithms.reliabilityñthe ability of a computer or an information or telecommunications system to perform consistently and precisely according to itsspecifications and design requirements and to do so with high confidence.remailerña computerbased process that automatically redistributeselectronic mail, often to multiple recipients. remailers can be anonymous(i.e., they can be configured to strip off information identifying the senderof a message, while still enabling a return òpathó so that recipients canreply to messages).reverse engineeringñthe generic name for methods by whichparties attempt to uncover technical details of a microelectronic chip or ofsoftware.riskñthe likelihood that a vulnerability may be exploited, or that athreat may become harmful.rsa algorithmñthe rivestshamiradelman publickey encryptionalgorithm.safetyñthe property indicating that a computer system or software,when embedded in its operational environment, does not cause any actions or events that create unintended potentially or actually dangeroussituations for itself or for the environment in which it is embedded.second partyñthe recipient of a transaction (e.g., an electronic message or telephone call).secretkey cryptosystemña symmetric cryptographic processthat uses the same secret key (which both parties have and keep secret) toencrypt and decrypt messages.secure hash functionña oneway hash function for which thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.362appendix blikelihood that two messages will yield the same digest is satisfactorilysmall.secure hash standardña u.s. government standard (fips 1801)for a secure hash function.securityñthe collection of safeguards that ensures the confidentialityof information, protects the system(s) or network(s) used to process it,and controls access to it. hence, security safeguards impose appropriateaccess rules for computer information.securityspecific (or standalone) cryptographyproductñan addon product specifically designed to provide cryptographic capabilities for one or more other software or hardware capabilities.sharewareñsoftware offered publicly and shared rather than sold.skipjackña classified symmetric key encryption algorithm that uses80bit keys; developed by the national security agency.source codeñthe textual form in which a program is entered into acomputer (e.g., pascal).specificationña technical description of the desired behavior of asystem, as derived from its requirements. a specification is used to develop and test an implementation of a system.spoofingñillicitly masquerading as a legitimate company, party, orindividual.stuiiiña u.s. government secure telephone system using endtoendencryption.symmetric cryptography, cryptosystemña cryptographicsystem that uses the same key to encrypt and decrypt messages.systemñan interdependent collection of components that can be considered as a unified whole; for example, a networked collection of computer systems, a distributed system, an editor, a memory unit, and so on.thirdparty accessñeavesdropping on or entry to data communicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.glossary363cations, telephony, or stored computer data by an unauthorized party.see exceptional access.threatñthe potential for exploitation of a vulnerability.tokenñwhen used in the context of authentication, a (usually) physicaldevice necessary for user identification.trap and traceña device that identifies the telephone numbers fromwhich calls have been placed to a target telephone number.trojan horseña computer program whose execution would resultin undesired side effects, generally unanticipated by the user. a trojanhorse program may otherwise give the appearance of providing normalfunctionality.trustñthe concept that a system will provide its intended functionality with a stated level of confidence. the term is also used for otherentities, e.g., trusted software, trusted network, trusted individual. sometimes the confidenceñalso called the assuranceñcan be measured, butsometimes it is inferred on the basis of testing and other information.trustworthinessñassurance that a system deserves to be trusted.vulnerabilityña weakness in a system that can be exploited to violate the systemõs intended behavior. there may be vulnerabilities in security, integrity, availability, and other aspects. the act of exploiting avulnerability represents a threat, which has an associated risk of beingexploited.work factorña measure of the difficulty of undertaking a bruteforce test of all possible keys against a given ciphertext and known algorithm.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.364appendix c364ca brief primer on cryptographythis appendix provides a brief primer on cryptography, but it is necessary to understand from the start that cryptography is not a òsilverbulletó for information security. for example, a network may be insecurein the sense that it is easy for an adversary to obtain information that isflowing on the network. end users may use very strong cryptography toprotect this information. but if sufficiently motivated and skilled, adversaries may well attempt to penetrate the systems attached to the network,where they can obtain the information in the clear. or they may be able tobribe a system operator to obtain it for them. nevertheless cryptographystill has value under these circumstances, because it forces the adversaryto alter his or her attack and expend greater effort to obtain information;furthermore, the use of cryptography will foil some adversaries who arenot motivated or skilled enough to develop alternative attacks.c.1 a very short history of cryptographyfor most of its history, cryptography was more an art than a scienceand was devoted primarily to keeping messages and records secret. to besure, mathematical techniques for cryptanalysis and engineering skills forbuilding devices for encryption and decryption played important roles,but cryptography itself did not rest on a firm mathematical foundation.the scientific basis for modern cryptography was established in 1949with the development of information theory by claude shannon, whodetermined for the first time a mathematically rigorous basis for definingcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography365a òperfectó encryption system that could be made impenetrable, even inprinciple, to an adversary with unlimited resources. based on this work,secretkey cryptography (defined below) blossomed, with the most public work in this area being the data encryption standard promulgated in1975 by the national bureau of standards (now the national institute ofstandards and technology). the second major revolution occurred in1976 with the first discussion in the open literature of asymmetric cryptography, inspired by a landmark paper of whitfield diffie and martinhellman.1c.2 capabilities enabled by cryptographycryptography can help to ensure the integrity of data (i.e., that dataretrieved or received are identical to data originally stored or sent), toauthenticate specific parties (i.e., that the purported sender or author of amessage is indeed its real sender or author), to facilitate nonrepudiation,and to preserve the confidentiality of information that may have comeimproperly into the possession of unauthorized parties.to understand how cryptographic methods span a range of communication and storage needs, consider the general problem of sending aprivate message from party a to party b. centuries ago, such a processwas accomplished by party a writing a letter containing his or her signature (authentication). the letter was sealed inside a container to preventaccidental disclosure (confidential transmission). if party b received thecontainer with a broken seal, it meant that the letter had been disclosed oraltered and party b would take appropriate actions (data integrity). otherwise, party b would verify party aõs signature and read the message.in the information era, each of the steps remains essentially the same,except that automated tools perform most of the work and are explainedbelow.c.2.1 ensuring the integrity of datadigital information is transmitted (or stored) so that it can be received(or retrieved). for two reasons, it is possible that the information receivedor retrieved might differ from the original information transmitted orstored:1. a technical problem may inadvertently alter one or more of thebits of information in question. no digital transmissionreceiving or stor1whitfield diffie and martin hellman, ònew directions in cryptography,ó ieee transactions on information theory, volume it22, ieee press, new york, 1976, pp. 644654.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.366appendix cage and retrieval system is perfectñevery now and then, with a frequencydepending on the particular characteristics of the technology used in thesystem and the environment in which it operates, a ò1ó will be received orretrieved when a ò0ó is sent or stored and vice versa.2. a third party may deliberately alter one or more of the bits ofinformation in question. for example, a proposal by vendor a to a buyermay offer to undertake a task for $100,000. vendor b, competing for thesame contract but wishing to charge $150,000, may intercept the digitaltransmission of vendor aõs proposal and deliberately alter the $100,000 to$300,000. thus, the buyer would be presented with information thatfalsely understated the costeffectiveness of vendor a and would awardthe contract to vendor b.in some cases, the alteration of one or even many bits may not renderthe information received or retrieved useless (e.g., if the bits constitute adigital representation of a photograph). however, for other purposes(e.g., the transmission of a software program), even a onebit differencebetween what was received and what was transmitted could make all thedifference in the world.it is therefore desirable to ensure that any alterations, whether inadvertent or deliberate, can be detected if they occur. an integrity lock orintegrity check is a quantity derived algorithmically from the bits thatconstitute the information being transmitted or stored and appended to itfor the purpose of ensuring that the information received or retrieved isidentical to the information being transmitted or stored.cryptography is relevant to integrity checks that are intended to detect deliberate alterations. in such cases, the integrity check (also knownas a message authenticator) must use a process that involves informationunknown to potential penetrators; that is, it has parts that are secret andknown only to the communicating parties (usually a secret key).2in the example of party a sending a message to party b, party aattaches a number called a cryptographic checksum that is generated2protecting against inadvertent alterations is the job of errorcorrecting codes (e.g., cyclicredundancy checks, reedsolomon codes, parity checks). however, for error correction,the process and techniques in question will be known commonly to all users. thus, if amessage is protected only by errorcorrecting codes, a person could use this knowledge toconstruct revised error checks that would conceal deliberate alterations. the use of errorcorrecting codes does not ensure integrity against intended subversions of the transmission.note: although under some circumstances (e.g., for limited numbers of presumablyrandom and inadvertent alterations), an errorcorrecting code can correct bits that havebeen changed.generally, a cryptographybased approach is much more sensitive to changes in themessage than usual errorcorrection schemes; that is, cryptography provides assurancesboth of confidentiality and of message integrity.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography367box c.1checksums and hasheschecksums were originally used to detect errors in stored or transmitted data.the simplest checksum is a single bit that is the xor of all message bits. this candetect single errors, but not double errors. most errordetecting codes add morecomplex checksums (often called crcs, for cyclic redundancy checks) to detectmuch larger numbers of errors.for nonmalicious errors owing to physical error phenomena, such checksumsare fine. but when an opponent might try to corrupt data, a cryptographically securechecksum is neededñone that will detect random errors and prevent malicious errors. for example, one of the federal standards relating to des describes a messageauthentication code (mac), which is formed by enciphering the message under asecret key known only to authorized parties and adding the last 64 bits (or less if thatsuffices) of ciphertext as a mac. clearly, another authorized user can validate themac by enciphering the message (which is sent in the clearñnot encipheredñsinceonly authentication is needed in this application) and comparing the computed macwith the received mac. an opponent who does not know the secret key has asmuch trouble computing a modified mac to go with a corrupted version of the dataas in breaking des. (if enciphering and deciphering are mathematically equivalent,it is just as hard to encipher without the key as to decipher without the key.)a hash function is a pseudorandom function that is shorter than its input. originally used in searching and sorting algorithms, where it did not need any cryptographic properties, a oneway hash function is useful for digital signatures becausethe hash can be signed by the publickey cryptographic system, rather than the muchlonger message. òonewayó means that it is easy to compute h (message) but computationally infeasible to compute any inverse image of a given value hñor if oneinverse image is known (e.g., if a spoof who has intercepted a message knows themessage and h (message)), it is computationally infeasible to find another inverseimage. (there are many inverse images since h is a compressive function.) the oneway property is needed because the signature is valid not only for the messagesigned, but also for any other message with the same hash value.in short, a cryptographic checksum depends on a secret key known to the authorized transmitter and receiver, whereas a oneway hash value can be computedby anyone. the hash value is then acted on by the secret key in an asymmetriccryptographic system to produce a digital signature.algorithmically from specific characteristics of the message (e.g., the letters and numbers in the message; see box c.1. party b can use the samealgorithm to compute the checksum of the message received and compareit to the checksum sent, and if they match, party b can be confident of themessageõs data integrity.c.2.2 authentication of usersin many communications systems, it is quite important to establishthe clear and unquestionable identity of the communicating parties; thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.368appendix cprocess of establishing and verifying the identity of a party is referred toas authentication.3authentication is based on something that the proper party wouldknow, would have, or would be. for example, a specially designed electronic ring might be owned or worn only by individuals authorized towear it.4 a secret password might be regarded as being known only to acertain party. another approach based on secret knowledge involves oneparty challenging another party to answer certain questions that could beanswered correctly only by one with the proper identity. in bankingcircles, a customerõs motherõs maiden name is often an authenticator,since it is assumed that such a fact would not be readily known to animpersonator (but contemporary dossierquality databases of personalinformation significantly weaken the assurance). in telephony, humansfrequently authenticate each other merely by the recognized sound of avoice or simply by the fact that a certain individual answers the telephonewhen the number alleged to be that individualõs number is dialed. vendors accepting credit cards use handwritten signatures to authenticateidentities on the assumption that only the proper holder of a credit cardcan sign the credit card charge slip in a way that matches the signature onthe card. stronger authentication methods often involve hardwareñatangible object or artifactñthat must be associated with authorized usersand that is not easily duplicated. (the ultimate òhardwareó involved might3authentication is almost always a requirement for authorized access (to use a system; toread, write, modify, or destroy data; to run a software process; to make use of computer orcommunications resources). access rights have qualifications that are often called privileges (e.g., access to data might include some or all of the privileges of read, write, modify,destroy). similarly, not all users of a system will be accorded free run of all the software inthe system (i.e., their privileges will be restricted). a system electronically accessing another without human intervention typically will not be entitled to all of the latterõs dataand/or software privileges. for example, one system might be authorized, or privileged, toask for only a certain kind of data (e.g., only the cash value of pointofsale information willbe exchanged with bankcard authorization systems).for some security requirements, authentication by itself may be sufficient. for example,the òsecurityó of the credit card industry is based primarily on authentication mechanisms,not secrecy mechanisms. people routinely recite their credit card numbers to anyone andeveryone who wants to be paid for services or products. some degree of security is provided by using other information, such as the expiration date or motherõs maiden name, toauthenticate the person using that number. such authentication is performed only whenthe risk of fraud is above a given level (e.g., the purchase of an expensive item or too muchcredit card activity in a given period of time). secrecy mechanisms are used, for the mostpart, to prevent eavesdroppers from getting oneõs card number, but most fraud is conducted without eavesdropping. for example, cards are stolen, numbers are stolen fromvendor databases, and merchant employees copy numbers.authentication and confidentiality are complementary tools for supporting informationsecurity, as the discussion above and that in box c.2 make clear.4òdick tracy eat your heart out,ó new york times, september 4, 1995, p. 38.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography369well be biometric in nature: a personõs handprint, a fingerprint, or a retinalpattern.) of course, except in the case of biometric identifiers, all authentication systems can be compromised if the secret or the hardware tokenbelonging only to the proper party is passed on to unauthorized parties.5even though such mechanisms are not perfect, they are routinelyused to conduct personal and business interactions, and most of thosecommunications use nonprivate channels. as we move toward an electronic economy, conducted over widescale communication networks, itbecomes increasingly important to develop stronger authenticationmechanisms that prevent wrongdoers of all types from being able to access remote resources without proper authorization. the reason is thatelectronic commerce disconnects consumers and suppliers from the physical mechanisms that help curb fraud. for example, vendors acceptingcredit cards for facetoface transactions check the signature on the card(or else accept liability for not performing the check). mailorder andtelephone vendors use the mailing address of a customer to help authenticate a purchase; large orders are generally not sent to an address different from the credit card billing address, unless extra steps are taken toensure authenticity. however, when such mechanisms are not available,electronic commerce will require strong cryptographybased mechanismsthat will help to establish the identity of the consumer.thus, it is the goal of most communications system designers to provide strong authenticity of the communicating parties. it should be noted,however, that in some cases (such as telephone caller id services), thecommunicating party may wish to be anonymous (or pseudonymous) forgood reason and system designers must take this into account.cryptographybased authentication could also help to deal with theproblem of controlling the secondary use of data collected from individuals (described in chapter 1). for example, a requirement to include thesource of personal data (e.g., the original party to which an individualdiscloses personal data) with the personidentified information at the timeof disclosure would help the individual keep track of how such information is subsequently used. such a requirement could be enforced throughthe use of a digital signature belonging to the data source being bound tothe personal information before it is disseminated.65for this reason, very strong authentication requires hardware components that can be inthe possession of only one person at a time. nevertheless, softwarebased authenticationhas many advantages (such as ease of deployment and perhaps lower costs) that may provedecisive against the lower levels of confidence that are possible with such methods. softwarebased authentication is better than nothing, and the decisions regarding medium willbe made on the basis of business needs for differing levels of confidence.6personal communication, marc rotenberg, electronic privacy information center, washington, d.c., march 10, 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.370appendix cfinally, good authentication mechanisms can facilitate the generationof reliable audit trails that allow the investigation of possible wrongdoing. such mechanisms have high value when many individuals are ina position to compromise the same sensitive data.c.2.3 nonrepudiationthe authentication of a user and the integrity of a message sent by auser are two different concepts. for example, being assured of a messageõsintegrity does not in itself assure the receiver that its purported senderdid in fact send it.nonrepudiation is a cryptographic capability that combines techniquesfor ensuring user authentication and message integrity in such a way thatthe signer of a message cannot plausibly deny that it was he who createdit or claim that the message received was not in fact the message sent. inother words, nonrepudiation protects against impersonation and denialof creation.digital signatures typically are used to provide nonrepudiation. adigital signature is a piece of information derived from both informationknown only to the sender (party a) and the exact text of the messagesent.7 on the basis of information freely available to the sender (party a),the receiver (party b), and any evildoer, party b can check the digitalsignature of the message allegedly sent by party a against the messageactually received. if nothing improper has occurred,¥ party b can be assured that party a was in fact the sender;¥ party b can be assured that the message received was actually theone party a sent; and¥ if party a ever denies having sent the message, party b can provethat party a did.8again, if the secrets on which authentication is based are compromised, a valid signature does not mean that a message was actually sent7although the entire message could be run through an encryption process and some partof the result used as the digital signature, in normal practice only a digest of the message issubject to this process to conserve both time and computer resources. the digest is createdby an algorithm (usually known as a secure hash algorithm) that shortens a message of anylength into a result that is of fixed and known length. this result (the digest or hash) isconstructed in such a way that the likelihood that different original data items will produceidentical digests is very small.8strictly speaking, this is true only if an asymmetric authentication system is used. anauthentication system based on symmetric cryptography and secret keys can protect onlyagainst thirdparty forgeries, but not against the case in which party b forges a message,claiming it to be from party a. the reason is that party a and party b (but not a third party)both know a common secret key.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography371by the person who would normally be associated with that signature. ifparty a gives his or her secret to party c (e.g., a secretary) and party cuses party aõs secret to send a message, that message is indistinguishablefrom one actually sent by party a. moreover, anyone receiving a messagesigned by party a has a right to expect that party a sent it and to takeaction on that basis. for example, if party a completes an electronicmessage to buy certain items, that party will digitally sign the message inpreparation for sending it. however, if party aõs attention is divertedduring this time, party c might actually send the message to a differentsupplier. this different supplier can verify that the message was signedby an authorized individual (party a) and has every right to concludethat a valid purchase order has been received.finally, nonrepudiation often includes a time element; for example,one must be able to prove not only that he or she directed a stockbroker tobuy 1,000 shares of company xyz at $30 per share, but also when theorder was placed. note that if the date and time are part of the messagebeing signed, then the sender also cannot repudiate that date and time atwhich he or she signed the message. a greater degree of confidence thatthe date and time are in fact correct can be provided by secure date/timestamps.9c.2.4 preservation of confidentiality10it is inherent and assumed in most communications system designthat communications between parties should be controlled in such a waythat unintended access by others is prohibited. there are three common9secure date/time stamping is a technique involving a trusted third party to certify thecreation of a document at a given time. conceptually, a digital document is mailed to thistrusted third party, who provides a date/time stamp and a digital signature of the documentstamp combination. if the date/time stamp is inserted correctly by the third party,the digital signature of that party ensures that the document did indeed exist at the timeand date in the document. more discussion of this concept can be found in barry cipra,òelectronic timestamping: the notary public goes digital,ó science, volume 261(5118),july 9, 1993, pp. 162163, and online at http://www.surety.com.10note that in this section (and throughout this report unless otherwise stated explicitly),the term òconfidentialityó (or, synonymously, secrecy) applies to data in a technical sense.there is another sense in which the term òconfidentialityó is often used that refers to apolicy contextñthe assertion that data are sensitive and must be protected from unauthorized parties. in a policy sense, confidentiality can be accomplished by techniques basedentirely on access control and authorizationñindividuals without proper authorization arenot permitted to view confidential data.thus, the distinction can be made between data that are confidential (i.e., on policygrounds, a personõs aids/hiv status may be confidential data; the law recognizes the confidentiality of communications between lawyer and client, husband and wife, priest and parishioner) and data that are made confidential by the technical means described in this section.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.372appendix cmethods of gaining confidentiality of communications: physical security,obfuscation, and encryption.in the case of physical security, the communicator relies on the fact thatthe attacker will have a very difficult time physically penetrating the communications media or devices, or that it will be too costly for an attacker to do so.an example of this is an optical fiber, a medium that is inherently difficult totap into without being intrusive to the communication.in the case of obfuscation, the communicator relies upon the fact thatcommunicated information is so well hidden in some surrounding container that it will be difficult for an attacker to recognize and thus retrieveit. an example of this is steganography, in which data can be hidden inthings such as photographs.11finally, with encryption, one communicating party encodes information by using an agreedupon coding method; the information is transmitted to its destination; then the other communicating party decodes theinformation. in this case, the communicator is relying on the fact that forsomeone other than the intended recipient, it will be very difficult to breakthe code or discover a secret that the code depends on, such as a key.when used for preserving confidentiality, cryptography enables thesystem designer to separate the security of a message from the security ofthe medium used to transmit that message. since some of the most usefuland least expensive media in use today are insecure (e.g., wireless communications), such separation has obvious advantages. even the mostsophisticated cryptography today requires some keeping of secrets, but aproperly implemented cryptography system reduces the problem of keeping messages secret to the problem of keeping secret a much smaller key,thereby simplifying the security problem.note that confidentiality and authentication are tied closely together,as discussed in box c.2. furthermore, systems that provide strong authentication capabilities and those that provide strong confidentiality canserve a similar purpose under some circumstances. for example, confidentiality provided by cryptography can keep hackers from learning acredit card number that is sent over the internet, while authenticationprovided by cryptography can keep hackers from using that credit cardnumber once they get it.1211a simple example: most blackandwhite pictures rendered in digital form use at most216 (65,536) shades of gray, because the human eye is incapable of distinguishing any moreshades. each element of a digitized blackandwhite photo would then be associated with16 bits of information about what shade of gray should be used. if a picture were digitizedwith 24 bits of gray scale, the last 8 bits could be used to convey a concealed message thatwould never appear except for someone who knew to look for it. the digital size of thepicture would be 50% larger than it would have to be, but no one but the creator of theimage would know.12of course, the problem is that, in practice, many uses of credit card numbers do notcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography373box c.2dependence of confidentiality on authenticationconfidentiality in electronic communications is not possible without authentication. suppose that party a and party b want to communicate in such a way thatparty c cannot eavesdrop, but that no authentication is performed. one might conjecture a system that selects a random session key, without telling party a and partyb, and then encrypts everything communicated between them. unfortunately, sucha system is not confidential because party c could place himself between party aand party b, relaying all information between both parties (or only the informationparty c wanted to pass). this is possible because it was assumed that no authentication existed. that is, by assumption the system cannot distinguish among party a,party b, or party c, and neither can any of the parties involved.in practice, there are numerous mechanisms that seemingly provide a sufficientlevel of authentication for business or personal communications. for example, people routinely òauthenticateó the person on the other end of a telephone call by recognizing the voice. unfortunately, this still does not provide the necessary foundation for a secure telephone system. for example, party c can simply listen to theconversation that he or she is relaying between party a and party b, without participating. (this scenario illustrates an illicit form of call forwarding; party c rigs thetelephone system to be called when party a dials party bõs number, and party cautomatically dials party b when a call from party a is received.) since the telephonesystem has no authentication, by assumption, party cõs scheme cannot be preventedeven if party a recognizes party bõs voice (which is a very strong endtoend authentication mechanism).similarly, one might assume that the telephone system itself does not allow thetype of tampering that party c needs to place himself between party a and party b.in other words, the telephone system is designed in such a way that when party adials party bõs number, the call is routed directly to party bõs telephone. this arrangement is characteristic of most telephone systems today. however, its successdepends on the ability of the telephone system to authenticate the maintainers of thesystem. although the population of valid system users is smaller than the populationof telephone users, the former is still relatively large (more than a few people), andhistory has shown that wideranging networks are difficult, if not impossible, to secure without strong authentication mechanisms.for a communications system to be confidential, the system itself must authenticate the end users. only then can it exchange the secret information needed toestablish a confidential connection between those users. authentication is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for confidentiality.require strong authentication (e.g., telephone orders), even if security procedures are intended to minimize the incidence of fraud in such orders (e.g., not shipping an order to anaddress other than the billing address on the credit card). if every use of a credit cardrequired cryptographic authentication, revealing a credit card number to the world wouldnot have much significance.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.374appendix cc.3 basic constructs of cryptographycryptography began the science of keeping information secret fromthose not authorized to see it. in this classical application (called encryption in this report), cryptography has been used for thousands of years.today, cryptographic methods help solve critical informationage problems, including those of data confidentiality (keeping data private), dataintegrity (ensuring that data retrieved or received are identical to dataoriginally stored or sent), and subject authentication (ensuring that thepurported sender or author of a message is indeed its real sender orauthor). box c.3 contains some additional applications of cryptography.in general, cryptographic systems involve the following:¥ the message to be sent (usually known as the plaintext); for example,a sentence written in english. the plaintext is the message that party acomposes for reading by party b. all plaintext messages can be represented as numbers (e.g., by using 00 for a, 01 for b, and so on, with 26 forspace, 27 for comma, 28 for period, 29 for semicolon, and 30 for questionmark).¥ the ciphertext (the gibberish that results from encryption) that anyone can see without compromising the plaintext message.¥ an encryption algorithm (a series of mathematical steps) that party auses, in combination with an encryption key, to generate the ciphertext.¥ a decryption algorithm that party b uses, in combination with adecryption key, to retrieve the plaintext from the ciphertext.one of the simplest encryption schemes is the following: for everyletter in the plaintext message (represented by a number), add 1 to obtainthe corresponding ciphertext message letter. the encryption algorithm issimple addition, with an encryption key of 1.13 the same encryptionalgorithm could be employed using a different encryption key (i.e., anumber other than 1). the corresponding decryption algorithm is subtraction, with a decryption key of 1.one of the fundamental goals of cryptographic research is to developalgorithms that can be used effectively within a specific system and thatare difficult to òcrack.ó (a more precise definition of òdifficultó is presented in the next section.) a second goal, pursued under the label of13in general, such schemes òwrapó at the end of the alphabet, so that 30 (originally question mark) is mapped back to the start of the alphabet (in this case a). thus, the completecipher is a becomes b, b becomes c, . . . y becomes z, z becomes space, space becomescomma, comma becomes period, period becomes semicolon, semicolon becomes questionmark, and question mark becomes a. if, as in our example, the alphabet has 31 characters,this wrap would be known as òmod 31.ócryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography375box c.3additional capabilities enabled by cryptographycryptographic techniques allow a wide variety of other capabilities, includingthe following:¥ secret sharing. cryptography enables the division of a secret among mpeople in a way that any k people can reconstruct the secret (for k less than or equalto m), but also in such a way that any combinations of fewer than k people have noinformation at all about the secret.¥ verifiable secret sharing. a stronger form of secret sharing enables any of thek people to verify that he or she has indeed received a real part of the secret.¥ secure function evaluation. cryptography enables a function to be evaluatedpublicly with multiple arguments in such a way that none of the holders of eachargument has any knowledge about what the others are holding. one application iselectronic voting in such a way that the winner of a vote can be known withoutforcing any individual to reveal how he or she voted.these capabilities are less commonly discussed than the fundamental capabilities of enabling confidentiality, signature, and authentication. however, other applications in the future may well rest on them.cryptanalytic research, is to develop methods and techniques for trying toread messages that have been encrypted by algorithms that may or maynot be known to the cryptanalyst.in symmetric cryptography (or, equivalently, secretkey or privatekey cryptography), the encryption key is the same as the decryption key;thus, message privacy depends on the key being kept secret. a majorproblem faced by party a is how to inform party b of the key that is beingused. the data encryption standard (des) is an example of a secretkeycryptographic system.in onetime pad cryptographic systems, a key is used once and thendiscarded; the key must be as long as the message. because an eavesdropper is faced with a constantly changing key pattern that is impossible tobreak even with exhaustive search, a onetime pad is provably unbreakable provided the key is secure. however, onetime pad systems aredifficult to use, and keeping the key secure poses a big problem for keymanagement.in asymmetric (or, equivalently, publickey) cryptographic systems,the encryption key is different from the decryption key. message privacydepends only on the decryption key being kept secret. the encryptionkey can even be published and disseminated widely, so that anyone canencrypt messages. only the recipient party b needs the decryption key(which is specific to that party), and party b never needs to share it withanyone (since only he or she should be able to read messages encryptedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.376appendix cfor transmission to party b). the rsa algorithm is a very popular algorithm at the heart of many asymmetric cryptographic systems. (box c.4provides more details on the mathematics of asymmetric cryptography.)in a keyescrow cryptographic system, the decryption key is madeavailable to parties not directly involved in a given communicationñbutonly under certain circumstances (e.g., under judicial warrant). however, without a complete decryption key, these other parties should beunable to decipher protected communications. the clipper initiative is akeyescrow proposal for secure telephone communications advanced bythe clinton administration and described in chapter 5.key management is an integral aspect of all cryptographic systems,which entails (1) the generation of appropriate keys and (2) the distribution of such keys only to the proper parties. proper and efficient keymanagement is quite complex and is needed to ensure the confidentiality,integrity, and authenticity of the keys used for encryption and decryption.for example, in a symmetric cryptographic system, each user must establish his or her own secret key to use with every other party with whomcommunication is desired. thus, for a system of n users who wish to beable to communicate securely with each other, the number of secret keysthat the parties (taken all together) must manage and keep secret isn(n 1)/2 (i.e., the number of pairs possible with n parties). when n issmall, the key exchange problem can be handled by personal meetings,box c.4the mathematics of asymmetric cryptographyasymmetric cryptography is based on the putative existence of oneway functions: mathematical functions that are easy to compute but hard to undo. there is nomathematical proof that such functions exist, but there are functions that to date haveresisted all attempts to make them easy to undo. one such function is multiplication(its inverseñfactoring). it is computationally easy to multiply two prime integers, butin general it is computationally difficult to factor the product. (computational ease anddifficulty refer to the computational resources that are required to perform the task.)an asymmetric cryptographic system based on factoring would regard the product of the two prime integers as the public key and the two prime integers as theprivate key. the public key can be made knownñonce it is known, all of the information about the private key is known in principle too, but it would simply take toolong to attempt to compute it.what does òtoo longó mean? if the publickey and privatekey pair is wellchosen, and if in fact multiplication does represent a true oneway function, it meansthat under no foreseeable circumstances could enough computational power be assembled to perform the factoring in a time shorter than the age of the universe.alas, factoring is not provably òhard,ó and a variety of techniques have beenused in the last decade to drive down the time needed to perform factoring.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography377but when n is large, facetoface meetings as a method for key exchangeare impractical.in many ways, the key management problem is conceptually the sameas the cryptographic problem of keeping messages secure, although inpractice the key management system usually handles a smaller volume ofdata, and therefore different methods can be used.14 asymmetric cryptographic systems greatly reduce, but do not eliminate, the problem of keydistribution. for example, people using an asymmetric cryptographicsystem can (in principle) publish their public keys in the equivalent of atelephone book that can be distributed freely. each user must keep trackof only n 1 keys (and can even keep them in a public place with nosecurity), and he or she needs to keep secret only one piece of informationñthe userõs own private key. note also that the need for facetofacemeetings is eliminated.another approach to managing cryptographic keys that does not useasymmetric cryptography is the use of a key distribution center (kdc). akdc is a trusted agent that knows each userõs master key. this masterkey is employed to exchange session keys for use by users in direct communication. the advantages over link encryption are that only one nodeis vulnerable to attack (the kdc) and that the users can converse directly(after the initial connection protocol in which both must communicatewith the kdc to set up the exchange of session keys).note that key management for data communications is very differentthan for data storage. when encrypted data are communicated, partieshave incentives to keep the relevant key only for the duration of thetransmission and to eliminate it permanently once the transmission iscomplete (typically measured in seconds or minutes). when encrypteddata are stored, the storing party has a great deal of incentive to retain thekey as long as the data may be important (perhaps years or decades).1514the primary exception to this rule is that keys in a onetime pad are as large as themessage itself; thus, the key management system for a onetime pad must be as efficient asthe cryptographic system itself.15one practical qualifier is important. another constraint on data storage entirely apartfrom encryption is the fact that archived data must in general be copied periodically andrewritten in order to ensure that the thencurrent generation of technology will be able toaccess it. for example, in the early days of desktop computing (10 years ago), many computers used 8inch floppy disks. today, it is difficult to find an 8inch floppy disk drive,and data stored on an 8inch floppy disk would be inaccessible without such a drive. thecareful archivist would have to copy the data from the 8inch floppies to newer media, suchas 5 1/4inch floppies or cdroms. when storage technologies become more capable andwidespread (leading to the obsolescence of todayõs cdrom drives), the same copying andrewriting procedure will have to be followed.footnote continues on next page.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.378appendix cc.4 attacks on cryptographic systemsa cryptographic system involves an encryption algorithm, adecryption algorithm, and keys for encryption and decryption. althoughthe precise boundaries between algorithm and key are fuzzy, for practicalpurposes the algorithm can be regarded as whatever in the mathematicsis difficult to change, whereas the key is whatever is easy to change.a basic assumption of cryptographic security is that an eavesdropperknows the relevant decryption algorithm. the algorithm may (or maynot) be a public one, but the history of all information secrecy suggeststhat the bestkept secrets eventually leak. the use of an easily changedkey thus enables the continued use of an algorithm that is known to aneavesdropper. (any added security that results from the fact that aneavesdropper may not in fact know the algorithm is simply a bonus.) putdifferently, the security of a cryptographic system should be judged bythe security provided by the key alone, even if one attempts to keep thealgorithm secret.to compromise a message, an eavesdropper has two alternatives: toobtain the message in plaintext before it has been encrypted (or after it hasbeen decrypted) or to obtain the ciphertext and decipher it without knowing all that the recipient knows about the decryption algorithm and key.(for the purposes of this appendix, the term òcompromiseó refers to aneavesdropper intercepting and being able to read the secret message;other types of compromise such as preventing party b from receiving themessage or deliberately garbling it so that even party b cannot read it arenot addressed here.) although cryptography and cryptanalysis are concerned primarily with the latter, an eavesdropper does not particularlycare what methods may be used to obtain the plaintext of a message.thus, party a and party b must ensure that all elements of their commugiven that periodic rewriting is necessary (e.g., every 10 years), it is natural to ask if itshould be the originally encrypted data or the unencryptedandthenreencrypted data thatshould be rewritten. there are advantages and disadvantages to both. rewriting the originally encrypted data means that it does not need to be decrypted, thus improving possiblelosses of confidentiality. on the other hand, it also means that the key management systemcontemporaneous with the originally encrypted data must be preserved for future use.(specifically, the key management system is responsible for maintaining a record of the keyused to encrypt the data so that it can be decrypted later.) preserving the key managementsystem has many of the same problems associated with it that preserving the older storagemedia poses. if the choice is made to rewrite unencryptedandthenreencrypted data, thenthe originally encrypted data must be decrypted, which opens another channel for loss ofconfidentiality.different institutions will make this tradeoff in different ways, but if the choice is madeto rewrite the unencryptedandthenreencrypted data, then the time that the original keymust be preserved is the time between data rewritings, which may be much shorter thanthe time the data is of interest.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography379nications system are secure; if party a uses a secretary to encrypt themessage and the secretary sells the message to an enemy agent, the bestencryption scheme in the world does not matter. similarly, if the eavesdropper is able to intercept the decryption key (e.g., because it was transmitted on an insecure channel or because it too was sold by the secretary),secret messages transmitted with the lost key are vulnerable to compromise. (the fact that party b must have the decryption key to decrypt themessage and that somehow the information identifying the decryptionkey must be transmitted from party a to party b is at the heart of the keyinterception problem.)still, it is often the case that the only real alternative for an eavesdropper is to try to decipher an intercepted ciphertext. how difficult is it foran eavesdropper to accomplish such a task?the difficulty of cryptanalysis depends on two factors: the size of thekey and the mathematical structure of the algorithm itself. key size determines how long it would take to cryptanalyze the ciphertext by bruteforceñtrying all possible keys with a given decryption algorithm untilthe (meaningful) plaintext appears.16 with a sufficiently long key, even16strictly speaking, this statement is true for symmetric cryptography involving algorithmssuch as des with a larger key and a few other minor modifications to make it stronger. withasymmetric cryptography, the difficulty of the problem rests in knowing the computationaleffort needed to invert certain functions (e.g, factoring). for more discussion, see section c.5.for these reasons, the comment of edgar allen poe (edgar allen poe, the goldbug, creativeeducation inc., mankato, minn., 1990, p. 63) that òit may well be doubted whether humaningenuity can construct an enigma of the kind which human ingenuity may not, by properapplication, resolveó is exactly wrongñthere is every reason to believe that it is possible todevise an impenetrable cipher. (the onetime pad is such an example.)quantitatively, the effort to encipher and decipher (i.e., with knowledge of the key) inconventional systems is almost independent of the key size (and sublinear in any event). forexample, both rc2 and rc4 have key initialization routines that take the variablelength keyand expand it into a larger òexpanded keyó used in the encryption and decryption process.since the key initialization is done only once per key, it adds a fixed overhead, which isnegligible in most applications because the expanded key is used to encrypt large amounts ofdata before the key is changed. cryptanalysis, on the other hand, appears to be exponentialin the key size (2b, where b is the number of bits).the bottom line is that cryptanalysis grows exponentially in b, while enciphering anddeciphering grow at worst linearly in bña very nice work factor for the cryptographer, but anawful situation for the cryptanalyst.asymmetric cryptographic systems are more complex. the bestknown algorithms provide cryptanalytic attacks that grow as exp[c á b1/3 á ln(b)2/3] (where c is a constant equal toapproximately 1.7) while enciphering and deciphering grow as b3.finally, one important operational caveat for both asymmetric and symmetric systems isthat one must be able to recognize the output as meaningful before one can know that the keyjust tested was indeed correct. when the plaintext is an english sentence, it is possible to lookat the resulting sentence and recognize it for what it is. however, if the òplaintextó is in fact acomputer program or an image file, it may be much more difficult to recognize the output asbeing correct.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.380appendix can eavesdropper with very extensive computing resources would have totake a very long time (longer than the age of the universe) to test allpossible combinations. on the other hand, practical considerations related to implementation issues may force a tradeoff between overall security (of which key size is one element) and cost.1717a relevant issue is that computers can be expected to grow more powerful over time,although there are fundamental limits on computational capability imposed by the structure of the universe (e.g., nothing travels faster than light in vacuum, and the number ofatoms in the universe available to build computers is large but finite). thus, the minimumkey size needed to protect a message against a very powerful opponent will grow as computers become more powerful, although it is certainly possible to choose a key size that willbe adequate for protecting against exhaustive search for all time.thus, although it is true that dramatic reductions in the cost of computing (or equivalently, increases in computational power) have occurred in the past four decades, it doesnot follow that such reductions in cost or increases in power can continue indefinitely. thecommonplace belief or instinct that they can continue indefinitely is simply wrong.what is true is that fundamental limits to computation have not yet been reached andwill not be reached for a long time, but this is a result of the fact that early computationaldevices were so far from the fundamental limits of computation that many orders of magnitude improvement have been possible. two illustrative calculations demonstrate the factthat there are practical limits:1. a limit based on the energy output of the sun. all real computations consume energy. onthe basis of standard thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, the energy cost of an irreversible computation must be on the order of kt, where t is the ambient temperature (onan absolute kelvin scale) and k is boltzmannõs constant (equal to 1.4 10ð23 joules perdegree kelvin). the sunõs power output is approximately 3.86 1026 watts; thus, its totalenergy output over its expected lifetime of 10 billion years (3 1017 seconds) is about1044 joules. assume an ambient temperature of t = 10ð6 degrees, which will then imposean energy cost per operation of 1.4 10ð29 joules per operation. thus, the number ofcomputational operations possible using the entire energy output of the sun is given byenergy output divided by the energy cost per operation, or about 1073 operations. if onlyone operation were necessary to test a key (in practice, hundreds are necessary), then itwould take 1073 operations to test a key of 73 decimal digits (which is equivalent to about250 binary bits). for reference, the number of atoms in the solar system is about 1060.2. a limit based on the mass of earth. the mass of earth is about 6  1024 kg. a protonmass is 1.6 10ð27 kg, so that earth contains about 4  1051 protons. assume one protonper computer, and that each computer can perform one operation in the time that it takeslight to cross its diameter (i.e., 10ð15 meters divided by 3  1010 meters per second, or 1/3 10ð25 seconds). each computer can thus perform 3  1025 operations per second. if all ofthese computers work in parallel, they can perform 4 1051 3 1025 operations persecond, or 1077 operations per second. the age of the universe is on the order of 10 billionyears, or 3 1017 seconds. thus, an earthful of protonsized computers can perform 31094 operations in the age of the universe. with the assumptions made before, this corresponds to a key size of 95 decimal digits, or about 320 bits.both of these calculations demonstrate that it is clearly possible to specify a key sizelarge enough to guarantee that an attack based on exhaustive search will never be feasible,regardless of advances in conventional computational hardware or algorithms. (the qualification to òconventionaló computing is for quantum computing, discussed in section c.6.6.)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography381nevertheless, because the cost of bruteforce cryptanalysis doublesfor every bit that is added to the length of a key, there is a broad consensus among cryptographers that it is possible today to encrypt data veryinexpensively in a way that would be unbreakable through brute force inthe foreseeable future, regardless of advances in computing technologythat could be used for cryptanalysis. put differently, for some sufficientlylong key length, the possibility of bruteforce cryptanalysis can be ruledout categorically for all time. in practice, òsufficiently longó may turn outto be a key length as short as 168 bits. (of course, this analysis does notaddress those operational situations, encountered from time to time, inwhich the time required to encrypt plaintext must be kept to a minimum;in such situations, the operational performance requirements of a systemmay preclude the use of such a long key. nevertheless, in many situations, the operational requirements are not quite so critical, and the system implementer can use very long key lengths without an impact onperformance.)the algorithm itself may provide an alternative to exhaustive search:a weakness in the algorithm, if exploited by an opponent, may categorically rule out certain keys, thereby reducing the number of keys that needto be tested. such weaknesses may be introduced deliberately (resultingin a òtrapdooró that allows someone with such knowledge to decipher amessage secretly) or may be accidental (perhaps as the result of insufficient analysis).several attack scenarios are possible for the eavesdropper:¥ ciphertext only. if the eavesdropper has only the interceptedciphertext and nothing else, it may well be impossible to recover theplaintext. this is the least advantageous for the eavesdropper; however,judgments about the security of a system should not be made on the basisof this assumption since party a and party b may not know that thiscondition obtains.¥ known plaintext. the eavesdropper may have the interceptedciphertext (call it c1) and some other ciphertext (c2), as well as theplaintext (p2) corresponding to c2. (for example, c2 may be known to bean encrypted press release that is then published by party a the day afterinterception.) if the eavesdropper has reason to believe that c1 (theciphertext of the message of interest) has been produced by the samealgorithm and key, he or she may be able to derive the decryption keywith much less work than by exhaustive search or the case in which onlyc1 is available (i.e., the ciphertextonly case).¥ chosen plaintext. a variant of the known plaintext attack is thechosen plaintext attack, in which the eavesdropper has been able to insertwords of his or her own into p2. (an attack of this sort characterized u.s.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.382appendix cnavy intelligence just before the battle of midway in world war ii.18) bycontrolling the plaintext, the work of the eavesdropper is eased significantly (because test cases can be generated easily, among other things).once the eavesdropper learns the decryption key, he or she can decipher easily any subsequent message that uses that key.note that much of the public debate about the ease or difficulty ofbreaking an encryption scheme is carried out in terms of an òidealó implementation of a given algorithm. however, in actual practice, cryptanalysts(those trying to break encryption schemes) exploit weaknesses in the wayan algorithm is implemented in practice. for example, the protectionafforded by algorithm x may require the use of random numbers. however, it may turn out that the way in which system a implements algorithm x does not use true random numbers but rather numbers with apredictable sequence (e.g., consecutive numbers, or even worse, a fixednumber such as zero or one).19 a cryptanalyst who suspects that thismight be true about someone who uses system a to protect communications may be able to exploit it and therefore reduce by orders of magnitude the effort required to decipher those communications. put differently, any cryptographic system that relies on keys has a builtinvulnerability with respect to the key. the encryption may be virtuallyinvulnerable, but the key is always vulnerable. even if the key is ultimately divided between multiple parties, the place at which the key isgenerated is always a potential vulnerability.strong cryptography refers to cryptographic systems that are verydifficult to break. eavesdroppers with large amounts of time, money, andcomputing expertise (e.g., national governments) are in a much betterposition to break cryptographic systems of a given strength than are thosewith more limited resources (e.g., individuals or corporations). organized crime may also be in a good position to obtain cryptanalytic intelli18to confirm a cryptanalytic solution, u.s. codebreakers asked the american garrison atmidway to report over an open and unsecured channel a shortage of fresh water. thejapanese, monitoring this channel, reported two days later that òafó was experiencing ashortage of fresh water, thus confirming that òafó was indeed the japanese code designation for midway. see david kahn, the codebreakers: the story of secret writing, macmillan,new york, 1967, p. 569.19an analogy will illustrate. computer users must often òsign onó to their computersusing a secret password that cannot be guessed easily. however, it is quite common to findcomputer users who use passwords such as their name or some easily remembered (andtherefore easily guessed) word. a person (or a computer) trying to guess passwords isobviously in a much better position if the search can be limited to all eightcharacter wordsin the dictionary and all proper names (analogous to numbers with a predictable sequence),rather than all possible combinations of eight characters (analogous to random numbers).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography383gence because it is able to bring large sums of money to bear on theproblem if the results are worth even more.an interesting technical question is the extent to which it is possibleto build very strong cryptographic systems with no algorithmic weaknesses whose decryption keys are sufficiently large to preclude exhaustive search as an effective method of decryption. if such systems arepossible, a user of such systems can, by definition, be assured that noeavesdropper can break that encryption system.finally, the role of operational errors in the penetration of even welldesigned cryptographic systems should not be underestimated. penetration is often possible because the user of the cryptographic system hasmade a mistake that compromises its security. one example that hasrecently come to light is the successful decryption of certain messagessent by soviet agents in the united states regarding nuclear weapons andthe u.s. nuclear program at the end of world war ii. soviet agents useda onetime pad; when used properly, a onetime pad is known with mathematical certainty to be impenetrable (as described above). however, aonetime pad is based on the idea that a certain sequence of randomnumbers serving as the encryption key to a message will never be usedmore than once. for some time, soviet agents used a particular onetimepad to encode messages, and american analysts were unable to decipherthem. however, the time came when soviet agents began to reuse numbers from the onetime pad, and american cryptanalysts were able tomake substantial headway in deciphering them.20c.5 elements of cryptographic securityto keep eavesdroppers from compromising secret messages, securityexperts may take several approaches. by far the most common approachis to change the key frequently, although in practice the problem of keydistribution may complicate matters considerably if a privatekey systemis used. a less frequent (though still common) technique is to encrypt amessage multiple times through the same algorithm with different keys;an approach based on multiple encryption using des has been proposedas an alternative to the skipjack encryptiondecryption algorithm. (skipjack is the name of the algorithm on which the clipper chip is based.)security experts may also attempt to keep the algorithm secret. keeping algorithms secret has advantages and disadvantages. the advantageis that when an algorithm is kept secret, fewer people have the opportu20george johnson, òthe spiesõ code and how it broke,ó new york times, week in review, july 16, 1995, p. 16.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.384appendix cnity to learn its potential weaknesses; thus, information about its weaknesses can be less widespread should any have been overlooked. inaddition, keeping algorithms secret is a way to keep out of the publicdomain information on what constitutes a good algorithm. the disadvantage is the flip side to the same coinñwhen fewer people can learn itsweaknesses, an algorithm may have vulnerabilities that go undetected byits users and, thus, may be vulnerable to clandestine compromise.finally, in principle, it is possible to vary the algorithm as well. however, it is very difficult to develop a trusted algorithm, with the result thatalgorithms are changed rarely, and the number of useful algorithms ismuch smaller than the number of keys possible when even a small key isused.to summarize, the fundamental question in evaluating cryptographicsystems is how long the system as a whole takes to become obsolete orwhether it will defy obsolescence. the algorithms and techniques for keygeneration and management are important, but it is a mistake to focusexclusively on these matters. a cryptographic system may well becomeobsolete in a given environment even though its mathematical foundations remain sound. extending the time to obsolescence may be desirableand necessary, but no system can be extended indefinitely. the continualevolution of cryptographic techniques and the use of redundant systemsare as important to security as the mathematical correctness of an algorithm and the size of an encryption key.c.6 expected lifetimes of cryptographic systemsbecause of the rapidly decreasing cost of computation, cryptographicsystems that cost $1 billion to break in 1945 can be broken for approximately $10 today. in the same way, todayõs cryptographic systems shouldhave large safety margins to protect against future advances in technology.the need for safety margins varies, depending on the data entrustedto the cryptographic system. press releases, encrypted during transmission for later release, typically need at most a few days of secrecy. medical records, on the other hand, can have privacy time constants on theorder of 50 years. because a company or governmental agency typicallyuses a single cryptographic system to protect all of its data, ideally thesystem should have a safety margin commensurate with the longest privacy time constant encountered.21symmetric cryptographic systems allow large safety margins at low21see also footnote 15.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography385cost. asymmetric cryptographic systems have a more pronounced relationship between cost and safety margin, so that it is harder to achievelarge safety margins with asymmetric systems. even with conventionalsystems, where 50year safety margins appear possible and costeffective,national security and related export considerations may prevent their use.c.6.1 backgroundthe need for safety margins stems from two general categories oftechnological advances: those due to improvements in computation andthose due to breakthroughs in cryptanalytic attacks.safety margins needed to protect against improvements in computation are easier to predict because there is a steady trend, manifest sincethe 1930s, that is expected to continue for the next few decades and probably beyond, in which the cost of computation has decreased by an orderof magnitude (i.e., a factor of 10) every 5 to 7 years (e.g., mooreõs lawpredicts, so far fairly accurately, that microprocessor speed doubles every18 months, equivalent to a factor of 10 every 5 years). consequently, acomputation that costs $1 billion today may cost only $10 in 50 years.22since some of the information entrusted to cryptographic systems has aprivacy time constant of 50 years and more (e.g., medical records shouldbe private for at least the duration of the patientõs life), it is seen that asignificant safety margin is needed.advances of the second type, breakthroughs in cryptanalysis andrelated techniques, are much harder to predict. in the case of symmetriccryptographic systems, there is little public literature to use as a guide,but asymmetric cryptographic systems offer some data points, and sothey are treated first.c.6.2 asymmetric cryptographic systemsthe asymmetric cryptographic systems in primary use today basetheir security on the difficulty of two related computational problems:factoring integers and finding discrete logarithms.23 factoring is used as22this assumes that mooreõs law will continue to hold. today, the technology of siliconelectronics does not run up against fundamental physical constraints, but whether themooreõs law trend will continue to hold for 50 years is open to debate. most expertssuggest that for a decade or two, it will probably remain valid.23although it is not needed to understand what follows, these two problems can be explained easily. in factoring, one is given an integer, for example 493, and asked to find allprime factors. since 493 17  29, the answer here is ò17 and 29.ó in discrete logarithms, oneis given a, n, and y in the equation òax modulo n yó and asked to find x. for example, asolution to ò2x modulo 11  10ó is x 5. to see this, note that 25 32 and 32 modulo 11  10.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.386appendix cthe example in what follows because it is the more studied of these twoproblems.for many years, the progress of factoring was measured by theprogress in factoring what are known as the fermat numbers, denoted byfn, the nth fermat number. the nth fermat number is 2^(2n) 1 (where ^denotes exponentiation). hence, f2 24 + 1  17, f3 28 + 1  257, etc. ingeneral, fn is an n 1 bit number. increasing n by 1 doubles the size of thenumber to be factored, when measured in bits. in recent history, f7 wasfactored in 1970, f8 in 1980, f9 in 1990, and f10 in 1995.it is interesting to note that f9 was factored by an algorithm that ismuch faster for òspecialó numbers such as 2^(2n) 1 than for ògeneralónumbers used in asymmetric cryptographic systems. this was not true ofearlier factoring methods. hence, although the history of the fermatnumbers can be used to illustrate the history of factoring as applied toasymmetric cryptographic systems, the future does not allow that correspondence. (more precisely, f8 was factored with a method that is notapplicable to breaking asymmetric cryptographic systems. however, another factoring method that is applicable to breaking asymmetric cryptographic systems was being tested at about the time and would have beensuccessful in factoring f8 in either 1980 or the next year.) also, the factoring of f9 involved a large network of workstations, connected over theinternet and using idle time. this networking reduced by several ordersof magnitude the time needed to undertake the relevant computations.table c.1 provides a historical record of the factoring of ònonspecialónumbers.some of the advances in factoring fermat numbers were due to thedecreasing cost of computation, which fell by approximately a factor of100 in each 10year period. however, most of the improvement was dueto breakthroughs in factoring algorithms. for example, the continuedfraction method, used successfully to factor f7 in 1970, would have takenapproximately a million times as much effort to factor f8, or 10,000 timesas long in 1980, given the factorof100 speedup in computers. in contrast,table c.1 a history of factoringyearsize of number factored196420decimal digits (66 bits)197445decimal digits (149 bits)198471decimal digits (236 bits)1994129decimal digits (429 bits)source: andrew odlyzko, òthe future of integer factorization,ó cryptobytes, rsa laboratories, redwood city, calif., volume 1(2), summer 1995, p. 5.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography387the quadratic sieve, developed in the late 1970s, cut the required computation by a factor of roughly 100,000 when compared to continued fractions. qualitatively similar numbers apply to the improvements thatallowed f9 to be factored in 1990.the data points from the factoring of fermat numbers give an estimate that key size (the size of the number to be factored) must doubleevery 10 years to keep up with improvements in factoring. this, in turn,implies that key size must have a safety factor of 32 to be secure over 50years (five periods of 10 years, resulting in a key size increase of 25 32).this estimate is very approximate, and probably conservative, becausethe development of asymmetric cryptography gave a tremendous impetus to the study of factoring. mathematicians working in what had beenone of the purest of pure areas of mathematics, with little attendant funding, could suddenly point to immense commercial benefits from theirwork. also, f7 and f8 were factored on singleprocessor machines,whereas the factorization of f9 made use of the idle time on a network ofapproximately 700 workstations scattered around the world, and such anadvance in computational power can come only once. a less conservativeestimate would therefore be to assume at least one, and probably two,additional breakthroughs that double the size of the numbers that can befactored.the above discussion points to a need for a safety factor of 2 to 32 inthe length of the key for asymmetric cryptographic systems, an admittedly large range of uncertainty. this ambiguity is sometimes eliminatedby realworld considerations. if, for example, there are significant idlecomputational resources available for publickey computations and theycan be done in background mode without delaying current communications, then a safety margin of a factor of 32 in key size is entirely reasonable and should be used. on the other hand, if the computation to use afactoroffour margin in key size results in unacceptable delay, one mightuse a factoroftwo margin, or no safety margin at all, particularly if thedata has low value and a short privacy time constant. export considerations also might limit key size, but in these latter cases users need to beaware of the danger to their communications, so that they do not trustvaluable data to a system with an inappropriately low safety margin.today, factoring 512bit numbers is extremely difficult, while factoring 1,024bit numbers is computationally impossible. by using 512 bits asa reasonable security level for asymmetric cryptographic systems whosedata must be secret only in the immediate future, a safety margin of 2 (theminimal indicated) would dictate the use of 1,024bit numbers, while asafety margin of 32 (a much more conservative and safer value) wouldlead to roughly 16kilobit numbers. the publickey algorithms in usetoday have a cost of computation that grows with b3, where b is the numcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.388appendix cber of bits. hence, a safety margin of a factor of 32 in key size requires anincrease in cost of 323 (more than 30,000), an uneconomic situation in mostapplications. at the larger bit sizes, more efficient arithmetic methods canbe used that might reduce the growth curve to approximately b2, but even322 1,024 is a larger cost penalty than most users will be willing to pay.c.6.3 conventional cryptographic systemsdes is the most widely studied conventional cryptographic system,and so it is used here for illustrative purposes in assessing the securitylevels needed in such systems. the best known practical method for breaking des is exhaustive search of all 256 possible keys. the correct key canbe recognized because it deciphers intercepted ciphertext into meaningfulplaintext. in 1977 diffie and hellman estimated the cost of exhaustivesearch at $10,000 per key.24 their estimate would scale to a cost of at most$100 per solution in 1994, 14 years (two periods of 7 years) later.this figure of $100 per solution is also supported by recent work ofwiener.25 using commonly available components, wiener estimated thathe could build exhaustive search machines for $1 million each, whichcould produce a des key every 3.5 hours. amortizing machine cost over5 years results in a cost of $80 per solution. although this estimate neglects costs such as interest, design, maintenance, electricity, etc., theseadditional costs do not affect the estimated cost because it is only aòballparkó estimate, accurate to at best a factor of two. more accurateestimates are not needed because of the rapidly decreasing cost of computation: an error by a factor of two is erased in 1 to 2 years. these numbersmight make it seem that des reached the end of its useful life some timeago. that is partly true and partly false for the reasons explained below.the approximately $100 cost per solution assumes an opponent iswilling to invest several million dollars in the design and production ofexhaustive search cryptanalytic machines. exhaustive search on generalpurpose computers is much more expensive, costing on the order of $10million per solution. hence, des is insecure against opponents who canafford to build specialpurpose cryptanalytic machines, have enoughproblems to keep them fully loaded (idle time increases the cost per solution), and have access to modern integrated circuit technology. nationalintelligence organizations within the developed world meet all of these24whitfield diffie and martin hellman, òexhaustive cryptanalysis of the nbs data encryption standard,ó computer, june 1977, pp. 7484.25m.j. wiener, òefficient des key search,ó tr244, school of computer science, carletonuniversity, ottawa, canada, may 1994; presented at the rump session of crypto õ93.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography389criteria. national intelligence organizations in less developed nationsand organized crime possess the budget, but export restrictions and othergovernment controls on cryptographic technology raise the question ofwhether they could purchase the required technology. large corporations also pose a potential threat to des, but the difficulty of hiding aseveral million dollar budget plus government controls make them lesslikely threats. hence, des is relatively secure today against industrialespionage, extremely insecure against major foreign powers, and questionable against lesser foreign powers and organized crime (which has noqualms about hiding budgets or conspiracies). desõs useful lifetimeagainst commercial adversaries is on the order of 15 years, which couldbring the $10 million per solution on generalpurpose hardware down to$10,000 per solution, an amount that many individuals could afford.advances in cryptanalysis could speed the obsolescence of des, butthere are few historical data on which to base such an estimate. prudencewould dictate doubling the key size over what is indicated by currentalgorithms, especially since exhaustive search has been assumed in theabove analysis. the frequently proposed tripledes, which uses threedes devices in series with three different keys, more than meets thisrequirement and does not require any new standards. it does, however,meet with realworld problems since even singledes is subject to u.s.munitions list controls.unlike asymmetric cryptographic systems, the cost of increasing thekey size of des, or of most other conventional cryptographic systems, isminimal. again, for illustrative purposes, des has a 56bit key that isexpanded into a 768bit pseudokey for use by the algorithm. aside fromthe increased storage required, a 768bit key could be used with a minimal penalty in the speed of computation. since storing the 56bit keyconsumes less than 10% of desõs required storage, doubling the key sizeresults in at most a 10% increase in encryptiondecryption cost.2626in fact, a small increase in encryption time would occur, because if the des algorithm isadapted to use a larger key size, it would also be advisable to increase the number ofrounds (iterations), thus increasing the encryptiondecryption time. for example, obtainingthe full benefit of a 128bit des key would require approximately doubling the number ofrounds, with an attendant doubling of computational time. although this increase in timewould be a problem in some applications, in many others it would not (e.g., telephone linecommunications where speeds are relatively slow). in any event, the rate of increase ofcomputational time (as security is increased) is much slower in symmetric systems such asdes than in asymmetric systems.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.390appendix cc.6.4 timing attacksa different type of attack against a number of cryptographic systemshas been developed by paul c. kocher, an independent consultant.27kocherõs attack differs from traditional cryptanalysis in that it needs additional information on the time required by each encryption, decryption,or signing. however, it often works even when only known ciphertext isavailable. although such an attack is harder to mount than a ciphertextonly attack (see definitions above), in most applications it appears comparable in difficulty to obtaining known plaintext and in most applicationsis no harder than mounting a chosen text attack. while the attack can thusbe mounted in only a small fraction of cases, good cryptographic practicerequires treating such attacks seriously. good business practice also dictates this approach because it takes only one large loss to result in a loss ofconfidence or money.kocherõs attack makes use of his insightful observation that the computation time of many systems depends in a predictable manner on thefirst bit of the secret key. by computing the two running times (when thatbit is 0 and when it is 1) for a large number of observed computations andcorrelating them with the observed computation time, the attacker canmake a good guess on the first bit of the secret key. if this guess is correct,the computation time depends in a predictable manner on the second bitof the secret key, which can be attacked in like manner, etc. any errors inearly decisions result in poor correlations that signal the error and inviterevisiting the decision.although his results are very recent and therefore somewhat preliminary, kocher has estimated that on the order of 1,000 computation timesare sufficient to attack many software implementations of des, rc5, rsa,diffiehellman, and the digital storage standard (dss). he is investigating the applicability to other systems as well.one obvious fix to this problem is to implement fixedtimelengthencryptions to conceal variations in the encryption times. of course, sucha fix would also run counter to the oftenpresent desire to minimize computational delay.27see paul kocher, cryptanalysis of diffiehellman, rsa, dss, and other systems usingtiming attacks, stanford, calif., december 7, 1995; available online at http://www.cryptography.com/timingattack.html. a popular account of this attack is found in johnmarkoff, òsecure digital transactions just got a little less secure,ó new york times, december 11, 1995, p. a1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography391c.6.5 skipjack/clipper/eesthe skipjack encryption algorithm used in the escrow encryptionstandard (ees; òclipperó) has an 80bit key size. since the algorithmitself is classified and made available only in silicon, exhaustive searchcannot be contemplated by other than the u.s. government until the algorithm is reverseengineered. many deem that likely to happen within 5 to10 years, perhaps even sooner at foreign national intelligence organizations. alternatively, the algorithm may have to be divulged to such organizations if ees is to become international in scopeña prerequisite to itsbeing widely used in this country since so much business is internationalin nature. for all these reasons, in what follows, the prudent assumptionis made that the algorithm is known to an adversary.since skipjack has a key size that is 24 bits larger than des, exhaustive search takes 224 16 million) times as long and costs 16 million timesas much. the $100persolution cost of des thus scales to approximately$1 billion per solution. (although 16 million times $100 equals $1.6 billion, the use of more than an orderofmagnitude estimate would give amisleading impression of the accuracy of these estimates.) skipjack isthus immune to exhaustive search for some time to come. if a cost of $1million per solution is used as ending the utility of a system, skipjackõskey size has a safety factor of 1,000, which will be erased in 15 to 21 yearsbecause of the decreasing cost of computation (three periods of 5 to 7years).if skipjack is considered usable even at $1,000 per solution, that addsanother 15 to 20 years to its useful life, for a total of 30 to 40 years. thefigure of $1 million per solution is appropriate since some data will beworth that much to an opponent. again, any cryptanalytic improvements over exhaustive search would decrease the lifetime of skipjack. insummary, skipjackõs key size possesses a larger margin of safety thansingleencryption des, but that margin is smaller than would be dictatedby purely economic and technical considerations. (as with des, increasing the key size of skipjack does not greatly increase the computationcost.)c.6.6 a warningwhen issues related to potential weaknesses are raised, the argumentis often made that when a system becomes weak, it can be replaced by astronger one. the implied question is, why use more security now than isneeded? although this argument makes sense for some cryptographicapplications, in many cases it is wrong, given that a standard is intendedfor universal use.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.392appendix cthe argument is correct for applicationsñsuch as tactical military orcommercial plansñin which an opponent gains value only by cryptanalyzing the system soon after the data have been encrypted. but strategic plans, as well as medical records and many other forms of individualand corporate data, have long privacy time constants. when the oldcryptographic system for such data is in danger of compromise, it doesnot help to reencrypt the data in a new, stronger cryptographic system: anopponent who has recorded and stored the data encrypted in the oldsystem can attack the old, weaker cryptographic system used to encryptthe stored data.c.6.7 quantum and dna computing28two recent computing proposals may fundamentally alter the aboveanalysis. shor has proposed using quantum computing to factor integers.29 although such computing requires technology far beyond thatavailable today, if it could be implemented, it would reduce factoring anddiscrete logs to easy problems and kill the currently most popular publickey cryptographic systems. quantum computing is still embryonic, andit is not clear whether it will be practical.quantum computing is computing that is based on the properties ofquantum mechanical systems. in classical computing, a bit is either 0 or 1.however, a fundamental property of quantum mechanical systems (suchas single quantum particles) is that they can exist in a òsuperpositionó ofstates, fractionally both 0 and 1. a properly coupled set of l quantum bits(or òqubitsó) can hold not just one value out of the total n 2l possiblevalues, but can in principle contain all such values simultaneously. iflogical operations are now performedñand the laws of quantum mechanics do allow such operationsñthen computations can be performedsimultaneously and in parallel on all the represented numbers.using these concepts, shor was able to find a quantum algorithm thatcan, in principle, find the prime factors of a number n in a time propor28material in this section is based on two jason reports, one on quantum computingcalled boundaries of computing, and the second called dna computing (a. despain et al.,boundaries of computing, jason study report jsr95115, mitre corporation, mclean,va., september 19, 1995; n. lewis and p. weinberger, dna computing, jason study report jsr95116, mitre corporation, mclean, va., september 12, 1995). a lay expositionof quantum computing is contained in seth lloyd, òquantummechanical computers,óscientific american, october 1995, pp. 140145.29peter shor, òalgorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring,ó in shafi goldwasser (ed.), 35th annual symposium on foundations of computer science:proceedings, ieee computer press, new york, 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography393tional to l, the number of bits of that number, raised to some power (i.e.,in polynomial time). no factoring algorithm implementable on a classicalcomputer is known that can factor a number with so few steps; all knownclassical factoring algorithms are at best barely subexponential in the number of bits. quantitatively, given the number n and l log2 n, the quantum algorithm can factor n in a time proportional to lk, where k is somenumber; all known classical algorithms give times that are worse than thistime.it must be emphasized that it is not known today how to build aquantum computer that could execute a quantum algorithm. indeed,while individual qubits have been created and manipulated in the laboratory, no basic circuit has yet been constructed for a quantum computation, let alone a fullup computer.30 it has been estimated that a quantumcomputer that could solve cryptographically interesting problems wouldhave a minimum of about 1011 quantum logic gates.nor is it known how broad is the class of numbertheoretic problemsthat can be speeded up with a quantum computer. shorõs factoring algorithm makes a very special use of the fast fourier transform as a key step.it is possible that some other computationally difficult problems on whichcryptographic systems could be based are not susceptible to this trick andare equally hard for quantum computers. this is a fascinating and livelyarea of current research.dna computing is another recently described paradigm for massively parallel computation. the basic idea is that dna strands in a testtube can be used to encode all possible answers to a given problem, suchas a cryptanalytic solution to a given piece of ciphertext encoded with aknown algorithm. biochemical techniques are known for sorting outdifferent strands of dna; these techniques are logically equivalent to theexecution of an algorithm to obtain only the strands of dna that represent the correct answer(s) to the problem. the power of dna computinglies in the ability to prepare and sort through a compilation of all possibleanswers to problems of a given computational complexity.a small computational problem has indeed been solved by the use ofa dna computer.31 this successful demonstration puts dna computingon a much firmer foundation than quantum computing. however, dnacomputing does not fundamentally change the hard nature of cryptanalytic problems, such as factoring or breaking des; it merely changes thecost of the computation. at this time, it is not clear if dna computing for30see david divicenzo, òquantum computation,ó science, volume 270(5234), october 13,1995, pp. 255261.31leonard adelman, òmolecular computation of solutions to combinatorial problems,óscience, volume 266, november 11, 1994, pp. 10211024.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.394appendix ccryptanalysis will be more or less expensive than electronic computing. ifdna cryptanalytic machines can be built more cheaply than electronicones, they will require those concerned with information security to adoptlarger safety margins in their encryption schemes (e.g., larger keys) thanthey previously envisioned.an approach has been described for using dna computing to breakdes that would require about 4 months of reaction time and 1 gram ofdna to succeed.32 since current laboratory techniques use only micrograms, or at most milligrams, of dna, actually implementing this approach today would probably be a multimillion dollar project, and itwould reveal only a single des key.more relevant to the future is the fact that the amount of dna required is exponential in the size of the problem. that is, attempting thedecryption problem on a message encoded with a 57bit key would require twice the amount of dna required for the comparable decryptionproblem with a 56bit key. an 80bit decryption (required for skipjack)would require 16 million grams 16 tons) of dna. thus, over the longrun, it does not appear that even the massively parallel nature of dnacomputing will be able to overcome the ease with which key sizes can beincreased.c.6.8 elliptic curve cryptographic systemsvariants of the rsa and diffiehellman asymmetric cryptographicsystems have been proposed that use elliptic curves instead of modularmultiplication as the fundamental group operation. today the ellipticcurve variants have the advantage that the bestknown algorithms forcryptanalyzing them have computational requirements that grow exponentially in the size of the modulus, as opposed to subexponential behavior for rsa and diffiehellman. if this exponential behavior continues tohold, asymmetric cryptographic systems can have significant safety margins, comparable to those obtainable with conventional cryptographicsystems, without undue economic or time cost to legitimate users. caution is warranted, however, since the elliptic curve systems are fairlyrecent and therefore not nearly as well studied as rsa and diffiehellman.c.6.9 quantum cryptographycertain techniques based on fundamental quantum mechanical properties of physical systems can be used to perform key exchange betweentwo parties that have never met, who share no a priori secret information,32see dan boneh, christopher dunworth, and richard j. lipton, breaking des using amolecular computer, technical report cstr48995, princeton university, princeton, n.j.,1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on cryptography395to enable them to communicate in absolute privacy.33 in particular, thelaws of quantum mechanics allow two particles (such as photons of lightin a fiberoptic cable) to be put in a state of òentangledó information. insuch a state, any measurement of one of the particles necessarily disturbsthe entanglement. thus, eavesdropping on a quantum channel used tocommunicate a key will inevitably be detected by the intended recipientof the key, at which point a new key can be transmitted.a working quantum cryptography apparatus has been developed,although the sending and receiving mechanisms are only 30 centimetersapart. the creators of this apparatus34 believe that nothing in principlelimits the technique from being used over much greater distances. at thesame time, they note that quantum key distribution must compete withclassical techniques for key exchange, which are much cheaper over longdistances.33the description in this subsection is taken from charles bennett et al., òquantum cryptography,ó scientific american, volume 267(4), october 1992, pp. 5057.34bennett et al., òquantum cryptography,ó 1992.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.396appendix d396dan overview of electronic surveillance:history and current status118 u.s.c. section 2511(4), (5); 50 u.s.c. section 1809(c); and 50 u.s.c. section 1810.2the discussion in this subsection summarizes the relevant provisions. a more detailedtreatment is given in clifford s. fishman, wiretapping and eavesdropping, the lawyers cooperative publishing co., rochester, n.y., 1978; and clifford s. fishman, wiretapping andeavesdropping: cumulative supplement, clark boardman callaghan, deerfield, ill., november1994. see also donald p. delaney, dorothy e. denning, john kaye, and alan r. mcdonald,òwiretap laws and procedures: what happens when the u.s. government taps a line,óseptember 1993, available online at http://snyside.sunnyside.com/cpsr/privacy/communications/wiretap/denningwiretapprocedurepaper.txt and other sites.d.1 the legal framework for domestic lawenforcement surveillanced.1.1 the general prohibition on electronic surveillancethe u.s. code, in section 2511 of title 18 and sections 18091810 oftitle 50, provides specific criminal and civil penalties for individuals (lawenforcement officials and private citizens alike) who conduct electronic orwire surveillance of communications (defined below) in a manner that isnot legally authorized.1 legal authorization for such surveillance is provided for specific circumstances in law enforcement and foreign intelligence collection as described below.d.1.2 title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of1968 and the electronic communications privacy act of 19862congress established the statutory authority for law enforcement incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance397terception of communications in title iii of the omnibus crime controland safe streets act of 1968 (title iii). in 1986, the electronic communications privacy act (ecpa) made significant additions and amendments.title iii, as amended by ecpa, defines three categories of communicationsñoral, wire, and electronicñand provides varying degrees of legalprotection against their unauthorized interception. oral communicationsare spoken words carried by sound waves through the air. electronicsurveillance of oral communications is performed with listening devices,known as bugs. wire communications are human speech carried over awire or wirelike cable, including optical fiber. they may be interceptedwith a wiretap. (interception of one end of a conversation by bugging theroom in which a telephone is placed is a case of oral interception.) electronic communications are definedñwith minor exceptions such as toneonly pagersñas every other form of electronically transmitted communication, including various forms of data, text, audio, and video. thelegislative history of ecpa specifically mentions electronic mail, pagingsystems, bulletin board systems, and computertocomputer communications, among other technologies the act was intended to address.3ecpa defines radio communications, including voice conversations,as electronic, with the exception that voice conversations carried in partover radio and in part through wires or switches (such as cellular telephone calls) are treated as wire communications.4 some radio communications may be intercepted without penalty. courts have found, andecpa affirms, that if a radio transmission is readily accessible to anyonewith an appropriate receiver, it does not meet the fourth amendment testof a òreasonable expectation of privacyó and is therefore unprotected.5however, ecpa specifies several forms of radio communication that arenot òreadily accessibleó and therefore are protected from interception.these include, among others, encrypted or scrambled transmissions (digital modulation alone does not meet this standard, unless the protocolshave been deliberately concealed from the public to maintain privacy);commoncarrier paging services (except toneonly services); and privatemicrowave services. in practice, unprotected radio transmissions generally relate to radio broadcasting, dispatching, publicsafety radio (police,fire, etc.), amateur radio, citizens band, and similar services. in the radio3fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 7.317.49.4fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 7.4, 7.5, 7.217.28. see also james g.carr, the law of electronic surveillance, clark boardman callaghan, deerfield, ill., september 1994, section 3.2.5by similar reasoning, messages are unprotected if posted in electronic bulletin boardsystems that are configured to make such messages readily accessible to the general public.fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 7.67.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.398appendix darena and others, the advance of communications technology, includingencryption and decryption, and the development of new services willinevitably create the need for further interpretation of title iii and theecpa by the courts and/or revision of the federal statutes.6like all searches and seizures in circumstances where a person normally has a reasonable expectation of privacy, electronic surveillance requires a warrant granted by a judge.7 to obtain a physical search warrant(e.g., to search a personõs home), officials must provide certain information. this includes a statement of facts demonstrating probable cause tobelieve a crime has been or will be committed; the identity of the personor place to be searched; and a particular description of the object of thesearch. evidence obtained in violation of these requirements may bechallenged by the defendant in a trial and may be subject to suppression.violations leading to suppression may include errors or omissions in theapplication for a warrant; warrants that should not have been issued, forexample, for lack of probable cause; and failure to execute the search inaccordance with the terms of the warrant.8in title iii, congress added significant, new requirements specific tothe electronic interception of oral and wire communications. these additional requirements, which are discussed below, set a higher standardthan the physical search and seizure standard of the fourth amendment.they are enforced by criminal and civil penalties, as well as by a statutoryexclusionary rule, which states that violations of these requirements maylead to suppression of evidence in a later trial. this suppression maythrow out evidence from electronic surveillance that would ordinarilymeet a fourth amendment test.9by law, only certain, serious felonies may be investigated with titleiii surveillance of oral and wire communications. these include murder,kidnapping, child molestation, organized crime, narcotics offenses, andcrimes against national security, among others.10 before performing electronic surveillance, investigators must obtain a special type of warrant6clifford fishman, personal communication, january 23, 1995. this process can be seen,for example, in the law enforcement communications act of 1994õs extension to cordlesstelephones of the same title iii protection that applies to cellular telephones.7surveillance with the consent of one of the parties to a communication (e.g., an informant wearing a hidden microphone) does not require an intercept order (on lee v. unitedstates, 343 u.s. 747 (1952)). see wayne r. lafave and jerold h. israel, criminal procedure,2nd ed., west publishing, st. paul, minn., 1992, pp. 248, 254255, 258259.8stephen patrick oõmeara, òon getting wired: considerations regarding obtaining andmaintaining wiretaps and ôbugsõ,ó creighton law review, volume 26, 1993, pp. 729749.9see lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, pp. 248256, for a discussion of title iiiand the fourth amendment.1018 u.s.c. section 2516(1); and carr, the law of electronic surveillance, 1994, section 4.2.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance39911requirements are detailed in 18 u.s.c. section 2518. emergency intercepts may beperformed without first obtaining a warrant in certain circumstances, such as physical danger to a person or conspiracy against the national security. an application for a warrantmust subsequently be made within 48 hours. there has been virtually no use of the emergency provision, and its constitutionality has not been tested in court. see lafave andisrael, criminal procedure, 1992, p. 254.12for a concise description of the application procedure, see delaney et al., òwiretaplaws and procedures,ó 1993.13in general, the supreme court has significantly diminished the strictness of the statutory identification provisions. potential telephone users may be listed in the application asòothers, as yet unknown.ó evidence obtained in a valid wiretap about crimes other thanthe one specified in the application is also admissible. see fishman, cumulative supplement,1994, sections 4950, 5556.14ronald goldstock and clifford fishman, briefings before the committee to study national cryptography policy, irvine, calif., february10, 1995. for a description of fbi andnew york state police procedures, see delaney et al., òwiretap laws and procedures,ó1993, section2.1.called an òintercept order.ó11 to obtain an intercept order, an applicantmust show that other investigative methods, such as informants or visualsurveillance, have been tried unsuccessfully or would be dangerous orunlikely to obtain the desired evidence. the applicant must also providespecific information, such as the identity of the requesting officer; facts ofthe case showing probable cause; period of time that surveillance will bein effect (up to 30 days, with extensions requiring another application);surveillance procedures to be followed, including plans for keeping theinterception of irrelevant communications to a minimum; history of previous intercept applications concerning the same person or location; andresults of the ongoing interception, if the application is for an extension ofan order.12 these requirements are somewhat flexible; not every impropriety in a surveillance results in suppression of all the evidence gathered.numerous court decisions have found, for example, that incriminatingconversations involving persons or crimes other than those identified inthe warrant are admissible in a trial, as long as the warrant was valid forthe purpose originally intended.13title iii requires that intercept orders be requested and granted byhigherranking officers and judges than warrants for physical searches.in federal investigations, applications must be authorized by a department of justice official at or above the level of deputy assistant attorneygeneral. only federal district courts and courts of appeals may issueorders (in contrast to search warrants, which may also be issued by federal magistrates). state electronic surveillance laws must designate responsible state officials and courts of comparable stature. in addition tothe title iii provisions, the federal bureau of investigation (fbi) and moststate enforcement agencies have detailed, internal approval proceduresthat officers must follow before they (or rather, a u.s. attorney acting ontheir behalf) may approach a court with an intercept request.14cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.400appendix dupon receipt of a court order, communications service providers arerequired by law to assist law enforcement officials. the service providermust furnish information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary toaccomplish the interception òunobtrusively and with a minimum of interferenceó with the subjectõs services.15 the provider is entitled to reimbursement of expenses and is immune from any civil or criminal penaltiesfor assisting in courtordered surveillance.one of the more intrusive aspects of electronic surveillance, in comparison to physical search and seizure, is the fact that the invasion ofprivacy continues over a period of time and is likely to intercept manycommunications that are irrelevant to the investigation. to restrict thisinvasion of privacy, title iii requires law enforcement officials to performa procedure known as minimization. in the context of a wiretap or bug,minimization requires realtime monitoring of the surveillance device.when conversations are intercepted concerning irrelevant subjects, suchas family gossip, monitoring officers must turn off the device. at intervals thereafter, they must turn on the device to spotcheck for relevantcommunications, which may then be recorded. minimization proceduresmust be described in the application for the intercept order. failure tominimize properly may result in suppression of evidence.16in certain cases, minimization may be postponed. foreignlanguageconversations may be recorded in their entirety and minimized later, whena translator is available.17 similar guidelines would presumably apply toencrypted communicationsñthey would be minimized after decryption.ecpa established that electronic communications, like oral and wire communications, are subject to minimization requirements; however, some differences in the procedures apply. for example, a text communication suchas an electronic mail message clearly cannot be òturned off and onó duringinterception, since it is read on a full computer screen. minimization in this1518 u.s.c. section 2518(4). see fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 118. seealso chapter 6 of this report for a discussion of how the communications assistance to lawenforcement act codifies specific obligations for carriers to assist authorized surveillance.16the supreme court has interpreted minimization criteria to permit some interceptionof irrelevant communications. for example, monitoring of a high percentage of all callsearly in the surveillance operation is permissible, provided that officers observe emergingpatterns of conversations with innocent parties and adjust accordingly. see oõmeara, òongetting wired,ó 1993, p. 743. in addition, judges rarely respond to minimization failures bysuppressing the entire body of evidence gathered throughout the surveillance. more typically, they suppress only the specific conversations or other interceptions that should havebeen minimized and were not. clifford fishman, briefing to the committee to study national cryptography policy, irvine, calif., february 10, 1995.17carr, the law of electronic surveillance, 1994, section 5.7(c).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance401case would consist of deleting irrelevant sections of text and retaining onlythe relevant portions for further use.18following the completion of an interception, the minimized tapes ofthe surveillance must be sealed and delivered to the custody of the court.this provision of title iii is intended to ensure that evidence used in asubsequent trial is authentic and has not been altered. after the interceptorder terminates, the issuing judge must notify the persons named in theorder within 90 days that they have been subject to surveillance, unlessgood cause is shown for postponement.19 for evidence to be used in a trial,the defendant must receive an inventory listing the date of the interceptorder, period of surveillance, and whether any communications were intercepted. the defendant may move to receive transcripts of the interceptions,as well as the underlying application and court order. failure to providenotice and inventory may serve as a basis for suppression of evidence if thedefendant can demonstrate prejudice having been shown as a result.20the procedures discussed above apply to oral and wire intercepts(bugs and wiretaps). ecpa applied most of the same procedures andrestrictions to surveillance of electronic communications. it also extendedtitle iii criminal and civil penalties for unlawful interception to electroniccommunications.21 however, it did not set the same standard of protection for these communications. for example, any federal felony may beinvestigated through electronic interception, and a federal attorney of anyrank may request an electronic communications intercept order.22in addition, the statutory exclusionary rule of title iii for oral andwire communications does not apply to electronic communications. evidence may be subject to suppression according to fourth amendmentstandards (such as probable cause), but ecpa expressly omits electroniccommunications from the provision that evidence obtained outside titleiii procedures is suppressible in court.23 as in the case of oral and wiresurveillance, however, state statutes must apply protection at least asstringent as the federal statute. the states of florida and kansas imposethe same requirements on electronic communications intercepts as onoral and wire intercepts.2418see fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 151159.19delaney et al., òwiretap laws and procedures,ó 1993, sections 2.42.5.20fishman, wiretapping and eavesdropping, 1978, section 203; and fishman, cumulativesupplement, 1994, section 211.21fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 7.58.22fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 7.32, 42.1, 53.1.23lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, pp. 256257.24fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 42.1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.402appendix dtitle iii, when first enacted, regulated only the interception of contentsof communications. however, ecpa added new regulations on trafficanalysisñthe use of devices to collect information about origins and destinations of communications (particularly, telephone calls) without intercepting their contents.25 traffic analysis is performed with the aid of penregisters, which record the numbers dialed from a target telephone, andtrapandtrace devices, which identify telephone numbers from which callsare placed to the target telephone.26 ecpa provides that use of thesedevices is a criminal offense except when performed by a law enforcementofficial with a court order, by a communication service provider for specified business purposes, or with the consent of the service user.with respect to law enforcement, ecpa codified the existing judicialrecord on traffic analysis. because the supreme court has ruled thattraffic analysis information is not protected by the fourth amendment,evidence obtained improperly or without a warrant is not suppressible ina trial.27 under ecpa, a pen register or trapandtrace order may berequested by any federal attorney and granted by any federal districtjudge or magistrate. states may designate comparable authorities forrequesting and approving orders. if the request meets the statutory requirements, the court must grant the order. (by contrast, interceptionorders are subject to the judgeõs discretion.) the application need notpresent a statement of facts showing probable cause, but merely theapplicantõs certification that probable cause exists. in practice, one purpose of obtaining an order is to compel the cooperation of communications service providers and to protect those providers from civil and criminal liability.28ecpa also governs access to stored wire and electronic communications, such as backup copies of voice mail and electronic mail messages.29ecpa provides criminal and civil penalties for accessing and obtaining oraltering stored communications without permission of the communications service provider or subscriber. with a search warrant (for which therequirements are much less stringent than for a title iii intercept order),25fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 2829.26dialed number recorders combine the functions of pen registers and trapandtracedevices.27in smith v. maryland, 442 u.s. 735 (1979), the supreme court ruled that a person placing a call has no òreasonable expectation of privacyó that the telephone company will notreveal the fact of the call to third parties; therefore, no warrant was required. see fishman,cumulative supplement, 1994, section 28.28fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 28.2.29see fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 7.27, 7.39, and 7.46. definitions,procedures, and penalties related to accessing stored oral, wire, and electronic communications are given at 18 u.s.c. sections 27012710.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance403law enforcement authorities may require a service provider to divulgestored communications without prior notice to the service subscriber orcustomer. the details of ecpaõs applicability to electronic mail and similar communications are somewhat controversial and have yet to be testedextensively in court.30 for example, ecpa may make it possible forinvestigators to obtain, with a search warrant, electronic mail messages intemporary storage at an online service that the customer has not yetdownloaded or deleted at the time of the investigation. however, requiring the service provider to copy and divulge all of the electronic mailaddressed to a subscriber over a period of time likely involves a title iiiintercept order.31tables d.1 and d.2 provide quantitative data on the scope and scaleof electronic surveillance in the united states in recent years.d.1.3 the foreign intelligence surveillance actin the mid1970s, congress undertook several public investigationsof controversial domestic surveillance activities by u.s. intelligence agencies, such as the central intelligence agency.32 title iii explicitly recognized presidential authority to take measures to protect national security,and in a 1972 case, united states v. united states district court (often calledthe keith case), the supreme court ruled that it is reasonable and necessary in some circumstances to weigh fourth amendment rights againstthe constitutional responsibility of the executive branch to maintain national security.33 in order to achieve a balance among these conflictingdemands, congress passed the foreign intelligence surveillance act of1978 (fisa). fisa concerns surveillance for gathering foreign intelligence30the most significant court decision yet made on the subject, itself open to variousinterpretations, is steve jackson games v. united states secret service (1993, w.d. tex.), 816 f.supp. 432, 442. on appeal, the u.s. court of appeals, fifth circuit (36 f. 3d 457), examinedthe question of whether òseizure of a computer used to operate an electronic bulletin boardsystem, and containing private electronic mail which had been sent . . . but not read (retrieved) by the intended recipients, constituted an unlawful intercept under [ecpa]ó andaffirmed the lower courtõs decision that it did not.31the wall street journal reported that one of the first publicized instances of law enforcement use of a title iii intercept order to monitor a suspectõs electronic mail occurred indecember 1995, when a compuserve information services customer was the subject ofsurveillance during a criminal investigation. see wall street journal, january 2, 1996, p. b16.32for a brief history of the foreign intelligence surveillance actõs origins, see james e.meason, òthe foreign intelligence surveillance act: time for reappraisal,ó internationallawyer, volume 24(4), winter 1990, pp. 10431058.33407 u.s. 297 (1972). see allan n. kornblum and lubomyr m. jachnycky, òamericaõssecret court: listening in on espionage and terrorism,ó the judgeõs journal, summer 1985,pp. 1519.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.404appendix dtable d.1 courtordered electronic surveillance authorized undertitle iii, 1994totalfederalstatesno. of orders authorizeda1,154554600no. of orders denieda000no. of intercepts installedb1,100549551no. of extensions authorizeda861458403average duration of orders (days)a original authorization2930nac extensions2930nactotal days in operationb44,50025,14819,352main offense specified in ordera narcotics876435441 racketeering886820 gambling86878 homicide and assault19415 other853946type of interceptb telephone wiretap768397371 microphone eavesdrop524210 electronic20871137 combination723933average no., per installed order, intercepted:b persons8411256 conversations2,1392,2572,021 incriminating conversations373374372average cost per orderb$49,478$66,783$32,236no. of arrestsb,d2,8521,6011,251no. of convictionsb,d772325447aas reported by federal and state judges issuing surveillance orders.bas reported by prosecuting officials for orders actually installed.cnot available.dadditional arrests and convictions associated with surveillance authorized in 1994 canbe expected to occur in 1995 and later years. for more complete arrest and convictionresults from past years, see table d.3.source:administrative office of the u.s. courts, wiretap report for the period january 1,1994 to december 31, 1994, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., 1995.information, as opposed to law enforcement. nevertheless, many of itsprocedures parallel those of title iii, and evidence gathered properlythrough fisa surveillance may, in some circumstances, be used in a trial.like title iii, fisa provides statutory procedures for authorizing electronic surveillance within the united states. executive order 12333 specifically states that no foreign intelligence collection may be undertakenfor the purpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance405ties of u.s. persons,34,35 and fisa surveillance may be performed onlyagainst foreign powers or their agents. fisa regulates signals intelligencecollection conducted in the united states and signals intelligence collection directed at a known u.s. person located in the united states; executive order 12333 regulates signals intelligence collection directed at aknown u.s. person located outside the united states.36 (see table d.3 fora description of what approvals are required for electronic surveillance ofcommunications in various circumstances.) to conduct surveillance of au.s. person within the united states, the executive branch must demonstrate to a special court, the foreign intelligence surveillance court (discussed below), probable cause to conclude that the u.s. person is anòagent of a foreign power.ó the phrase includes persons who engage in,or aid or abet individuals who engage in, espionage, terrorism, or sabotage.37 each fisa warrant application is signed, under oath, by the applicant, certified by the secretary of defense or deputy secretary of defensethat it is directed against a bona fide òforeign poweró or òagent of aforeign power,ó reviewed by the department of justice and endorsed bythe attorney general, and approved by a judge of the foreign intelligencesurveillance court.38 the warrant application must also identify the typeof foreign intelligence information sought; communication media, facilities, and persons to be monitored; devices and procedures to be used,including those for minimization; duration of the order, up to 90 days (or1 year if the target is a foreign power); review of previous surveillance34executive order 12333, section 2.3(b).35òu.s. personsó are defined by fisa and by executive order 12333 to include u.s.citizens, permanent resident aliens, corporations incorporated in the united states, andunincorporated associations substantially composed of u.s. citizens or u.s. persons. see 50u.s.c. section 1801(i) and e.o. 12333, section 3.4(i).36interception of communications taking place entirely outside the united states, whetheror not the participants include u.s. persons, is not governed by fisa, title iii, or any otherstatute. executive order 12333 requires that the attorney general approve the use forintelligence purposes, against a u.s. person located abroad, of any technique for which awarrant would be required if undertaken for law enforcement purposes. in each case, theattorney general must find probable cause to conclude that the individual is an agent of aforeign power before collection may begin.3750 u.s.c. section 1801(b).38surveillance may take place without a court order for up to 1 year if the attorneygeneral certifies that there is very little likelihood of intercepting communications involving u.s. persons and the effort will target facilities used exclusively by foreign powers.under limited circumstances, emergency surveillance may be performed before a warrantis obtained (fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 361, 366).for a discussion of fisaõs applicability in various circumstances, see fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 348358.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.406appendix dtable d.2 courtordered electronic surveillance, 1984 to 199419841985198619871988198919901991199219931994no. of orders8027867566737407638728569199761,154authorizedafederal (%)3631333540413742374648state (%)6469676560596358635452no. of orders denieda12202000000no. of intercepts7737226766346787208128028469381,100 installedbtotal days in20.922.120.819.826.427.828.830.032.439.844.5 operationb (thousands)main offense (%)a narcotics6055465659626063697076 racketeering781391112101310108 gambling23262520171513117107 homicide and43532322432 assault other68111211815111077cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance407average no., perorder, intercepted:b persons10210511910412917813112111710084 conversations1,2091,3201,3281,2991,2511,6561,4871,5841,8611,8012,139 incriminating298275253230316337321290347364373 conversationsaverage cost per45.036.535.636.949.353.145.145.046.557.349.5orderb ($ thousands)no. arrestsb,c3,7194,1783,8303,2443,8594,2223,2502,4593,6682,4282,428no. convictionsb,c2,4292,6172,4491,9832,4692,3681,5802,5641,9521,325772conviction rate (%)6563646164564898493927 aas reported by federal and state judges issuing surveillance orders. bas reported by prosecuting officials for orders actually installed. centry for each year shows arrests and convictions arising both during and after that year from surveillance authorized during that year. thelarge majority of arrests and convictions occur within 4 years of the surveillance. thus, the relatively low numbers in 19931994 can be expected toincrease over time.source: administrative office of the u.s. courts, wiretap report for the period january 1, 1993 to december 31, 1993, u.s. government printingoffice, washington, d.c., 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.408appendix dtable d.3 approval requirements for foreign intelligencesurveillance of various parties variously located (under fisa in theunited states and executive order 12333 outside the united states)partyin the united statesoutside the united statesonly if known to be anagent of a foreignpower and a fisawarrant is approvedonly if a fisa warrant isapprovedonly with the approval ofthe attorney generalwithout restrictionu.s. person may betargeted for wireinterceptsnonu.s. person may betargeted for wireinterceptsrelated to the same target; and certification that the information cannot beobtained through normal investigative methods.39electronic surveillance governed by fisa includes interception ofwire, radio, and other electronic communications. interception of thesecommunications is regulated only if they take place under conditions of areasonable expectation of privacy, in which a warrant would be requiredfor law enforcement surveillance. it addresses only communications occurring at least partly within the united states (wholly, in the case ofradio communications), although listening stations used by investigatingofficers may be located elsewhere. fisa also covers the use of pen registers and trapandtrace devices.the purpose of fisa surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligenceinformation. fisa defines this in terms of u.s. national security, including defense against attack, sabotage, terrorism, and clandestine intelligence activities, among others. the targeted communications need notrelate to any crime, although surveillance for counterespionage and counterterrorism purposes clearly has the potential to yield evidence for criminal prosecution. fisa surveillance actions are implemented operationally by the fbiñsometimes on behalf of other intelligence agencies of theu.s. government.fisa established a special court with sole authority to review applications and grant intercept orders. the foreign intelligence surveillancecourt (fisa court) consists of seven u.s. district court judges appointedby the chief justice of the supreme court. the fisa court meets in secret3950 u.s.c. section 1805. see delaney et al., òwiretap laws and procedures,ó 1993,section 3.1. some of this information may be omitted if the target is a foreign power.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance409twice yearly in washington, d.c., although the court acts through a singlejudge who is always available.40 one of the seven judges has always beena judge in the washington, d.c., area to ensure local availability, and theother six judges rotate through washington, d.c. fisa also provides foran appeals court. however, the fisa court has never denied a request foran order, and the appeals court has never met. one interpretation of thishistory is that the fisa court is a rubber stamp for government requestsfor foreign intelligence surveillance. a second interpretation is that theauthorities who request such surveillance do so only when surveillance istruly necessary and prepare their cases with such thoroughness that thefisa court has never found sufficient fault with a request to deny it.without a detailed independent review of all requests (a task beyond thescope of the committee), it is impossible to choose definitively betweenthese two interpretations. members of the committee having personalexperience with the fisa process prefer the second interpretation. since1979, there has been an average of more than 500 fisa orders per year. in1994, 576 were issued. other information about fisa intercepts is classified.41unlike title iii, fisa does not require that the target of surveillanceever be notified that communications have been intercepted. evidencegathered under a fisa order may be used in a trial, with the approval ofthe attorney general. a defendant whose communications were intercepted then receives a transcript and may move to suppress such evidence if it was gathered unlawfully. however, the defendant is deniedaccess to the application and fisa court order if the attorney generalcertifies that national security would be harmed by release of these documents. in this case, the appropriate federal district court reviews andrules on the legality of the warrant ex parte, in camera (withoutadversarial representation, in secret). this may severely restrict thedefendantõs ability to obtain suppression.42finally, signals intelligence activities may incidentally generate information to, from, or about u.s. persons even when they are directed atforeign individuals. information so derived is regulated by one of twosets of minimization procedures. one set is statutorily mandated by fisa.40see kornblum and jachnycky, òamericaõs secret court,ó 1985, for a description of theforeign intelligence surveillance court, a list of its members, and a review of the judicialrecord on the constitutionality of the court and its procedures.41benjamin wittes, òinside americaõs most secretive court,ó legal times, february 19,1996, p. 1.42lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, pp. 260261.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.410appendix devery fisa surveillance approval is subject to those minimization procedures. the procedures prescribe how information about u.s. personsacquired during the course of a fisa surveillance may be processed,retained, and disseminated.43 the other set is mandated by executiveorder 12333 and regulates all other signals intelligence collection, processing, retention, and dissemination involving information on u.s. persons. this set is approved by the secretary of defense and the attorneygeneral. copies are provided to the senate and house intelligence committees prior to implementation.d.2 historical overview ofelectronic surveillancethe right to privacy of communications from electronic surveillance(such as bugging and wiretapping) is protected by several federal andstate statutes and by the fourth amendment to the constitution. thiswas not always the case. electronic surveillance of communications firstcame before the u.s. supreme court in 1927. in olmstead v. united states,44the court ruled by a 54 vote that interception of telephone conversationsby federal law enforcement officials using a wiretap did not constitute asearch or seizure, because nothing tangible was seized and no premiseswere entered and searched. the court concluded that wiretapping wasnot subject to fourth amendment protection against unreasonable searchand seizure.new legislation, however, soon removed the wiretap from the repertoire of evidencegathering tools. the communications act of 1934 madeit a crime for anyone, including law enforcement officials, to intercept andsubsequently divulge telephone, telegraph, or radio communicationswithout the consent of the sender. the statute did not state specificallythat evidence obtained through wiretaps was inadmissible in a trial. subsequent court rulings held, however, that wiretap evidence gained without consent could not be used because to divulge it in court would beagainst the law.45 federal officials continued to conduct warrantless wiretaps, mainly against suspected foreign agents under the presidentõs constitutional authority to protect national security.46 (these activities were4350 u.s.c. section 1801(h).44277 u.s. 438 (1928). much of the following discussion of the evolution of electronicsurveillance law is based on the work of lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, pp.246256.45for example, nardone v. united states, 308 u.s. 338 (1939). the court also excludedevidence obtained as a result of information gained in a wiretap. see lafave and israel,criminal procedure, 1992, p. 246.46see lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, pp. 259260.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance411later regulated with the passage of fisa in 1978.) state law enforcementagencies also continued to wiretap, where permitted by state laws andnot associated with federally regulated interstate commerce.technological advances led to the development of other means ofelectronic surveillance that continued, for a time, to be accepted by thecourts. in particular, electronic bugs were not restricted by the fourthamendment, by the same principle that applied in olmsteadñthey seizednothing tangible. nor were they subject to the communications act prohibition on divulgence of intercepted communications because they intercepted only sound waves, not wire or radio signals. in goldman v. unitedstates,47 the supreme court found that federal officers could legally use alistening device placed against the wall of a room adjoining the one occupied by the target of an investigation. as long as no physical trespasstook place, the fourth amendment did not apply and no search warrantwas needed. in other cases, the court also supported the practice ofòwiringó a consenting party to the communicationñsuch as an undercover agent or informantñwith a device to record or transmit conversations in the hearing of the person wearing the wire.48over time, however, a series of decisions eroded the legal frameworkfor bugging. in silverman v. united states,49 for example, the court rejected agentsõ use of a òspike mikeó driven through an adjacent wall intothe heating ducts of a targetõs house as a fourth amendment violation,even though agents did not physically enter the premises. finally, in the1967 case of katz v. united states,50 the court found that federal agentsõbugging of a public telephone booth known to be used regularly by aparticular suspect was a search and seizure protected by the fourthamendment. a person using a phone booth was found to have a reasonable expectation of privacy, which may not be infringed without a validwarrant based on probable cause to believe that a crime has been or willbe committed. in this ruling, the court explicitly overturned olmsteadand goldman and determined that fourth amendment protection appliesto persons, not merely to places that can be entered and searched.with the katz decision, law enforcement officials were left with neither bugs nor wiretaps as viable tools for gathering evidence. their absence was significant, particularly since these tools were thought to havegreat potential usefulness for investigating and prosecuting conspirato47316 u.s. 129 (1942). see discussion in lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, p.248.48on lee v. united states, 343 u.s. 747 (1952). see lafave and israel, criminal procedure,1992, pp. 248, 258259.49365 u.s. 505 (1961). see lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, p. 248.50389 u.s. 347 (1967). see lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, p. 248.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.412appendix drial activities such as organized crime, a highprofile social and politicalissue in the late 1960s. the judicial record made it clear that electronicsurveillance with a court order would not be prohibited by the constitution, but new legislation was needed to define and regulate courtorderedsurveillance.51 at the same time, existing statutes such as the communications act inadequately protected communications from malicious interception and use by private citizens acting outside a law enforcement capacity.52congress took action in 1968 to give law enforcement the tools ofelectronic surveillance, subject to constitutional and statutory controls,and to outlaw electronic interception of communications in most othercircumstances. title iii of the omnibus crime control and safe streetsact of 1968 created the first specific legal framework for electronic surveillance of oral and wire (telephone) communications. it made an exception to the communications actõs divulgence prohibition for law enforcement officers with a courtissued warrant, thus bringing wiretapping backinto legal use. to guard against abuse of these politically charged, highlyintrusive techniques, congress imposed special procedures for obtaininga warrant and other restrictions beyond those required under the fourthamendment. these are discussed in detail in section d.1.2. title iii alsospecified civil and criminal penalties for anyone intercepting private communications outside these approved circumstances. in addition, it required state statutes to be at least as restrictive as title iii.53 currently, 37states and the district of columbia have electronic surveillance statutes.54at the time the omnibus crime control and safe streets act waspassed in 1968, president johnson strongly objected to title iii, warningthat it could lead to governmental abuses of civil liberties.55 however,after an initial flurry of court challenges, a rough consensus has emergedin the nation that wiretapping under the jurisdiction of title iii representsa reasonable compromise between the rights of individuals and the lawenforcement needs of the state.in 1986, congress passed the electronic communications privacy act.one of the actõs main purposes was to update title iii. the advance of51see carr, the law of electronic surveillance, 1994, section 2.3(d).52lafave and israel, criminal procedure, 1992, p. 248.53fishman, wiretapping and eavesdropping, 1978, section 5; and fishman, wiretapping andeavesdropping: cumulative supplement, 1994, section 5.54administrative office of the united states courts, wiretap report for the periodjanuary 1, 1994 to december 31, 1994, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.,1995, p. 3.55congressional quarterly almanac, congressional quarterly inc., washington, d.c., 1968,p. 225.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an overview of electronic surveillance41356for a detailed analysis of ecpaõs additions to electronic surveillance law, see fishman,cumulative supplement, 1994, sections 7.217.28, 7.32.57fishman, cumulative supplement, 1994, section 5.1; and computer science and telecommunications board staff communication with clifford fishman, january 23, 1995.technology after 1968 brought new forms of communication into commonuse. many of these stretched the framework of title iii. electronic mail,data interchange, medical records, and fund transfers are examples ofpotentially confidential communications that did not fit within the original title iii definitions of oral and wire communications. with respect topersonal (as opposed to broadcast) radio communications, which grewrapidly with the advent of cellular and other mobile telephone services,neither title iii nor the communications act provided guidance for lawenforcement surveillance. treatment of video images associated withteleconferencing was also unclear.56ecpa added a new category, electronic communications, to title iiiõsprotection of oral and wire communications. in general, electronic communications are communications carried by wire (including optical fiber)or radio that do not involve the human voice; rather, they convey information such as text, images, and numerical data. many of these communications were protected by ecpa for the first time, with both criminaland civil penalties defined for infringing on their privacy. as discussedin section d.1.2, however, the privacy of electronic communications withrespect to law enforcement was set at the fourth amendment standard ofprotection, rather than the additional level of protection given by title iiito oral and wire communications. this reflected a political compromiseamong several factors, including the interests of law enforcement, thetelecommunications industry, and civil liberties; judicial precedent; andthe judgment of congress that bugging and telephone wiretapping areinherently more sensitive than interception of electronic communications.57 as discussed in section d.1.2, ecpa also created new regulationsfor traffic analysis and for retrieval of stored communications.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.414appendix e414ea brief history ofcryptography policyin the united states cryptography policy and information about cryptography were largely the province of the national security agency (nsa)until the 1970s. although a small market existed for unclassified commercial cryptography, the most advanced cryptographic techniques wereclassified and were limited largely to military, diplomatic, and intelligence use.1e.1 export controlsone policy mechanism for controlling the diffusion of cryptographyis control of exports. the earliest u.s. use of export controls was in thetrading with the enemy act, passed in 1917 during world war i, whichempowered the president to restrict economic activities with enemy countries.2 u.s. peacetime export control activities grew to a significant degreefollowing world war ii. the export control act of 1949 gave the executive branch broad authority to determine what products or technical dataare subject to export licensing, to run the licensing system, and to penalizeviolations. it also largely exempted the rulemaking process, including1office of technology assessment, information security and privacy in network environments, otatct606, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., 1994, p. 115.2mitchell b. wallerstein and william b. snyder, jr., òthe evolution of u.s. export controlpolicy: 19491989,ó in national research council, finding common ground, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991, p. 308.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief history of cryptography policy415determination of what items should appear on the controlled list, frompublic comment and judicial review.3the export administration act of 1969 changed the name of the legislation and introduced the first attempt by congress to balance control oftechnology for national security reasons with the goal of expanding u.s.exports. for example, congress recommended for the first time that foreign availability of controlled items be taken into account in the licensingprocess. under the export administration act, the department of commerce is responsible for administering the export administration regulations (ear), including maintaining the commerce control list.cryptography is covered on this list. however, cryptographic products and data are also subject to licensing on the u.s. munitions list,along with other items that are òinherently military in character.ó theu.s. munitions list is administered by the department of state under thearms export controls act, which provides the basis for the internationaltraffic in arms regulations (itar). there is significant overlap betweenthe itar and ear with respect to cryptography. at present, however,most software and hardware for cryptographic systems (such as thosewith key lengths of more than 40 bits) remain on the munitions listunless the state department grants jurisdiction to the commerce department. as discussed in chapter 4, the national security agency plays astrong advisory role to the departments of state and commerce in deciding issues of licensing cryptographic products for export.e.2 academic research and the control ofinformation about cryptographyby the 1970s, interest in cryptography was growing not only in commercial but also in academic circles. this created conflicts due to government controls on the dissemination of information about cryptography,including at open scientific meetings. legal basis for government controlof scientific information exists in several sources. one of the first pieces oflegislation addressing cryptography was a law, passed in the 1920s andstill in effect, that prohibits publication of information about diplomaticcodes and ciphers. this was a prior restraint on free speech that wasconsidered justified on national security grounds.4the atomic energy act of 1946 created a category of informationknown as restricted data, which encompassed data on the manufacture3wallerstein and snyder, òthe evolution of u.s. export control policy,ó 1991, p. 310.4james bamford, the puzzle palace: a report on americaõs most secret agency, houghtonmifflin, boston, 1982.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.416appendix eor use of atomic weapons or special nuclear material. restricted data isessentially òborn classified,ó subject to secrecy from its creation even ifcreated by a private person such as an academic scientist not involved inany federal research program. applying these rules, a court issued apreliminary injunction against the progressiveõs publishing an article onthe working of hydrogen bombs, even though it was based on information from publicly available sources.5 (the injunction was later liftedwhen a newspaper published similar information.)the ear and itar prohibit not only the export of listed items without a license, but also the distribution of technical data about items thatare subject to export controls. the restriction on technical data has beenapplied to restrict dissemination of academic research, for example, atopen scientific meetings within the united states, because the accessibility of such data to foreign persons implies the possibility of òexportó ofthe data.6prepublication review clauses in contracts and grants for governmentsponsored university research, the restricted contact between cryptographers and foreign visitors, and nsa review of material to be presented atopen meetings have all provoked conflict between the academic and government cryptography communities. one result of such conflicts (not onlyin the area of cryptography) was a national academy of sciences review ofscientific communication and national security, which concluded that policies of òsecurity through secrecyó would chill scientific activity and ultimately weaken u.s. technological capabilities to the point of adverselyaffecting u.s. security.7 (the report, published in 1982, recommended limits on the use of contract clauses to control scientific information.)in the late 1970s, academic research in cryptography achieved severalmajor advances, prompting responses from nsa. for example, an nsaemployee unofficially informed the institute for electrical and electronicsengineers that a conference presentation by stanford university researchers (including martin hellman) of work related to publickey cryptography could violate export control laws. after consultation with universitycounsel, the presentation went forward.8 nsa also imposed a secrecyorder on a patent application filed by university of wisconsin professor5office of technology assessment (ota), defending secrets, sharing data, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., 1987, pp. 141142.6ota, defending secrets, 1987, p. 142.7national academy of sciences, scientific communication and national security: a report,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1982.8susan landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy, association forcomputing machinery inc., new york, june 1994, pp. 3738; and martin hellman, communication with computer science and telecommunications board staff, december 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief history of cryptography policy417george davida; the order was later lifted. however, at nsaõs request, theamerican council on education formed a study group that recommendeda 2year experiment in which cryptography research would be submittedto nsa for review, on a voluntary basis, before publication. this procedure began in 1980 and remains in effect. over this time, nsa has madeonly a few requests for changes, and there appear to have been no longterm chilling effects on academic research.9funding of academic cryptography has also been influenced by secrecy concerns. in 1980, leonard adleman (another of the rsaalgorithmõs authors) submitted a grant proposal for research, includingwork on cryptography, to the national science foundation (nsf). nsaoffered to assume all responsibility for funding unclassified cryptographicresearch, in place of nsf; this would give nsa the opportunity to subjectall research proposals to secrecy review. interpretations vary about theextent to which this proposal reflected a power struggle between nsaand nsf; ultimately, a decision at the white house level determined thatboth agencies would continue to fund cryptographic research.10e.3 commercial cryptographygrowing interest and technical capabilities in cryptography withincommercial communities brought cryptography policy into public debatein the 1970s.11 the spark that began much of this debate was the nationalbureau of standards (nbs) 1975 proposal for a new cryptographic technology standard required for government useñand recommended forcommercial useñoutside classified (military and intelligence) applications. this was the data encryption standard (des).nbs proposed the des under its authority, in the brooks act of 1965,to recommend uniform data processing standards for federal governmentpurchasing.12 the proposed des was based on an ibmdeveloped technology. nsaõs role in recommending changes to ibmõs original algorithm raised questions of whether the agency had weakened the standard. the reduction in key length from 128 bits in ibmõs original versionto 56 bits clearly weakened the algorithm considerably, all else beingequal.13 public debate also addressed whether the revised algorithm con9landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, p. 38.10landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, p. 38; and ota, defending secrets, 1987,pp. 144145.11landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, pp. 3738.12ota, information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, pp. 134136.13horst feistel, òcryptography and computer privacy,ó scientific american, volume228(5), may 1973, pp. 1523.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.418appendix etained a trapdoor or other vulnerabilities. a review led by representativejack brooks, however, concluded that changes had been made freely byibm. apart from the key length reduction, some changes that nsa suggested appear to have strengthened the algorithm against a form of attack, differential cryptanalysis, that was not widely known at the time.14in 1977, the des was issued as a federal information processing standard (fips). its promulgation as a stable, certified technology stimulatedits widespread use in commercial applications. it has been reviewedevery 5 years for continued suitability in the face of advances in computing power and techniques available to attackers. nsa subsequently hasplayed an important role in testing and certifying products for conformityto the des. by 1986, nsa had certified more than 400 voice, data, and fileencryption products using the des.in the mid1980s, however, nsa announced it would stop endorsingdes products after 1988, instead focusing on a set of classified, hardwarebased standards for modular products that were incompatible with thedes. (this approach is reflected, for example, in the fortezza cardbasedsystems that nsa is now promoting.) these plans raised immediateconcern about the cost of switching over to new equipment in industriessuch as banking that relied heavily on products incorporating the des.this controversy was one factor that motivated passage of the 1987computer security act, which placed responsibility for standards development and product evaluation for nonclassified applications in the national institute of standards and technology (nist), the renamed nbs.as an agency of the department of commerce, nist has a mandate tosupport u.s. commercial interests. in cryptography policy making, therefore, nist could be expected to take commercial factors into accountmore wholeheartedly than nsa. nist recertified the des in 1988, andnist became responsible for assessing product conformity to the standard. (the des was most recently recertified in 1993 and, according tonist, may or may not be recertified in 1998.15) nist also developed othercryptographic fipss, including standards for algorithms (such as the digital signature standard) and for implementation of cryptographic systems.another factor leading to the computer security act was the need toresolve conflicts in agency responsibilities among the brooks act, various14ota, information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, p. 123.15the announcement of the most recent recertification of the des states, òat the nextreview (1998), the algorithm specified in this standard will be over twenty years old. nistwill consider alternatives which offer a higher level of security. one of these alternativesmay be proposed as a replacement standard at the 1998 review.ó see nist, announcing thedata encryption standard, fips publication 462, december 30, 1993; available online athttp://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief history of cryptography policy419office of management and budget directives, and the 1984 national security decision directive 145 (nsdd145), which created a new process forsetting standards for federal systems to protect òsensitive but not classifiedó national security information. nsdd145 also made the director ofnsa responsible for evaluating vulnerabilities and reviewing and approving security standards and systems for government information andtelecommunication systems.16nist and nsa signed a memorandum of understanding (mou) in1989 delineating the agenciesõ roles under the computer security actwith respect to cryptography and other issues. under the mou, nist isresponsible for, among other activities, developing standards and procedures for the protection of sensitive (but not classified) information infederal computer systems, drawing on computer security guidelines ofnsa where appropriate, and for coordinating with nsa and other agencies to ensure that these standards are consistent with those for protectionof classified information. nsa provides nist and other agencies withtechnical assistance related to cryptographic algorithms and techniquesand to endorse products for application to secure systems. the two agencies also agreed to establish a technical working group to review issues ofmutual interest related to protecting unclassified information.17e.4 recent developmentsnsa played a strong role in the development of the escrowed encryption standard (ees), through the process outlined in the mou.18 thestandard was in part an effort to forestall a mass market for telephoneencryption devices that would obstruct authorized wiretaps. in 1992,at&t announced plans to produce the first encrypted telephone backedby the marketing strength of a major corporation, the model 3600 telephone security device, which used the des for encryption.19 on april16ota, information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, p. 143.17memorandum of understanding between the director of the national institute of standardsand technology and the director of the national security agency concerning the implementation ofpublic law 100235; reprinted in ota, information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, p. 197; reprinted also in appendix n.18it has been a matter of debate whether nsaõs influence over nist in the developmentof the ees was so great as to exceed nsaõs advisory role authorized in the computersecurity act. ota concluded that òinteragency discussions and negotiations by agencystaffs under the mou can result in delay, modification, or abandonment of proposed niststandards activities, without notice or the benefit of oversight that is required by law.óota also noted that nist and nsa officials disagreed with this conclusion. see ota,information security and privacy in network environments, 1994, p. 168.19landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, p. 45.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.420appendix e16, 1993, the white house announced an effort to develop a new standardfor encryption of digitized voice communications that would allow lawenforcement access by recovering an òescrowedó decryption key. thestandard would be based on a classified algorithm made available bynsañskipjackñimplemented in a hardware device, the clipper chip.(see chapter 5 for technical details of clipper, the skipjack algorithm, andkey escrow.)in february 1994, following a formal comment period in which virtually all written comments received by nist were opposed to the proposed standard, nist announced the adoption of fips 185, the ees.20 asa voluntary standard, ees is available for federal agencies (and privatefirms that so desire) to cite in procurement specifications for encryptedvoice products, in lieu of the des. at&t incorporated clipper into itsencrypted voice product, now called the surity telephone device 3600. asecond initiative led to standards for data encryption devices using asmartcard design called fortezza. the fortezza card includes a capstonechip, which uses skipjack for confidentiality and several other algorithmsfor integrity and key exchange. in 1995, fortezza was specified in a largeprocurement (750,000 units) of data encryption products for the defensemessaging system.21recent federal initiatives have sought to promote broader use of escrowed encryption technologies. on september 67, 1995, nist sponsored a workshop to discuss draft criteria under which software productswith escrow features for authorized thirdparty access to keys could receive expedited export licensing review on the commerce control list, asopposed to the u.s. munitions list. one criterion allows export of escrowed key systems with key lengths up to 64 bits. on september 15,1995, another nist workshop sought comments from private industry onthe development of a new fips that would allow for both hardware andsoftware implementations of escrowed key cryptosystems. in both ofthese areas, additional workshops and discussions are expected to continue.2220landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, p. 48; nist, escrowed encryption standard,fips publication 185, february 9, 1994, available from nist via the internet at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/fips.21kevin power, government computer news, july 31, 1995, p. 1.22nist, òmedia advisory: u.s. government seeks public comment on draft export criteria for key escrow encryption,ó november 6, 1995, available online at http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow; and committee and staff attendance at workshops.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.421fa brief primer on intelligence note: some material in this appendix, including the organizational makeup of theintelligence community and the stages of the intelligence cycle, is adapted from the centralintelligence agency, òfactbook on intelligence,ó september 1995, available online at http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications. 1as a result of operational successes in the persian gulf war, however, increased demand by field commanders for realtime access to national intelligence resources, such assatellite reconnaissance, is blurring the boundary between these areas. see, for example,desmond ball, signals intelligence in the postcold war era: developments in the asiapacificregion, institute of southeast asian studies, singapore, 1993.intelligence gathering takes place for both tactical and strategic purposes. tactical intelligence is primarily the domain of agencies within themilitary services. tactical intelligence provides advantages on the battlefield against hostile military forces (or in support of counterterrorist operations) through direct support to operational commanders in areas suchas reconnaissance, mapping, and early warning of enemy force movements. intelligence for strategic purposes (national intelligence) servesforeign policy, national security, and national economic objectives. national intelligence focuses on foreign political and economic events andtrends; strategic military concerns such as plans, doctrine, scientific andtechnical resources; weapons system capabilities; and nuclear programdevelopment.1signals intelligence (sigint) is one key source of intelligence, important to both tactical and national intelligence. strictly speaking, sigintencompasses two different forms of intelligenceñcommunications intelcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.422appendix fligence (comint) and electronic intelligence (elint). elint refers tothe capture and analysis of electromagnetic signals from emitters such asradars; in general, these signals do not carry information in the communications sense of the term. in this report, and because it conforms toconventions that have been established by the public debate to date,sigint is used to refer to communications intelligenceñthe capture andanalysis of signals (from whatever source) that carry communicationsinformation.it is difficult or impossible to identify a single source that is morecritical or important than all others because the essence of intelligence is thesynthesis of information from all available sources (òallsourceó synthesis).no single source is necessarily critical, although any one might be in anygiven instance, and it is a matter of judgment as to whether a certain sourceshould be accorded a higher priority than another. many important sourcesare open and public, but others are secret or clandestine. clandestine information gathering, directed toward foreign and domestic military, political,economic, criminal, and other sources to which open, public access is denied, is a core element of national intelligence activities.the community responsible for allsource synthesis is the intelligencecommunity, which consists of a number of civilian and military agencies.the director of central intelligence (dci) is both the coordinator of thiscommunity and the director of the central intelligence agency (cia).under the national security act of 1947, the cia is the coordinatingagency for foreign intelligence analysis and dissemination. the cia produces finished (refined) intelligence for the president and the nationalsecurity council, and it is engaged in many aspects of information collection. the defense intelligence agency and the bureau of intelligence andresearch of the department of state also analyze and produce finishedintelligence, primarily for the secretaries of defense and state, respectively. the national security agency (nsa) is responsible for collectingsignals intelligenceñmonitoring, decrypting, and translating foreign communicationsñand for developing cryptographic and other techniques toprotect u.s. communications and computer security. other parts of thecommunity include intelligence agencies of each of the military services;the national reconnaissance office (nro), through which the air forceand cia jointly manage spacebased (satellite) data collection; the centralimagery office, for processing photographic intelligence; and elements ofthe departments of treasury and energy, among others.intelligence (and counterintelligence2) have foreign and domestic com2protecting secrets from disclosure to others is the focus of counterintelligence, a closelyrelated activity involving many of the same processes as intelligence.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on intelligence423ponents, including infiltration of human agents into organizations operating abroad and in the united states and electronic and photographic surveillance. the federal bureau of investigation (fbi) is responsible for conducting these activities in the united states. by law, foreign intelligenceagencies such as the cia and nsa are barred from domestic surveillance.transgressions in this area have occurred, however, providing part of therationale for creation in the 1970s of the senate and house select committees on intelligence. these committees provide legislative oversight aswell as budget authorization.finally, it is important to note that intelligence is pursued largely on alevelofeffort basis, rather than in response to some set of specific needsthat must be met at all costs. thus, its importance is more a judgmentquestion than one based on any analytical argument. this means, forexample, that it is very hard to exclude or include missions or capabilitieson the basis of a òmusthaveó list.f.1 the intelligence missionthe mission of national intelligence is defined by the national security act and by relevant presidential directives, of which the most recentis executive order 12333, signed by president reagan on december 4,1981. executive order 12333 authorizes the dci to develop and implement a national foreign intelligence program to provide ò[t]imely andaccurate information about the activities, capabilities, plans, and intentions of foreign powers, organizations, and persons and their agents.ó3 itsprimary purpose is to provide the president and designated officials, suchas the national security council, with decision supportñinformation onwhich to base decisions on foreign, defense, and economic policy and theprotection of u.s. national security interests.in the postcold war environment, the definition of national securityinterests goes far beyond a focus on a single rival such as the sovietunion, and the united states is now concerned with threats throughoutthe world.4 many of these threats are lower in intensity, but in some waysmore complex and difficult to address, than those of the former sovietunion. they include not only conventional military threats, but alsoissues such as the proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons of mass destruction; terrorism; and political and economic instability,3ronald reagan, united states intelligence activities, executive order 12333, the whitehouse, washington, d.c., december 4, 1981; reprinted in appendix n.4s. turner, òintelligence for a new world order,ó foreign affairs, volume 70(4), 1991, pp.150166.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.424appendix fwhich often leads to demands for u.s. or united nations military orhumanitarian intervention.counterterrorism efforts are on the rise. for example, public reportsindicate that sigint was responsible for determining libyan involvementin the terrorist bombing of pan am flight 103 in 1988.5 during the persiangulf war, intercepted communications enabled identification and forestallment of iraqi terrorist teams.6 evidence from wiretaps formed an important part of the case against sheik omar abdel rahman in the case of analleged conspiracy by islamic fundamentalists to blow up the united nations, the hudson river tunnels, and the federal building in manhattan.7national security is also increasingly recognized as including broader,nonmilitary areas. monitoring and countering the international drugtrade is a relatively new priority for the u.s. intelligence community.economic strength, industrial technology development, and environmental protection contribute to national security, creating demand amongpolicy makers for collection and analysis of information in areas traditionally unfamiliar to the intelligence community.the net result is that the number and range of tasks being assigned tothe intelligence community are growing rapidly. intelligence efforts haveexpanded to include the support of activities in the following areas:¥ counterproliferation. the united states has a policy to discouragethe proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, biological) and the capabilities of other countries to acquire such weapons.(ballistic missiles are also subject to significant counterproliferation efforts.) since the united states is not the only possible supplier of components for these weapons, it must rely on the cooperation of other possiblesupplier nations to discourage proliferation. thus, intelligence efforts aredirected toward identifying potential suppliers and purchasers, and theinformation derived from these efforts is passed to policy makers whocan undertake appropriate actions in response.¥ sanctions enforcement. the united states is a supporter of manysanctions around the world. for example, the united nations may decideto imposeñand the united states decide to supportñeconomic sanctionson a nation such that only humanitarian supplies may enter it. intelligence efforts are needed to identify potential sources of leakages (e.g.,sanctioned shipments masquerading as humanitarian supplies).5òthere are some secrets the nsa doesnõt want kept,ó newsday, august 21, 1989, p. 54.6ball, signals intelligence in the postcold war era, 1993.7see joseph p. fried, òsheikõs tapped calls entered in terrorism trial,ó new york times,april 23, 1995, p. 45.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on intelligence425¥ economic and trade relations. u.s. trade relations with the rest of theworld are increasingly important in a globally interdependent economy.two key dimensions of such relations are the following:ñtrade treaties. u.s. negotiators meet with their foreign counterpartsto secure treaty arrangements that are fair, are equitable, and advance u.s.interests. public sources assert that intelligence efforts sometimes supportthe positions of u.s. negotiators.8ñtrade practices. u.s. companies often compete against foreigncompanies for international contracts. although the u.s. intelligence community does not provide support to individual u.s. companies, it does playa role in identifying unfair trade practices (e.g., illegal activities undertakenby foreign governments on behalf of their constituents) and providing information to u.s. policy makers who might be responsible for remedialactions.one result of the expanding plate of activities is that the parts of thenational intelligence community that traditionally focus on strategic issues are spending a larger percentage of their time on activities that provide realtime operational support. whereas in the past the intelligencecommunity concentrated primarily on strategic intelligence (largescaletrends and the like) that was actionable by policy makers on a scale ofyears, the community today must also provide products that are actionable in the time scale of hours, days, or weeks. such time pressuresobviously place greater demands on the intelligence cycle, and in such anenvironment realtime information is at a premium.f.2 the intelligence cyclehistorically, the process of intelligence production has been cyclical.planning, which entails the prioritization of information demands andthe allocation of resources, represents both the first and the last stage.information is collected from a variety of sources, processed into usefulform, analyzed, by drawing upon all available sources to generate balancedconclusions, and disseminated to the consumers of intelligenceñthe president, national security officials, and others in the executive and legislativebranches of government with a need for information to support national8for example, public sources reported that the u.s. intelligence community was active insupporting u.s. negotiators on the general agreement on tariffs and trade. see craigwhitney, òfrance accuses 5 americans of spying; asks they leave,ó new york times,february 23, 1995, p. a1; tim weiner, òc.i.a. faces issue of economic spying,ó new yorktimes, february 23, 1995, p. a1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.426appendix fsecurity decisions. dissemination of finished intelligence products maystimulate demand for new requests for intelligence information.f.2.1 planningnational intelligence planning, management, prioritization, and resource allocation are overseen by the dci, as well as the deputy directorof central intelligence. the dci chairs the national foreign intelligenceboard, which includes officials of the department of defense, nsa, fbi,and other agencies and advises dci on both analytical and administrativeissues. the national intelligence council, comprised of senior intelligence experts inside and outside the government, produces national intelligence estimates, assesses the quality of analyses, and identifies critical gaps requiring new collection priorities. among others with seniorplanning roles are the executive director for intelligence communityaffairs; the executive director and deputy director of the cia and deputydirectors of its intelligence, operations, administration, and science andtechnology branches; and officials of other intelligence agencies.in the context of the intelligence cycle, planning entails the identification of collection priorities in response to requests from intelligence consumers. an example of the planning stage is the determination of howmany surveillance satellites the united states needs, the correspondingallocation of financial resources made available by congress, and thecontinual process of selecting targets at which the satellitesõ cameras andantennas should be aimed.planning of collection efforts is an essential element of the intelligencecycle because the united states does not have unlimited intelligence collection assets. a central authority is needed to weigh competing demands for collection and decide which collection assets should be assigned to which tasks. far more requests for collection are submitted byvarious users than are actually approved.f.2.2 collectioncollection of foreign intelligence relies heavily on technical means.the bulk of the intelligence budget is for acquisition and operation oftechnical systems, most of which are related to collection.9 technicalcollection assets include various satellites; groundbased monitoring stations; and airborne, ocean surface, and underwater platforms.9h. nelson, òthe u.s. intelligence budget in the 1990s,ó international journal of intelligenceand counterintelligence, volume 6(1), 1993, pp. 195203.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on intelligence427technical collection methods are categorized broadly as image intelligence (imint; e.g., overhead photographs) and sigint. imint is collected from aircraft, such as the u2 and the sr71 blackbird, and satellites.the nsa is the lead agency for sigint, the monitoring of electronicsignals. these include intercepted radio, microwave, satellite, and telephone communications; telemetry, such as data streams transmitted during ballistic missile tests; and radar emissions. some signals are intercepted through the antenna arrays of ground stations around the world,which monitor broadcast, satellitelinked, and other radio communications. spacebased sigint collection comes from a variety of satellites.historically, technical collection means have been critical in the verification of arms control agreements, through monitoring of missile tests,radiation and seismic detection, and direct observation of nuclear production facilities and weapons sites.10nontechnical intelligence collection can be open or covert. althoughthere is substantial debate over the extent to which the intelligence community (particularly the cia) has made effective use of opensource intelligence,11 it is widely recognized that a great deal of relevant informationabout foreign political, economic, military, and other issues is publicly available. other potential open sources of material for intelligence analysisinclude foreign broadcasts and newspapers; academic, scientific, and tradejournals; books; scientific conference reports; diplomatic contacts (e.g., foreign attach”s); and debriefings of u.s. scientists and businesspeople whoattend international meetings.12clandestine nontechnical intelligence collection is the concern of human intelligence, or humint. case officers, usually operating undercover as u.s. officials in foreign posts, are the backbone of this effort.through their political, economic, and social contacts, case officers recruitlocal agents to provide information unavailable through technical means.placement of agents under nonofficial òdeepó cover may facilitate entryinto particularly difficult to penetrate organizations such as drug cartels;however, deep cover involves potentially greater risk to the agent.1310 j.a. adam, g. zorpette, s.m. meyer, and j. horgan, òpeacekeeping by technical means:special report/verification,ó ieee spectrum, volume 23(july), 1986, pp. 4280.11r.d. steele, òa critical evaluation of u.s. national intelligence capabilities,ó international journal of intelligence and counterintelligence, volume 6(2), 1993, pp. 173193.12r. godson (ed.), intelligence requirements for the 1990s: collection, analysis, counterintelligence, and covert action, lexington books, lexington, mass., 1989.13godson, intelligence requirements for the 1990s, 1989.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.428appendix ff.2.3 processingthe information collected by intelligence assetsñparticularly, technical meansñmust be converted to a usable form before it can be analyzed.encrypted communications have to be decrypted for maximum utility (although full decryption may not be necessary for traffic analysis, whichitself provides some useful information); language experts translate sigintinto english; imint is processed electronically to assist in interpretation ofimagery.f.2.4 analysisas noted earlier, allsource analysis is the basis of the intelligence production effort. allsource analysis converts collected information frommultiple sources into finished intelligence products that are useful to intelligence consumers. at the simplest level, clearly, extensive editing andprioritizing are necessary to reduce and simplify the voluminous stream ofcollected data. the practice of analysis, however, involves more than editing. in the traditional view of the intelligence community, allsource analysis is both science and art. it includes integration and evaluation of allavailable data, finding patterns among fragmentary or contradictorysources, and drawing inferences from incomplete evidence. whereas allsource analysis can add significant value to raw information, it is subject topotential pitfalls that can lead to major errors. these include, for example,a lack of awareness of other cultures, leading to òmirror imagingóñtheassumption that foreign policy makers will behave as americans would.overreliance on clandestine or technical sources, simply because they areuniquely available to intelligence analysts, is another risk.14analysts, who are typically regional or subject matter specialists, prepare a variety of products for intelligence consumers. these include,among others, (1) current intelligence on political and other events; (2)encyclopedic intelligenceñcompilations of data for future use, such asmaps or economic statistics; and (3) estimative intelligenceñpredictionsof trends and events, with a focus on potential threats to u.s. security.the traditional view of analysis, developed in the ciaõs early history andincorporated into its training for many years, held that analysis should beconducted at armõs length from intelligence consumers. this distancewould enable analysts to avoid being biased by domestic political concerns.15 more recently, a competing view has emerged within the intelli14victor marchetti and john d. marks, the cia and the cult of intelligence, alfred a. knopf,new york, 1974.15godson, intelligence requirements for the 1990s, 1989.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a brief primer on intelligence429gence community that analysts should actively seek to meet the specificneeds of policy makers, for example, by identifying opportunities forproactive measures that advance u.s. policies.f.2.5 dissemination the final step of the cycle is dissemination of the finished product toconsumers. finished intelligence prepared under the dciõs direction ishandcarried daily to the president and key national security advisers.other selected intelligence products, such as classified papers and encrypted electronic documents, are distributed to national security planners and policy makers on the basis of their need to know, as determined,in most cases, by the intelligence community. broader, longerrange products prepared under the national intelligence councilõs direction are disseminated as national intelligence estimates. as these disseminationefforts lead to new requirements for information, the intelligence cyclebegins again.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.430appendix g430gthe international scope ofcryptography policyg.1 international dimensions ofcryptography policyany u.s. cryptography policy must take into account a number ofinternational dimensions, the most important of which is the fact that theunited states today does not have unquestioned dominance in the economic, financial, technological, and political affairs of the world as it mighthave had at the end of world war ii. thus, the united states is not in aposition to dictate how the rest of the world should regard cryptographictechnology as it becomes more relevant to nonmilitary and nondiplomaticmatters.a second critical consideration is the international scope of business,as described in chapter 1. increasingly, firms need to be able to communicate with their subsidiaries or affiliates across national boundaries, aswell as with nonaffiliated partners in joint ventures or in strategic alliances. whether multinational or not, u.s. firms will need to communicatewith customers and suppliers on a worldwide basis. foreign customersneed to be able to pay u.s. vendors, and vice versa, in a way that respectsdifferent monetary systems; thus, financial transactions occur increasinglyover international boundaries, resulting in a truly global banking andfinancial system. to the extent that these various types of communications must be secure, cryptography provides a very important tool forcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy431ensuring such security.1 thus, differing national policies on cryptography that lead to difficulties in international communications work againstoverall national policies that are aimed at opening markets and reducingcommercial and trade barriers.related is the fact that u.s. companies, including the hightechnologycompanies that manufacture information technology products withworldwide acceptance and popularity, face the potential of significantforeign competition, as discussed in chapter 4. to the extent that thesecompanies constitute major u.s. national assets, policy actions that affecttheir international competitiveness must be considered very carefully.a final international dimension is that other nations also have theoption to maintain some form of export controls on cryptography, as wellas controls on the import and use of cryptography. such controls formpart of the context in which u.s. cryptography policy must be formulated.g.2 similarities in and differences between theunited states and other nations withrespect to cryptographydespite the international scope of cryptography policy, the international scene is dominated by national governments. all national governments have certain basic goals in common:¥ to maintain national sovereignty,¥ to protect public safety and domestic order,¥ to look after their nationõs economic interests, and¥ to advance their national interests internationally.these common goals translate into policy and interests that are sometimes similar and sometimes different between nations. perhaps the mostimportant point of similarity is that national governments are likely totake actions to mitigate the threat that the use of cryptography may poseto their ability to achieve the goals listed above.2 a corollary is thatforeign national governments are likely to resist unilateral u.s. decisions1in the international arena, as elsewhere, not all aspects of cryptography are necessarilyequally critical to all problems of security. for example, to some extent, the security ofinternational electronic payments and other financial transactions can be enhanced throughcollateral (nonconfidentiality) uses of cryptography, as discussed in chapter 2.2experience in other internetrelated matters suggests that many governments are willing to wield their influence in areas that they believe affect the public safety and welfare.for example:¥ the compuserve online service suspended access worldwide to approximately 200internet ònewsgroupsó at the request of the german government. these newsgroups werecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.432appendix gthat affect the use of cryptographic technologies within their borders (e.g.,by threatening their control over cryptography). for example, they willlikely oppose the use of cryptographic communications systems withintheir borders for which the keys are escrowed solely in the united states.the existence of a range of limited, shared interests among nationsnevertheless suggests at least the possibility of international cooperationand formal agreements on cryptography policy. for example, law enforcement is a concern that constitutes a generally shared interest. thereason is that many nations have a more or less equivalent sense of actions that should subject an individual to the sanction of law, at least incertain domainsñmurder and kidnapping are examples of actions thatare crimes in almost every nation.3 some aspects of law enforcement haveexplicitly international dimensions, such as global organized crime andterrorism.4 a second area of shared interest is in maintaining the integritysuspected of carrying child pornography. see john markoff, òonline service blocks access to topics called pornographic,ó new york times, december 29, 1995, p. a1.¥ the peopleõs republic of china declared its intent to supervise the content of allfinancial news reports that collect information in china. specifically, it announced thatòforeign economic information providers will be punished in accordance with the law iftheir released information to chinese users contains anything forbidden by chinese lawsand regulations, or slanders or jeopardizes the national interests of china.ó see seth faison,òciting security, china will curb foreign financial news agencies,ó new york times, january 17, 1996, p. a1. china is also attempting to develop internetcompatible technologythat will enable a strong degree of government control over the content that is accessible tochinese residents. see òchinese firewall: beijing seeks to build version of the internetthat can be censored,ó wall street journal, january 31, 1996, p. 1.¥ singapore announced that it would hold providers of access to the internet andcontent providers responsible for preventing information deemed to be pornographic orpolitically objectionable from reaching internet users in singapore. see darren mcdermott,òsingapore unveils sweeping measures to control words, images on internet,ó wall streetjournal, march 6, 1996, p. b6.3at the same time, differences of national law in certain other important areas should notbe overlooked. specifically, the crimes for which an individual may be extradited varyfrom nation to nation (e.g., some nations will not extradite a person for financial fraud); inaddition, some nations may criminalize certain activity related to computers and/or electronic communications that other nations do not. enforcement of laws is often difficultover national boundaries, even if relevant laws in another nation do criminalize particularacts. the reason is that if nation a suffers the brunt of actions taken by a citizen resident ofnation b, nation b may have little incentive to prosecute those actions even if its lawscriminalize them, since it does not particularly suffer from those actions. both of thesefactors complicate the feasibility of achieving international agreements. some discussion ofdifferent international perspectives on computer crime can be found in the united nationsmanual on the prevention and control of computerrelated crime, available online at http://www.ifs.univie.ac.at/~pr2gq1/rev4344.html.4see, for example, phil williams, òtransnational criminal organizations and international security,ó survival, volume 36(1), spring 1994, pp. 96113.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy433of the financial systems of each nation, because failures in one part of aninterconnected financial system may well ripple through the entire system. individual privacy is another common interest; in some nations, forexample, the notion of widespread government surveillance of communications in society causes public and political concern, as it would in theunited states.5on the other hand, there are many national differences that potentially obstruct the achievement of agreements:¥ differing expectations regarding citizensõ rights (e.g., rights to privacy,rights to trial, rights to express dissent freely, the relative balance of personal versus societal rights) and methods by which such rights can be enforced.for example, the united states has a tendency to enforce privacy rightsthrough market mechanisms, whereas many european governments generally take a more active policy role in protecting such rights. moreover,the united states has a rich tradition of public debate and argument, anddissenting discourse is far more the rule than the exception compared tomost foreign nations, whose publics tend to exhibit a greater willingnessto grant certain powers to the state, a less adversarial relationship towardthe government, and more trust in the ability of government to do what isin the national interest. (indeed, at a public meeting a representative ofthe national security agency noted complaints from foreign intelligenceservices that the u.s. policy debate had raised public visibility of thecryptography issue within their countries.)¥ businessgovernment relationships. in some nations, it is the expectation that national intelligence services will cooperate with and assist businesses that in the united states would be regarded as entirely separatefrom government. indeed, many foreign nations operate with fewer andmore blurred lines between government and òprivateó businesses than istrue in the united states. in areas such as standards setting that arerelevant to businesses, the united states tends to rely on market forcesrather than government much more than other nations do.¥ what constitutes òfairó business practices. in principle, many nationsgive lip service to the idea of confidentiality in commercial transactionsand the notion of fair competition, but the actual practices of nations areoften at variance with these statements.¥ status. as a global power, the u.s. scope of activities for monitoring external traffic (i.e., traffic between two other nations) is greater thanthat of other nations, which are concerned mostly about communications5for example, a disclosure that a spanish military secret service intercepted hundreds ofmobile telephone conversations caused considerable public uproar. see òspaniards stunnedby military eavesdropping,ó new york times, june 16, 1995, p. a5.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.434appendix ginto and out of their borders. the status of the united states as a globalpower also makes its citizens and facilities highprofile targets for terrorist attacks throughout the world.¥ access to technology. on average, u.s. citizens tend to have a higherdegree of access to and familiarity with information technology than docitizens of other nations. furthermore, the information technology deployed internationally has tended to be less sophisticated than that deployed in the united states; with some exceptions, this lack of sophistication is reflected generally as well in the level of deployed technology thatsupports security.6 thus, the body politic in the united states arguablyhas more at stake than that in other nations.finally, the foreign governments relevant to the policy issues ofcryptography range from very friendly to very hostile.¥ some nations are very closely aligned with the united states, andthe united states has no real need to target their communications (northey ours).¥ some nations are allies in some domains and competitors in others,and the circumstances of the moment determine u.s. needs for access totheir communications.¥ some nations are pariah or rogue nations, and as a general rule, theunited states would be highly interested in the substance of their communications.g.3 foreign export control regimesthe united states is not the only nation that imposes export controlrestrictions on cryptography. many other nations, especially former members of the coordinating committee (cocomñsee below), control theexport of cryptography to some extent.7 cocom nations included australia, belgium, canada, denmark, france, germany, greece, italy, japan,luxembourg, the netherlands, norway, portugal, spain, turkey, theunited kingdom, and the united states.86for example, 37% of u.s. households have personal computers, compared with 21% inspain, 9% in britain, 19% in germany, 14% in italy, 15% in france (excluding minitel), and15% in other european nations. see john tagliabue, òeuropeans buy home pcõs at recordpace,ó new york times, december 11, 1995, p. d1.7the most authoritative study on the laws of other nations regarding controls on theexport, import, and use of cryptography is a study produced by the department of commerce and the national security agency. see department of commerce and nationalsecurity agency, a study of the international market for computer software with encryption,washington, d.c., released january 11, 1996.8national research council (nrc), finding common ground, national academy press,washington, d.c., 1991, p. 62 (footnote).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy435cocom was a western response to the threat of the soviet union inthe days of the cold war.9 under the cocom export control regime,member nations agreed to abide by regulations governing the export ofmany militarily useful items, including cryptography, to nations that werepotential adversaries of the west (generally eastern bloc nations androgue nations).the regime was more successful in those instances in which the technology in question was u.s. source, and thus what was needed from othercocom members was control over reexport, or in which there was strongcooperation based on political agreement that the technology should bekept away from controlled destinations, despite its general availability inother cocom nations. cocom controls did not work perfectly, but theyhad some nontrivial impact. for example, export controls did not preventthe soviets from obtaining certain types of computers, but they probablyhad fewer of those computers than if there had been no export controls.this had some advantages for the west: the soviets were locked into oldfirstgeneration computers in many cases; also, they did not have manyand, thus, had to use them only on their highestpriority projects.on the other hand, cocom controls were less successful when¥ noncocom countries (e.g., taiwan and korea) developed indigenous capabilities to produce cocomcontrolled technologies and a willingness to sell them;¥ cocom member nations disagreed among themselves about thedanger of exporting certain products to eastern bloc nations; and¥ the items in question were dualuse items.all of these conditions currently or potentially obtain with respect tocryptography,10 although they should not be taken to mean that cooperative, multinational cocomlike controls on cryptography would be hopeless. also, it is important to note that the intent of the cocom exportcontrol regime was to prevent militarily significant technologies (including cryptography) from falling into the hands of the eastern bloc, ratherthan to inhibit mutually advantageous sharing of military technologyamong the member states.history demonstrates that the united states has always appliedtighter export controls for security and foreign policy reasons than anyagreement with other nations might otherwise mandate.11 for example,9for detailed discussion of the cocom regime, see nrc, finding common ground, 1991,and nrc, balancing the national interest, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1987.10for example, most countries have not yet attained the degree of success in producingshrinkwrapped software applications incorporating cryptography that the united stateshas; potentially, they could do so and become significant suppliers of such applications.11for example, see nrc, finding common ground, 1991, pp. 99100.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.436appendix gsince cryptography is in general controlled by the united states as a munitions item, the same export controls on cryptography apply to productsdestined for england (a cocom member) and saudi arabia (a noncocommember), though the decisionmaking process might well generate different answers depending on the receiving nation. a staff study by the u.s.international trade commission found that the export controls on encryption maintained by many other nations apply for the most part tocertain proscribed (or òrogueó) nations. thus, there are in general morerestrictions on the export of products with encryption capability from theunited states than from these other nations, even though all of the nationsin question maintain export controls on encryption.12g.4 foreign import and use control regimesa number of nations discourage cryptography within their jurisdictions through a combination of import controls and use controls. importcontrols refer to restrictions on products with encryption capability thatmay be taken into a given nation; use controls refer to restriction on theuse of such products within their jurisdictions.at the time of this writing (early 1996), finland, france, israel, russia,and south africa assert the authority, through an explicit law or decree, toexercise some degree of explicit legal control over the use and/or importof cryptography within their borders;13 a number of other nations arereported to be investigating the possibilities of legal restrictions. on theother hand, the fact that a law regulating the use of cryptography is on thebooks of a nation does not mean that the law is consistently enforced. forexample, at the international cryptography institute 1995 conference,14speakers from france and russia both noted the existence of such laws intheir nations and observed that for the most part those laws generallywere not enforced and thus did not inhibit the widespread use of cryptography in those nations.1512office of industries, u.s. international trade commission, global competitiveness of theu.s. computer software and service industries, staff research study #21, washington, d.c.,june 1995, chapter 3.13department of commerce and national security agency, a study of the internationalmarket for computer software with encryption, 1996, part ii.14international cryptography institute (ici) 1995, george washington university, sept.22.15still, the mere existence of such lawsñwhether or not enforcedñserves as an obstacleto large vendors who wish to sell products with encryption capabilities or to provide encryption services, thereby reducing their availability to the average consumer. in addition,such nations may well practice selective enforcement of such laws. for example, a representative of a major computer company with a french subsidiary observed at the ici 1995conference that although french laws forbidding the use of unregistered encryption werenot regularly enforced against private users, they did inhibit this company from marketingproducts with encryption capabilities in france.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy437the flip side of unenforced laws is the case of a nation that appliesinformal controls: a nation without explicit laws forbidding the use ofsecure communications devices may nonetheless discourage their import.16 in addition, nations have a variety of mechanisms for influencingthe use of cryptography within the country:¥ laws related to the public telephone system. in most nations the government has the legal authority to regulate equipment that is connected tothe public telephone network (e.g., in homologation laws). in the eventthat a nation wishes to discourage the use of encrypted telephonic communications, it may choose to use existing homologation laws as a pretextto prevent users from connecting to the network with secure telephones.¥ laws related to content carried by electronic media. in some nations,the transmission of certain types of content (e.g., sexually explicit material) is prohibited. thus, a nation could argue that it must be able to readencrypted transmissions in order to ensure that such content is indeed notbeing transmitted.¥ trade laws or other practices related to the protection of domestic industries. many nations have trade policies intended to discourage the purchase of foreign products and/or to promote the purchase of domesticproducts; examples in the united states include òbuy americanó laws.such policies could be used selectively to prevent the import of productswith encryption capabilities that might pose a threat to the law enforcement or national security interests of such a nation. in other nations, lawsmay be explicitly neutral with respect to local or foreign purchases, butlongstanding practices of buying locally may prove to be formidablebarriers to the import of foreign products.¥ licensing arrangements. a company (especially a foreign one) seeking to do business under the jurisdiction of a particular cryptographyunfriendly government may have to obtain a number of licenses to do so.many governments use their discretionary authority to impose òunofficialó requirements as conditions for doing business or granting the licenses necessary to operate (e.g., the need to bribe various government16the feasibility of such practices is documented in a 1992 report by the u.s. departmentof commerce, which describes foreign governmentsõ assistance to their domestic industries. this report found that foreign governments assist their industries by creating barriersto the domestic market (e.g., through tariffs or quotas, testing regulations, investment restrictions, and product and service standards), by devising incentives for domestic production (e.g., tax policies and legal regimes for intellectual property that favor domestic industries), and by aiding in market development (e.g., guaranteeing a certain minimum level ofsales through government purchase, providing foreign aid to buy domestic goods, applying political pressure to potential customers). see u.s. department of commerce, foreigngovernment assistance to domestic industry, u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c., september 1992, p. iii.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.438appendix gindividuals or informal òunderstandingsó that the company will refrainfrom using cryptography).many anecdotal examples of active government discouragement ofcryptography circulate in the business community. for example, abusinessperson traveling in a foreign nation brought a secure telephonefor use in her hotel room; a few hours after using it, she was asked by ahotel manager to discontinue use of that phone. a press report in thekarachi daily dawn reported on february 26, 1995, that the governmentof pakistan shut down a cellular network run by mobilink, a joint venturebetween motorola and pakistani saif telecom, because it was unable tointercept traffic.17nevertheless, it is possible (or will be in the near future) to circumvent local restrictions through technical means even if attempts are madeto enforce them. for example, direct satellite uplinks can carry communications without ever passing that information through the telecommunications network of the host nation.18 if available, superencryption (i.e.,encrypting information before it is entered into an approved encryptiondevice) can defeat an eavesdropper armed with the key to only the outerlayer of encryption; the use of superencryption cannot even be detectedunless a portion of the encrypted communication is decrypted and analyzed. (see also the discussion in chapter 7 on prohibiting the use ofunescrowed encryption.)to summarize, in some cases, a u.s. vendor that receives an exportlicense from u.s. authorities to sell in a given foreign market may wellencounter additional complications due to the import and use controls ofthe target nation. indeed, a number of other nations rely on u.s. exportcontrols to keep strong encryption products out of the market in theircountries.g.5 the state of international affairs todaytoday, international communications are conducted with no universally adopted information or communications privacy and security standards or policies. this is not surprising; the communications systems in17according to the article, the company was unable to provide interception services topakistani intelligence agencies. according to a mobilink official, òthere are no commercialproducts . . . that enable overtheair monitoring of calls.ó however, it remains unclearwhy agencies would require monitoring of wireless mobiletobase traffic, instead of intercepting at the base station. although the global system for mobile communicationõs digitally encrypted wireless traffic may be hard to tap in real time, it is decrypted at the basestation.18there are several systems in preparation that use lowearthorbit satellites to providedirect communications links, including iridium and odyssey.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy43919indeed, in the absence of standards, interoperability is often a problem even whencryptography is not involved.use worldwide are highly heterogeneous, are made by many differentmanufacturers, and embody many different standards; under these circumstances, securityspecific aspects of these systems cannot be expectedto be either standardized or government certified. in the absence of common understanding, ensuring information privacy or security is an adhoc affair. cryptographic equipment is freely available, and standards toensure interoperability and compatibility emerge, in many cases, througha market process with no intervention on the part of any national government. cryptographic equipment on the market is not always tested orcertified by national authorities or any organization with the responsibility for undertaking such testing.some of the future consequences of this current are likely to includethe following:¥ interoperability of communications equipment involving cryptography will be difficult.19¥ some companies and businesses will be able to implement veryhigh quality security, while others fall victim to the purveyors of shoddysecurity products.¥ national governments will be unable to use wiretapping as a toolfor enforcing criminal laws and pursuing national security interests inmany cases.needless to say, these consequences are undesirable for reasons related to business and commerce, national security, and law enforcement.how governments have responded to these undesirable consequences isdiscussed in section g.7.g.6 obtaining international cooperation on policyregarding secure communicationsif the use of the global information infrastructure (gii) is to grow withthe blessings of governments, common arrangements among governments are needed. to the extent that u.s. national cryptography policyaffects communications and information transfer across national boundaries, it has international implications.one approach is that the united states will set a standard on securecommunications that accommodates the needs of various national governments around the world. this approach is based on the assumptionthat the united states is the dominant player with respect to internationalcommunications and information transfer, and that actions taken by thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.440appendix gunited states to promote a future global information infrastructure set atleast a de facto standard to which all other parties to the gii will have toadhere. the result would be that u.s. national policy becomes the defacto international policy.the committee does not believe that this approach is feasible today.rather, the committee proceeds from the belief that the united states willbe an important but not the controlling international player with respectto international communications and information transfer. thus, theunited states cannot operate unilaterally and will have to reach accommodation with other national governments.by taking as given the fact that nationstates will continue to try toexert sovereignty over activities within their borders, including the pursuit of law enforcement and national security activities, the followingstatements seem warranted:1. common and cooperative policies are possible if and only if national governments agree to them.2. national governments will allow policies to be set in place if thesepolicies are consistent in some overall sense with the equities they seek tomaintain.3. a national government will not base its policies on the assumptionthat it will abuse the rights of its citizens (as it defines them).by assumption, cryptography threatens the ability of national governments to monitor the communications of others. thus, according tostatement 2, controls on the use of cryptography are a plausible governmental policy option as discussed above. at the same time and despitethis threat, some foreign governments could be willing to allow secureinternational communications on a casebycase basis, where the scopeand nature of use are clearly delimited (i.e., relatively smallscale use,clearly specified use). of course, the united states places no restrictionsat all on the use of secure communications domestically at this time.over the next 10 years, some of those countries will surely changetheir minds about encryption, though in what direction is as yet not clear.other nations are beginning to pay attention to these issues related tointerception of communications and wiretapping and have many of thesame concerns that the u.s. government has. indeed, as internationalpartnerships between u.s. and foreign telecommunications companiesincrease, it is likely that foreign intelligence agenciesõ awareness of theseissues will increase. such concerns in principle suggest that an international agreement might be possible with respect to these issues.at the same time, the united states has a stronger tradition of individual liberties than many other nations, and it is conceivable that theunited states might be the òodd man outó internationally. for example,the official u.s. view that it will not impose legal restrictions on the use ofcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy441cryptography within its borders may run contrary to the positions takenby other nations. an international agreement that accommodates suchdiffering degrees of legal restriction is hard to imagine.a global information infrastructure allows conceptually for two different policy structures regarding international communication and datatransmission:1. common policies shared and implemented by many nations cooperatively, or2. individual policies implemented by each nation on its own.of course, it may be that some group of nations can agree to a set ofcommon policies, while other nations will operate individually.by definition, individual policies of nations may conflict at nationalborders.20 for nations whose policies on cryptography do not agree,international interconnection will be possible only through national gateways and interfaces that handle all international traffic.21 for example,nations a and b might require users to deposit all cryptographic keyswith the national government but otherwise leave the choice of cryptographic equipment up to the relevant users. an a national communicating with a b national might see his or her traffic routed to a switch thatwould decrypt aõs transmission into plaintext and reencrypt it with theb nationalõs key for ultimate transmission to the b national.2220although the notion of a global information infrastructure is based to a large degree onthe idea that national boundaries are porous to information, nations can and do exert someinfluence over what information may cross their borders. for example, while traffic maytraverse many countries between nation a and nation b, it is not inconceivable that anintermediate nation might attempt to establish a policy on cryptography that any incomingtraffic had to be sent in the clear. enforcing such a policy would be technically difficult forindividual nations to accomplish in todayõs networking environment, but a different architecture might make it easier.21an additional challenge is the emergence of national or commercial parties that willprovide communications that are independent of any physical infrastructure under thecontrol of any given nation. for example, a person in japan might use a portable device tocommunicate with someone in peru, connecting directly through a future american communications satellite. such a channel might bypass entirely the japanese and peruviannational authorities. even more complicated might be the use of a communications satellitebought from an american manufacturer by indonesia and launched into orbit by the french.(however, satellite communications are subject to a degree of control over services offered,in the form of international agreements in the international telecommunication union onthe uses of electromagnetic frequency spectrum.)22policies regarding cryptography are complicated further by policies on data. for example, a number of european nations will not permit the transport of personal data (e.g.,on employees) out of their countries for privacy reasons, even though a multinational firmmight like to be able to process such data in one central location. to ensure that such dataare not transported, those nations may demand the ability to inspect all transborder dataflows outward.footnote continues on next page.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.442appendix gthis hypothetical arrangement is insecure in the sense that text can befound in the clear at the border interface points. it is therefore clumsy andarguably unworkable on a practical scale. thus, the problem of obtaininginternational cooperation on policy regarding secure communication isaddressed here.in the export control domain, attempts are under way to establish anorganization known as the new forum to achieve some common policyregarding exports. the mandate of the new forum is to òprevent destabilizing buildups of weapons and technologies in regions of tension, suchas south asia and the middle east, by establishing a formal process oftransparency, consultation, and multilateral restraint [in the export ofcritical technologies].ó23 the new forum is expected to include thecocom nations, as well as hungary, poland, and the czech republic anda number of cooperating states. the new forum is similar in many waysto cocom, but one critical difference is that unlike cocom, new forummembers do not have veto power over individual exports involving member nations; member states retain the right to decide how to apply thenew forum export control regime to specific instances.24in the domain of policy regarding the use of encryption, serious attempts at international discussion are beginning as of this writing (early1996). for example, in december 1995, the organization for economiccooperation and development (oecd) held a meeting in paris, france,among member nations to discuss how these nations were planning tocope with the public policy problems posed by cryptography.in order to stimulate thought about alternative ways of approachingan international regime for cryptography (with respect to both exportcontrol and use), it is useful to consider how international regimes inother areas of policy are constructed. this is to a certain extent a taxocontrolling inbound data may pose problems. for example, a dictatorial governmentmay assert the right to monitor data flowing into its nation, perhaps to combat subversiveagitation. even democratic governments may wish for the ability to monitor certain incoming data to prevent money laundering.laws governing privacy can conflict with laws on cryptography. for example, a law ondata privacy may require that certain sensitive data associated with an individual be protected, while a law on cryptography may forbid the use of cryptography. such laws wouldobviously conflict if a situation arose in which cryptography were the only feasible tool forprotecting such data.in short, policies regarding data export, import, and privacy are an additional dimension of resolving policy with respect to cryptography.23u.s. state department, òpress release: new multilateral export control arrangement,óoffice of the spokesman, washington, d.c., january 23, 1996.24see sarah walking, òrussia ready to join new postcocom organization,ó arms control today, september 1995, pp. 3133.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy443nomic exercise, but it has the virtue that it opens wider perspectives thanif we limit ourselves to prior arrangements in the law enforcement andintelligence fields. moreover, it permits an analysis to profit from experience in other fields of foreign policy. that said, most successful international efforts are built on precedents from the past, and therefore it maybe a mistake to start out too ambitiously.two dimensions should be kept separate, one organizational and theother substantive. is there to be an international organization; a treaty;something less, such as an international agreement; parallel bilateralagreements; or, at the least ambitious end, merely a coordination of policybetween the u.s. executive branch and other governments?with respect to international agreement on the substantive dimension, four different approaches reflect varying levels of ambition:¥unification of law in the cooperating countries involved. unificationmeans simply that the law of each cooperating country would be the same.¥harmonization. harmonization refers to a general similarity of lawamong national laws, with purely local differences or relatively unimportant differences remaining. these differences would be slight enough topreclude major distortions of trade or serious policy disagreements amongnations. harmonization of law is particularly common in europe.¥mutual recognition. under mutual recognition, when one government approves a product manufactured within its borders as being consistent with an agreedupon standard, another government will allowthat product to be imported and used within its territory. in a world witha variety of cryptographic options, the options then would have to becertified by the home government before they could be imported andused in the territories of cooperating countries. for example, perhapsmutual recognition would require that any escrow holder certified by onegovernment would be acceptable to other governments.¥interoperability. cooperating nations would work, perhaps in partthrough telephone companies and ptts, to ensure that encrypted communications across national borders would remain encrypted but alsoconform to national laws. interoperability would require some agreement among cooperating nations that limited the kinds of encryptionacceptable domestically and provided for exchange of keys. (for example, a foreign government might require an interface for internationalcommunications at a border through which traffic would have to bepassed in the clear or encrypted in a way that it could read.) technicalapproaches to interoperability would probably require translation facilities that reconcile policies at national borders, automatic recognition ofprotocols being used, and automatic engagement of the necessary technology.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.444appendix gthe feasibility of a cooperative regime on secure international communications is likely to require the consensus of a core group of nations.such a consensus would then set standards that other nations would haveto follow if they wanted to share the benefits of interacting with thosecore nations; nations that refuse to accept the arrangement would byimplication be cut off from applications that demand cryptographic protection (although they would still be able to transact and communicate inthe clear). for obvious reasons, this suggests that the core group of nations would have considerable aggregate economic power and influence.(note that a division of the world into core and noncore nations mightrequire the fractionation of a multinational companyõs information network into those inside and outside the core group.)g.7 the fundamental questions of internationalcryptography policyif the assumption is made that escrowed encryption is the underpinning of national governmentsõ attempting to manage cryptography, threebasic questions arise regarding cryptography policy internationally.g.7.1 who holds the keys?any of the agents described in chapter 5 are candidates for key holders: these include government agencies, private forprofit organizationsthat make a business out of holding keys, vendors of escrowed encryptionproducts, and customers themselves (perhaps the end user, perhaps anorganization within the corporation making the purchase). the variouspros and cons of different types of escrow agents described in chapter 5apply equally in an international context.g.7.2 under what circumstances does the key holderrelease the keys to other parties?from the standpoint of u.s. policy, one essential question is whichnationõs or nationsõ laws control the actions of escrow agents vis‹vis therelease of keys. conceptually, three possibilities exist:1. the u.s. government (or escrow agents subject to u.s. law) holdsall keys for all escrowed encryption products used by u.s. persons or soldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy445by u.s. vendors, regardless of whether these products are used domestically or abroad.252. the u.s. government (or escrow agents subject to u.s. law) holdsall keys for all escrowed encryption products used by u.s. persons, andforeign governments (or escrow agents subject to the laws of those foreign governments) hold all keys for escrowed encryption products usedby nationals of those governments.263. both the u.s. government and nation x have access to all keys forescrowed encryption products that are used in nation x, and either theunited states or nation x can obtain the necessary keys.products used in nation x would most likely be purchased in nationx, but this is not a requirement. note also that a wide variety of escrowing schemes exist, many of which are described in chapter 5.for the most part, options 1 and 3 compromise the sovereignty offoreign nations, and it is hard to imagine that a strong u.s. ally wouldpublicly announce that its citizens and industries were vulnerable to u.s.spying without their approval. early in this study (late 1994), the committee took testimony from senior administration officials to the effect thatoption 1 was likely feasible, but the administration appears to havebacked off from this position in its most recent statements (late 1995).only option 2 is symmetric: the united states holds keys for escrowedencryption products used by u.s. persons or sold in the united states,and foreign nations do the same for their persons and products. option 2could meet the international law enforcement concern in much the sameway that the law enforcement agencies of various nations cooperate todayon other matters. such cooperation might be the focus of explicit bilateralagreements between the united states and other nations; such agreementsmight well build on existing cooperative arrangements for law enforcement (box g.1), and they are most likely to be concluded successfully ifthey are arranged informally, on a casebycase basis in which the scopeand nature of use are clearly delimited (i.e., relatively smallscale and25under the clipper initiative, u.s. policy is that the two escrow agents in the unitedstates have clipper/capstone keys because they are available and put into escrow at thetime they are programmed at the u.s. factory. since there is no formal policy governingwhat should be done if a foreign nation purchases clippercompliant devices, the currentpolicy obtains by default.26an important operational question is the following: if the keys are generated in theunited states, on what basis could any foreign user be confident that the united states didnot retain a copy of the keys that were issued to him or her? such a question arises moststrongly in a hardwarebased escrow encryption product with a u.s.classified design inwhich the united states is the designated key generator for reasons of classification.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.446appendix gbox g.1on mutual assistance agreements for law enforcementthe united states has mutual assistance agreements for law enforcement withmany other nations. these agreements, managed by the criminal division of thedepartment of justice with a state department liaison, provide for mutual cooperation for the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of crime, to the extent permitted by the laws of each nation, in many areas. in general, these agreements discusscooperation in certain listed areas as illustrative, but they usually have a òcatchallócategory. some of the listed areas include:¥ assistance in obtaining documents;¥ release of interviews and statements of witnesses;¥ arrangement of depositions;¥ assistance in securing compulsory process (e.g., subpoenas);¥ cooperation in obtaining extradition consistent with existing extradition treaties; and¥ cooperation in obtaining forensic information (e.g., laboratory results andfingerprints).these agreements are meant to enhance the collection of information and evidence in foreign nations when a crime is being committed or planned. thus, theycould serve as the vehicle for cooperative action with respect to sharing cryptographic keys available to the government (pursuant to its law enforcement objectives) of agiven nation for specific law enforcement purposes; keys given by nation a to nation b would be obtained in accordance with the laws of nation a and the mutualassistance agreement between nations a and b. these agreements do not make newlaw; unlike treaties, they simply facilitate cooperation with respect to existing law.to adapt these agreements to cover sharing of cryptographic information, thenations involved could use the catchall category or explicitly negotiate agreementscovering this area; the first could suffice until the second was implemented.in general, these agreements have worked well. nevertheless, some problemsexist. for example, they may not work fast enough to provide timeurgent responsesto pressing law enforcement needs. in addition, some nations that are party to amutual assistance agreement may not be trustworthy with respect to certain areas(e.g., the colombian government with respect to drugs, the mexican governmentwith respect to immigration matters and smuggling of aliens).clearly specified use). alternatively, access might be requested on an adhoc basis as the occasion arises, as is the case for other types of informallyarranged law enforcement cooperation.option 2 alone will not satisfy u.s. needs for intelligence gatheringfrom the foreign nations involved, because by assumption it requires theinvolvement (and hence the knowledge) of an escrow agent that is subjectto another nationõs jurisdiction. further, it is inconceivable that the unitedstates is a party to any formal or informal agreement to obtain keys fromcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy447nations that are most likely to be the targets of interest to u.s. decisionmakers (e.g., rogue nations). on the other hand, options 1 and 3 also poseproblems for u.s. intelligence gathering, because even with the ability toobtain keys individually, the united states loses the ability to conduct goodbulk intercepts. on the assumption that there is no largescale òmasterkey,ó individual keys would still have to be obtained. this would inevitably be a timeconsuming process and could diminish the flow of signalsintelligence information, since obtaining individual keys is a much moretime and laborintensive activity than listening to unencrypted traffic.the administrationõs position on foreign escrow agents is stated inone of its proposed criteria for liberalized export consideration for escrowed encryption software. specifically, it proposes that the relevantkeys be escrowed with òescrow agent(s) certified by the u.s. government, or . . . by foreign governments with which the u.s. government hasformal agreements consistent with u.s. law enforcement and nationalsecurity requirements.ó27note that all of the issues discussed in chapter 5 with respect toliability for unauthorized disclosure of keys necessarily apply in an international context.28g.7.3 how will nations reach consensus on internationalcryptography policy regarding exports and use?harmonized export policiesagreement on the following points would be necessary to develop acommon export control policy that would help to preserve law enforcement and intelligencegathering capabilities by retarding the spread ofcryptography worldwide:¥ rough concurrence among nations exporting cryptography aboutthe nations whose access to encryption capabilities should be kept to aminimum and what policy toward those nations should be;¥ willingness to allow relatively free trade in products with encryption capabilities among member nations;¥ willingness to abide by prohibitions on reexport to rogue nations;and¥ agreement among member nations about the types of encryptioncapabilities that would constitute a threat if widely deployed.27national institute of standards and technology, draft software key escrow encryptionexport criteria, november 6, 1995; see box 5.3, chapter 5.28some agreements establish the extent and nature of liability in other contexts (e.g., thewarsaw convention and airline travel), thus suggesting that the international dimensionsof liability for unauthorized release of keys are not necessarily insurmountable.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.448appendix gthe extent to which agreement on these points can be reached is anopen question, although there are precedents to some degree in the u.s.bilateral arrangements with various other nations for cooperation in lawenforcement matters. a high degree of concurrence among these nations(a òcryptococomó) would help to retard the spread of encryption capabilities to rogue nations, with all of the attendant benefits for law enforcement and national security.many problems stand in the way of achieving a plausible cryptococom regime. these include the following:¥ the scope of a cryptococom. given that the basic algorithms forcryptography are known worldwide, it is not clear that the developednations of the world have a true monopoly on the technology. many ofthe traditional lesser developed countries in asia and latin america aredemonstrating significant interest in modernizing their communicationsinfrastructures, and they will almost certainly be driven to an interest insecure communications as well.¥ the absence of a pervasive threat. with the demise of the sovietunion, it has proven much more difficult for the united states to take thelead in matters requiring international cooperation.¥ the implied connection between thirdparty decryption for governmentsand exportimport controls. international arrangements will have to satisfythe needs of participating nations for thirdparty decryption before theywill agree to relax import and use controls.harmonized policies regarding useas noted above, the organization for economic cooperation and development held a december 1995 meeting in paris among member nations to discuss how these nations were planning to cope with the publicpolicy problems posed by cryptography.29 what this meeting made clearis that many oecd member nations are starting to come to grips with thepublic policy problems posed by encryption, but that the dialogue onharmonizing policies across national borders has not yet matured. moreover, national policies are quite fluid at this time, with various nationsconsidering different types of regulation regarding the use, export, andimport of cryptography.29additional information on this meeting can be found in stewart baker, summary reporton the oecd ad hoc meeting of experts on cryptography, steptoe and johnson, washington,d.c., undated. available online at sbaker@steptoe.com or check http://www.us.net/~steptoe/276908.html.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international scope of cryptography policy449the majority view of the assembled nations was that national policieshad to balance the needs of corporate users, technology vendors, individuals, law enforcement, and national security. a number of participants appeared to favor a òtrusted thirdpartyó approach that would relyon nongovernment entities (the trusted third party) to serve as the generators of cryptographic keys for confidentiality for use by the public aswell as escrow agents holding these keys and responding to legally authorized requests for encryption keys for law enforcement purposes.30however, the needs of national security were not mentioned for the mostpart.31,3230see, for example, nigel jefferies, chris mitchell, and michael walker, a proposed architecture for trusted third party services, royal holloway, university of london, 1995.31for additional industryoriented views on international policies concerning the use ofcryptography, see u.s. council for international business, business requirements for encryption, new york, october 10, 1994; infosec business advisory group, commercial use ofcryptography, statement presented at the iccbiacoecd businessgovernment forum,paris, france, december 1995; european association of manufacturers of business machinesand information technology industry (eurobit), information technology association ofcanada (itac), information technology industry council (itic), and japan electronic industry development association (jeida), principles of global cryptographic policy, statementpresented at the iccbiacoecd businessgovernment forum, paris, france, december19, 1995. the statements from the paris meeting are available online at http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/#ici.32intelligence needs may conflict directly with needs for business information security.for example, u.s. and foreign companies sometimes form consortia that work cooperatively to make money; national intelligence agencies often funnel information to individualcompanies to develop competitive advantage. one major reason that u.s. companies operating internationally want to have encrypted communications is to protect themselvesagainst the threat of national intelligence agencies. thus, they would require that anyescrow arrangements at a minimum include audit trails to ensure that their communications were being monitored in accordance with laws governing criminal investigations andthe like (in the united states, this might be a court order) to ensure that data from wiretapswere not being funneled to foreign competitors. however, it is very hard to imagine that aforeign intelligence agency would be willing to provide such assurances or to live withsuch audit restrictions. ultimately, the tradeoff might be the willingness of an international corporation to bargain with the host nation about the ability to have secure communications, using its willingness to invest in the host nation as its ultimate bargaining chip toforce the host nation to acquiesce.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.450appendix h450hsummary of important requirementsfor a publickey infrastructurebased on information from a national institute of standards and technology (nist) document on publickey infrastructure,1 this appendixbriefly summarizes the user, technical, and legal requirements of a federalpublickey infrastructure, as well as other observations obtained throughinterviews and the analysis of pertinent standards.¥ ease of use. certificate infrastructures should not make applications utilizing digital signature capabilities more difficult to use. to support ease of use, the infrastructure must provide a uniform way to obtaincertificates in spite of the possible differences in certificate managementpolicies employed by different segments of the infrastructure.¥ user authentication. to ensure proper linkage of a public key witha specific user, the identity of that user must be authenticated. userauthentication is usually conducted by the certification authority (ca)during the key certification process.¥ certification policies. if the existence of different certification policies is allowed, certification policies for both individual users and organizational users must be clearly articulated. in addition, mechanisms must1shimshon berkovits et al. (mitre corporation), public key infrastructure study: finalreport, national institute of standards and technology, gaithersburg, md., april 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.requirements for a publickey infrastructure451be provided to enable each user to be aware of the policies governing anycertificate that he may encounter. in particular, a user should be able toestablish how carefully and thoroughly the ca authenticated owner identity of the public key before certifying the association between the userand the key.¥ trusted certificate authority. digital signatures are used to ensuresender authentication, nonrepudiation, and message integrity. to trustthese security services, the user needs to be assured that the public keyused to verify a signature is actually the key of the person who signed thetransaction. to ensure that certificates are generated by and obtainedfrom trusted sources, mechanisms are needed to prevent any user fromcreating false certificates that are signed with the userõs regular privatekey. even though a signature can be verified by employing the userõsproperly certified public key, the false certificates must not be accepted aslegitimate. then a pretender cannot create signatures that will be accepted because they are verified using keys obtained from the false certificates. since the ca performs user authentication at key certification timeand is responsible for keeping the userõs name and public key associated,each ca must be a trusted entity, at least to the extent defined in thepertinent pca policies. this implies the provision of some security protection for each ca, specifically the private key of the ca, so that the cacannot be modified or impersonated. certification policies can specify thesecurity measures that a particular ca undertakes. users must determinewhether the ca is sufficiently trustworthy for their applications. thebasic trust rests in the certification policies and security mechanisms established for the infrastructure.¥ user affiliation. to have a ca certify a public key, a user mustprovide a unique name in addition to the public key that is to be certified.that name usually contains the userõs organizational affiliation. it ispossible, however, that some private citizens may wish to have their keyscertified independently of any organization. therefore, provisions forcertifying private citizens must also be made.¥ privacy of userõs identity. some users may wish to remain anonymous but still register with a ca. this may require the establishment ofcertification agencies that would register users requesting nondisclosureof their identification information. alternatively, policy choices in different segments of the infrastructure could include or exclude anonymouscertificates.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.452appendix h¥ multiple certificates. in some instances a user may have severalcertificates, each issued by a different ca. this situation may occur if auser belongs to more than one organization and needs a certificate fromeach organization or if a user has a certificate as an employee and anothercertificate as a residential user. if the naming convention includes a userõsorganizational affiliation in the personõs unique name, then a user canhave several unique names with a different certificate associated witheach. multiple certificates assigned to a single unique name may be usedto simplify recovery from ca privatekey compromise. the infrastructure may have to handle multiple certificates for a single user.¥ certification revocation lists. when a private key is known to becompromised or even when its compromise is only suspected, it must bereplaced immediately. the certificate containing the associated publickey must be revoked immediately. to inform users of such a compromisedkey, thus allowing them to identify and reject possibly fraudulent transactions, the certificate is placed on a certificate revocation list (crl). placing a certificate on a crl can also be used to announce the severing of arelationship between a signer and the organization with which he or shewas once associated.¥ services of ca. cas will need to certify public keys, create certificates, distribute certificates, generate crls, and distribute crls. distribution of certificates and of crls will be accomplished by depositingthem with a generally available directory service.¥ security and legal efficacy. there is an inherent linkage betweensecurity and legal efficacy. the security of electronic messages and recordsis not only a business requirement, but also an underlying legal requirement. this linkage determines what is sufficiently secure by consideringwhat presumptions apply to the particular messageõs or documentõspurpose(s) and by considering the risks it confronts. legal requirementsshould clarify reasonable security procedures without sacrificing neededflexibility. the question is not whether to have or not to have security, butrather whether the implemented security mechanisms provide the degreeof security offered by the digital signatures. the answer rests squarely onthe strength of the infrastructureõs security mechanisms.¥ liability. the extent of the infrastructureõs liability must be foundedon a balance between the interest of the government, which would limitit, and of the private sector, which would expand it. bringing suit must beallowable, but there must also be a reasonable limit on the extent of theinfrastructureõs liability. different levels of liability limitations can becryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.requirements for a publickey infrastructure453offered. for a price, users might even be allowed to tailor the extent ofprotection to their needs.in committee discussions, it was noted that the liability of those providing authentication services is a critical issue. when the provider ofauthentication services is a business with which one is interacting forother purposes (e.g., to buy something), that business will generally haveto accept liability for the interaction. thus, if it wrongly certifies that joeis jack, and if joe then steals money out of jackõs account, the bank thatauthenticated the transaction is liable. likewise, thirdparty authentication services whose job it is to provide authentication services, but nothing more, would or should accept liability. appropriate insurance requirements and a legislative framework might be necessary to regulatesuch services to ensure that they adhere to good practice.as an agency of the federal government, the infrastructure may beconsidered to have sovereign immunity. such immunity would implythat the infrastructure and its managers cannot be sued for any lossesresulting from their actions or from their inaction. although such a statusmay be attractive, it undermines the usefulness of the certification infrastructure. without reasonable assurances that potential losses due tomalfeasance will be recoverable, a typical nongovernment user will shyaway from relying on the publickey infrastructure. any set of laws andregulations must strike a balance between protection of the governmentfrom excessive claims and blocking users from any chance of reimbursement. the following items summarize what may be considered reasonable limits on the extent of liability to which a ca at any level and ultimately the publickey infrastructure as a whole should be exposed.ña ca has no liability associated with the loss of the private keys ofits clients or with their generating weak private keys.ña keygeneration facility has no liability associated with the compromise of the private keys it produces unless it can be proved that thedocumented policies and procedures relevant to the facility were not followed during the keygeneration process, resulting in a weak private keythat is more susceptible to compromise or the actual revelation of a private key.ña keygeneration facility has limited liability for the compromise ofa private key during the key distribution process if the documented policies and procedures relevant to the facility are not followed, resulting inthe revelation of the private key.ña ca has no liability associated with forged signatures unless theforgery results because the documented policies and procedures relevantto the ca were not followed.ña ca has no liability associated with the wrongful binding of anindividualõs identity with an associated public key unless it can be provedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.454appendix hthat the documented policies and procedures for identification and authentication relevant to the ca were not followed.ña ca has limited liability for not revoking certificates accordingto its revocation policy.ña ca has limited liability for revoking a certificate for a reasonnot specified in its revocation policy.ña ca has limited liability if, despite its having followed published policies and procedures, a certificate in the database is modified ordeleted.¥ liability policy. the extent of liability in the above situations isconceivably a part of the policy under which a ca or keygenerationfacility operates. the policy must distinguish between direct liability onthe one hand and indirect and consequential damages on the other.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.455iindustryspecific dimensionsof securitythe discussion in chapter 1 is couched in terms that are relativelyindependent of the specific industry or business involved. however,industries differ in the specifics of the information they wish to protectand in the operational questions they ask about security. what follows isan indicativeñnot exhaustiveñdiscussion of security issues as they relate to specific types of business.1 as discussed in chapters 1 and 2,cryptography is only part of an overall approach to dealing with information security concerns; other factors also matter, such as administrativeand technical procedures for controlling access to sensitive informationand the trustworthiness of computer operating systems and applicationssoftware, among others. however, cryptographic technologies for authentication, integrity, and confidentiality can strengthen an organizationõs overall information security in many ways.i.1 banking and financial servicesbanking and financial services are a good example of how communications underpin the economy. the flow of currency is largely digital.funds are transferred from account to account, from customer to vendor,1these industryspecific comments should not be read as being mutually exclusiveñconcerns raised in the discussion of one industry may apply to other industries as well.nevertheless, as presented, they do reflect concerns raised in discussions with representatives from the industries indicated.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.456appendix ifrom bank to bankñall without the trade of tangible property. as evidenced recently by the economic crisis in mexico, the rapid transfer ofinvestments has the ability to make or break an economy, much as theweather affected economies during the agricultural era. networkenabled communications speed backoffice (check and accounts) processing, as well as mortgage and loan application processing, and indeedinterlink financial services, banking, and investment systems worldwide.wholly new securities (e.g., derivatives and indexes) and services arecreated by the effective use of information communicated in a promptand timely fashion.banks and financial service institutions have had a long history ofbeing a target of nefarious elements in society and thus traditionally havebeen willing to spend money on security measures (e.g., safes). thishistory, coupled with their dependence on information technology andtheir capability for networked communication among themselves, has ledto a relatively high degree of concern within the banking and financialservices sector for information security. given the importance of u.s.banks in the world economy, large u.s. banks with multinational connections have needs for security that are quite stringent.in the matter of managing electronic transfers of financial transactioninformation, banks are much more concerned with authentication thanwith data confidentiality, although concerns about the latter are growingas the result of regulation and increasingly common business practices.the reason is that false authentication may lead to an unrecoverable lossof financial assets, an event regarded as more disastrous than the loss ofprivacy. nonetheless, confidentiality is important as well,2 not so muchbecause personal financial transactions need to be kept private (they do,but the ramifications of divulging one personõs transactions are generallylimited to that person), but because an adversaryõs understanding of thedata flows within the banking system can itself lead to security breakdowns. (for example, with access to confidential information, an adversary may learn how to bypass certain access controls.)banking is extensively international today and will become more soin the future. moreover, it has moved relatively quickly to bring customers (both individual and institutional) on line in an attempt to reducecosts. (for example, some banks with south american customers call theunited states and are answered in spanish or portuguese from processing and customer service centers in europe.) for these reasons, the banking industry may represent the leading edge of information security needs2note that banks, as part of a highly regulated industry, are relatively less concernedabout government monitoring of their financial transactions, since governments usuallyhave extensive authority to monitor any aspect of bank transactions in any event.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security457as far as other increasingly internationalized and electronically interconnected industries are concerned. (box i.1 describes some of the issues thatarise when retail customers might apply for a loan through an electronicconnection.)to date, losses due to electronic penetration of banking systems havebeen a relatively small fraction of the billions of dollars written off everyyear in bad loans, unrepayable debt, and the like.3 yet the fact that anypenetrations at all have occurred raise the specter of much larger losses(billions rather than millions of dollars) as the result of similar but moresophisticated actions. in addition, given the central importance of banking systems in the u.s. economy, a major disruption of service in thesesystems could have cataclysmic consequences for the world economy.finally, customer and patron trust is at the heart of modern financialsystems around the world, and such trust, once lost, is difficult to regain.even small bank lossesñif made widely knownñcould adversely affectcustomer trust in banks, and the result could be a significant and widespread loss of trust leading to enormous financial disruption and chaos.i.2 medical consultations and health caremany health care professionals believe that computerbased healthcare information systems, both within individual institutions and networked over a national information infrastructure, hold great potentialfor improving the quality of health care, reducing administrative andclinical costs, increasing access (e.g., through telemedicine in rural areas),and enabling data aggregation in support of research on the cost andeffectiveness of alternative treatments. computer storage, retrieval, andnetwork accessibility of health care information, such as medical recordsand diagnostic test data, can sharply increase the efficiency with whichpatients, care providers, and others (such as payers, researchers, and public health officials) use that information.4at the same time, the digitization and transmission of such information raises concerns about the heightened vulnerability of personal infor3for example, losses on credit cards issued to consumers are considerable, but the amountlost due to outright fraud is small compared to the debts that consumers are simply unableor unwilling to pay.4see, for example, institute of medicine, the computerbased patient record: an essentialtechnology for health care, r.s. dick and e.b. steen (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c., 1991; and information infrastructure task force committee on applicationsand technology, putting the information infrastructure to work, nist special publication 857,u.s. department of commerce, national institute of standards and technology,gaithersburg, md., 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.458appendix ibox i.1loans by networkloans are an essential part of many large transactions such as the purchase ofhouses and automobiles. consumers provide information in loan applications whichthe loan provider uses as the basis of a loan approval. the formal approval commitsthe lender to a specific interest rate and, when it is accepted, the user to a specificrepayment schedule. since only information is exchanged, an application in principle could be conducted entirely without facetoface interaction between consumerand provider, thus freeing the consumer to search the internet for a provider offeringthe best rate.1in practice, however, the prospect of an internet loan application raises manyquestions:¥ how is the personal data transmitted from the consumer to the provider to beprotected as it crosses the internet? in a facetoface interaction, the information isprovided at the bank, and so there is no difficulty in protecting the information intransit.¥ how does the consumer know that she or he is sending the data to the properbank? in a facetoface interaction, the consumer can look at the sign on the front ofthe building to verify that it is indeed a branch of first citibank of washington, forexample. (people have been known to send faxes to the wrong fax number.)¥ how does the consumer know that the institution with which he or she isinteracting is a trustworthy one (e.g., an organization chartered and regulated by thefederal deposit insurance corporation)? in a facetoface interaction, the consumercan look for the federal deposit insurance corporation seal at the front of the building and have some confidence that the seal is indeed associated with the officesinside the building.¥ how do the parties ensure the integrity of a quoted interest rate? in a facetoface interaction (or over the telephone), the parties can simultaneously view a pieceof paper on which a certain interest rate is typed.¥ in many loans, the interest rate is tied in an algorithmic fashion to a marketindex of some sort (e.g., 3 percentage points over the prime interest rate). in a facetoface interaction, the lender can pull out a copy of the wall street journal and pointto p. b4.¥ how does the lender verify the consumerõs identity? in a facetoface interaction, the consumer can present two photo identification cards and a recent tax return.¥ how can the lender as a commercial entity protect itself against cyberanarchists who believe that commercial transactions have no place on the internet? inoffering services to consumers on a facetoface basis, police and security guardsprotect the bank against robbers.1indeed, laws and regulations governing the granting of credit explicitly orimplicitly forbid the inclusion of factors such as race or òcharacteró that mightbe ascertained in a facetoface interaction.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security459mation in a profession with a tradition of maintaining the confidentialityof patient records that goes back to the days of hippocrates.5 indeed,patient records may contain a great deal of sensitive information, photographs and other images, physiciansõ observations, clinical tests, diagnoses and treatments, lifestyle information (e.g., tobacco and alcohol useand sexual behavior), family medical history, and genetic conditions. ifdivulged to parties outside the patientcaregiver relationship, such information carries the risk of causing great personal anguish and/or financialharm (e.g., loss of insurance, employment).trends in health care today suggest an increasing aggregation of clinical, demographic, and utilization information into a single, patientbasedrecord6 or the development and deployment of systems for virtually linking these sources of information.7 as a result, the number of access pointsto the information contained in computerbased patient records is increasing, thereby increasing its potential vulnerability. in addition, as thepractice of telemedicine spreads, patient information and conferencesamong geographically separated medical professionals treating a singlepatient, which are transmitted across communications networks may besusceptible to interception.data aggregation presents another concern. for example, databaseswithout personal identifiers may be assembled for purposes of researchor public health planning.8 despite the fact that it may not be necessary toknow the identities of individual patients, it may be possible to crossindex these databases with others (such as employment histories, insurance records, and credit reports), enabling the determination of personalidentities.9 this might be done, for example, in order to generate a list ofnames and addresses for direct marketing of a pharmaceutical product ora health service. box i.2 describes one cryptographic method that can beused to reduce the risk of improper data aggregation.the risks of improper disclosure of patient information come from5it is interesting to note that for health care professionals, òconfidentialityó refers to keeping certain information out of the hands of unauthorized individuals by whatever mechanisms are necessary, whereas for information security providers the term refers to a specificproperty of encrypted information.6l.o. gostin, j. turekbrezina, m. powers, r. kozloff, r. faden, and d.d. steinauer, òprivacy and security of personal information in a new health care system,ó journal of theamerican medical association, volume 270(20), 1993, pp. 24872493.7personal communication, e.h. shortliffe, stanford university school of medicine, november 5, 1994.8institute of medicine, health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacy, m.s.donaldson and k.n. lohr (eds.), national academy press, washington, d.c., 1994.9e. meux, òencrypting personal identifiers,ó health services research, volume 29(2), 1994,pp. 247256.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.460appendix ibox i.2preventing the unauthorized aggregation ofhealth care informationuse of the social security number as a de facto universal identifier gives rise toconcerns on the part of privacy advocates regarding the unauthorized aggregation ofdata about individuals collected from many different institutions that have been individually authorized to release specific data. peter szolovits and isaac kohane haveproposed a mechanism based on publickey cryptography that would generate aunique identifier tied to the individual and a specific institution under which thatindividualõs information could be stored by that institution. with such a mechanismin place, a positive user action would be required to create an identifier, and theindividual would gain control over the parties who could aggregate personal databecause he or she could refuse to create an identifier for any given institution requesting particular data.in essence, the scheme relies on the individualõs performing a publickey digitalsignature on the institutionõs name. the result of this operation is a piece of data,usable as an identifier, that only the individual could have created, but that anyonecan verify the individual has created. more specifically, the individual òdecryptsóthe plaintext that gives the name of the institution using his or her private key. onlythe individual could have created the result, because only the individual knows theprivate key. however, anyone can encrypt the identifier using the individualõs public key. if the result of this encryption is the name of the institution, it can be knownwith confidence that indeed the individual generated the identifier.of course, policy would be needed to support this mechanism as well. forexample, it might be necessary to conduct random data audits of various institutionsthat would check to see if a given institution was indeed properly authorized by theindividual to receive given data.source: p. szolovits and i. kohane, òagainst universal healthcare identifiers,ó journal of the american medical informatics association, volume 1,1994, pp. 316319.two sources: disclosure through actions taken by unauthorized òoutsideóparties (e.g., eavesdroppers, hackers, visitors wandering through a hospital unchallenged, individuals posing over the telephone as physiciansand convincing medical personnel to divulge sensitive information orgrant remote access to an information system) or disclosure through actions taken by authorized òinsideó parties who abuse their authorization(e.g., a hospital staff member snooping out of curiosity into the records ofrelatives, friends, or celebrities or a medical records clerk motivated byfinancial, political, or other concerns who gives or sells lists of womenwith appointments for abortions to an antiabortion political group.10)10personal communication, e.h. shortliffe, stanford university school of medicine, november 5, 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security461health care organizations tend to be much more concerned about theòinsideró than the òoutsideró threat. information systems for health careorganizations are no longer freestanding òislands of informationó; instead, because they are increasingly networked beyond their walls, thenumber of òinsideó authorized users is expanding to include other primary and specialty health care providers, health insurers, employers orpurchasers, government agencies, and the patient or consumer.a final category of concern related to health care information securityis the need to ensure the integrity and the authenticity of data associatedwith a patient. thus, computerbased patient records must be secureagainst improper alteration or deletion of data (data integrity) and knownwith high confidence to be associated with the particular individual withwhom they are claimed to be associated (data and user authenticity).this categorization of risks suggests that, within health care organizations, the need for authentication of users and access controls (for bothinsiders and outsiders) may well be more important than encryption forconfidentiality (in the information security sense of the term). the reasonis that good authentication and access controls enable to a very highdegree the creation of audit trails that can help document who has accessed what information and for what reason. however, the need forinterorganizational transmission of data is encouraging many health careadministrators to reevaluate their strategic risk analysis and considercryptography for data confidentiality.some informal discussions with health care leaders reveal that security issues are generally delegated to their chief information officers andare not a standing toppriority item in their overall strategic planning.however, many of the countryõs foremost health care organizations continuously conduct risk analysis and generally have decided that servingthe needs of authorized patient caregivers for rapid access to clinical information is their paramount priority. any technical or policy approachto implementing cryptography for confidentiality will always be measured against this patient care priority.i.3 manufacturinglarge manufacturing companies are increasingly multinational. forexample, general motors (gm), the worldõs largest fullline vehicle manufacturer of cars, trucks, and automotive systems, has units worldwidethat support all dimensions of its production. its divisions range fromthose that build mechanical subsystems and components for automobilesand electronic systems for automotive electronics, telecommunications,and space and defense electronics to those that provide financing andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.462appendix iinsurance for dealers and end customers. gm has about 600,000 employees in 170 countries worldwide.manufacturers are placing more emphasis on product variety.11 variation inevitably increases costs (e.g., each variant requires considerable engineering; thus, the engineering costs per variant rise). to amortize thesefixed costs, manufacturers necessarily seek larger markets for these variants, and the result is often a global market. for example, a market for acertain product in a particular foreign nation may exist, and a variant of aproduct originally intended for a u.s. market with local content added inthat foreign nation may prove quite successful. to manage sales globally,companies may well need to establish company offices in foreign countriesthat remain in frequent communication with company headquarters in theunited states.manufacturing operations must be managed globally as well. forexample, a problem in a manufacturing plant in brazil may require anengineering change order to be generated at an engineering design centerin germany and synchronized with tooling supplied by japan and partsmanufactured in mexico. a second incentive for global operations is thatlabor costs are often lower abroad as well, for both whitecollar and bluecollar workers.the network of vendors and suppliers that serve large manufacturingoperations is also global. the day is long since gone when it makeseconomic sense for a manufacturer to take responsibility for fabricatingevery component under its own direct controlñoutsourcing such fabrication is often much more efficient. in some cases, foreign suppliers of partsare used because foreign purchase of parts is an additional incentive for aforeign nation to buy the finished u.s. product. however, to obtain theright mix of price, quality, volume, and timeliness, manufacturers increasingly search globally for subcontractors, and these subcontractorsmust be integrated into the manufacturerõs information network. at thesame time, it may not be desirable for subcontractors to share the samelevel of access as the primary company, especially if these subcontractorsare competitors. unauthorized disclosure of information between suchparties constitutes a threat by endangering and presenting a risk to important communications links between the company and the customersand suppliers (reducing business trust). the same is true for manufacturers and customers: a manufacturer of capitalintensive products maywell wish to share product information with potential customers. yetsince potential customers may be competitors among themselves (e.g., anairplane manufacturer may have several airlines among its customers)11for more discussion, see computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council, information technology for manufacturing: a research agenda, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1995.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security463and information regarding customerdesired product configurations mayhave competitive significance, the manufacturer has an important requirement to keep information about one customer private to that customer.the information flows associated with such activities are enormouslyvaluable to manufacturing firms. these flows contain sensitive and proprietary information related to:¥ product design and research and development;¥ marketing, sales, and bidding;¥ plant operations, capabilities, and efficiencies;¥ costs and prices of parts or services being purchased and productsbeing sold;¥ strategic plans;¥ profits and losses;¥ orders to and from suppliers;¥ product readiness and repair; and¥ product problems and incident investigations.these information flows need not necessarily be electronic; manycompanies still use people on airplanes with briefcases locked to theirwrists. in electronic form, however, they can be transmitted instantly viaelectronic mail, telephone, fax, and videoconference, and action can betaken on a much shorter time scale. specialized communications infrastructures can make all the difference in the worldñone manufacturerreported that before a specialized network was installed, engineers in theunited states were cutting large engineering drawings into 8 1ú2 11 sheetsand faxing them to their counterparts in another country.at the same time, the compromise of communications can be significant in manufacturing. theft of product design data can result in the lossof competitive advantage in products; if the products in question havemilitary significance, such data may well be classified and the compromise of data may lead to a national security threat to the united states.premature release of financial information can affect stock prices. knowledge of specific problems in a given plant can give competitors unwarranted leverage. unauthorized changes to engineering orders can resultin chaos on the assembly line or in operational disaster. destruction oralteration of key data by insiders or outsiders could be as significant asphysical sabotage, and subtle changes to digital designs or software maybe undetectable for an indefinite time with possible consequences such asproduct recall.i.4 the petroleum industrythe petroleum industry is inherently international; a typical multinational oil company may operate in dozens of nations. moreover, the scalecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.464appendix iof oil exploration and production requires substantial collaborative efforts, even among potential competitors. thus, this industry highlightsthe need for protecting sensitive proprietary information that must beshared worldwide, potentially across telecommunication networks. sensitive information of particular significance to the petroleum industryincludes the following:¥ personnel information. top executives of large multinational oilcompanies are often placed at substantial physical risk by threats of kidnapping, extortion, and other criminal activity. thus, the whereabouts ofsuch individuals are often confidential.¥ personal information. midlevel employees who work and live inpolitically unstable areas are often concerned about maintaining theirpersonal safety. since they may engage routinely in communicationsbetween home and office that could disclose their whereabouts, compromise of these communications could subject them to personal attack.¥ seismic and other data indicating the whereabouts of oil and natural gasunderground. such data are particularly sensitive because the competitiveadvantage of a given oil company may well be in the data it has been ableto collect on a given field. the use of such data, coupled with advancedcomputing capabilities, has saved hundreds of millions of dollars by helping drillers to avoid òdryó wells.12¥ information related to bidding. oil companies often bid for rights todrill or to explore in certain locations, and premature disclosure or disclosure to inappropriate parties of such information could seriously compromise bidding negotiations.¥ conferences among technical experts. with worldwide operations, itmay be necessary, for example, for experts at a potential drilling site toconsult with experts located halfway around the world to make a reasoned decision about drilling. these experts display the same seismicdata on their computer screens (data that is confidential as describedabove), but the inhouse expertise needed to interpret such data (as expressed in their communications) can be an additional competitive advantage that cannot be compromised.a significant amplifier of the information security threat relevant tou.s. multinational oil companies is the fact that the oil companies of othernations are often state owned and operated. the close integration between such foreign oil companies and their governments, combined with12written testimony of jack l. brock to the subcommittee on science, technology andspace of the senate commerce committee, march 5, 1991, p. 4.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security465the large economic stakes involved, raises significant concerns in u.s. oilcompanies that all of the resources of those foreign governments may bebrought to bear against them, including foreign intelligence services.i.5 the pharmaceutical and chemical industriesthe pharmaceutical and chemical industries are also global, sinceforeign nations often possess both the intellectual expertise and the natural resources needed to be successful in these industries.13 the criticaldimensions of these industries in which information must be protectedinvolve not products per se but rather other areas:¥ the scientific and technical expertise that allows companies to conceptualize new molecules or adapt previously known molecules to new functionality.research and development of new drugs and chemicals is the lifeblood ofthese industries, and information or data in which the creativity of theirchemists is reflected is critical.¥ the regime of intellectual property protection. intellectual propertyrights are one primary mechanism on which the pharmaceutical andchemical industries depend to protect their large investments in researchand development. however, intellectual property rights are generallygranted to the parties that are first with a discovery or invention.14 thus,the speed with which discoveries can be made or a patent applicationfiled becomes a parameter of critical importance; nonrepudiable (i.e., irrefutable) proof of the integrity of data from clinical trials and of the datesof patentable discoveries can be useful to strengthen patent claims. inaddition, given the public nature of much of the science underlying thesediscoveries, small intellectual advances that save time may be the onlyadvantage that a company has in the race to be first. premature disclosure of information associated with the protection of intellectual propertyrights can lead to patent challenges or even loss of protection and thusmay be extraordinarily damaging.¥ the processes by which drugs and chemicals are manufactured. in general, drugs and chemicals are at the end of a long processing chain inwhich raw materials are transformed into the desired substances. even13for example, in august 1995, upjohn announced a merger with a swedish competitor(pharmacia ab) that would result in the ninthlargest drug company in the world, with34,500 employees worldwide. see associated press, òupjohn, rival drug firm planmerger,ó washington post, august 21, 1995, p. a6.14in some regimes, òfirstó means first to discover or invent. in others, first means first tofile for patent protection. for purposes of this discussion, the distinction is irrelevant.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.466appendix ismall process improvements that reduce the volume of raw materialsnecessary, problems of quality control, or the dangers or complexity ofthe overall manufacturing process can be reflected in large savings oftime and money. such improvements may be protected by intellectualproperty rights, but enforcement may be difficult if it is not known that acompetitor is using a stolen process improvement. in other instances(e.g., safety), widespread publicity of information taken out of contextmay cause a company many public relations difficulties.i.6 the entertainment industrythe product of the entertainment industry is information, information that is increasingly migrating to digital form. the dominant concernof the entertainment industry is how to protect digitized music, movies,games, and the like from unauthorized mass distribution without properpayment of royalties and fees. a secondary, though still important, concern is how the integrity of such products can be ensured. for example,an unprotected digitized movie could be altered unmaliciously (with theintent of enhancing its appeal, e.g., by colorizing an original blackandwhite movie) or maliciously (e.g., by changing a scene for purposes ofembarrassing the producing company).i.7 governmentthe u.s. government is, and will continue to be, a major user ofcryptography, both for internal purposes and in its exchanges with citizens. as more and more government services are implemented usingelectronic methods, it becomes increasingly important to identify andauthenticate individuals and to verify the accuracy of data. to the extentthat people wish to use electronic means to communicate personal information to the government, the need to maintain confidentiality also increases. cryptography supports all of these goals in an electronic world.several of the many examples of how cryptography will be used in thefederal government are described here.the internal revenue service (irs) is responsible for collecting thetaxes that fuel all government programs. every year, citizens and corporations transmit financial data to the irs and interact with the agency toresolve any problems. the agency processes approximately 100 millionindividual tax returns and more than 1 billion supporting documents(e.g., w2 forms, 1099 forms) annually. the primary goal of the irsõs taxsystems modernization (tsm) effort is to facilitate this process by incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.industryspecific dimensions of security467creasing its use of electronic processing and electronic interchange ofinformation.15the tsm effort will allow the irs to process 100% of all tax returndata on line and will significantly increase the amounts of data that aresubmitted electronically. it is this latter capability that requires the use ofcryptography, primarily in the form of digital signatures, to ensure thattax returns are submitted in a proper manner. currently, the irs is required to store the handwritten signature of the person(s) for each andevery tax return, including those submitted electronically. the use ofdigital signatures will allow the irs to eliminate handwritten signatureswithout loss of authentication, which will streamline the datagatheringprocess. the irs will be supporting the digital signature standard, aswell as other signature standards that become de facto commercial standards.16 while most electronic filing of income tax returns is currentlycarried out by authorized tax preparers, the irs is working on creating asecure system using cryptography that would enable taxpayers to filedirectly from their home computers.similar to the irs, the social security administration (ssa) also collects data from citizens and corporations on a regular basis. furthermore,the ssa is responsible for disbursing funds for oldage and survivorsõinsurance, disability insurance, and supplemental security income programs. the effective and efficient management of these programs increasingly relies on automated data processing and electronic exchangesamong the ssa, citizens, and corporations. the agency is also involved inthe deployment of digital signatures to streamline its operations. digitalsignatures will allow citizens with home computers to check the status oftheir benefits 24 hours a day, rather than waiting for a telephone servicerepresentative to provide the needed information. without digital signatures, such a service cannot be provided electronically because of concerns about protecting the security of the private information involved insuch an exchange.the widescale government use of cryptography will require an extensive infrastructure for maintaining public keys for all citizens, corporations, and organizations. the security infrastructure program management office at the general services administration is planning pilot15computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, reviewof the tax systems modernization of the internal revenue service, national academy press,washington, d.c., 1992; and cstb, continued review of the tax systems modernization of theinternal revenue service, 1994.16òirs, ssa to let public try digital signatures,ó government computer news, november13, 1995, p. 1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.468appendix iprojects to test the use of cryptography in electronic communicationsbetween agencies and citizens. agencies such as ssa, irs, and the department of education will participate. citizens participating in the pilottests will use a personal computer or government kiosk and the internetto access social security information, file income tax forms, orñin timeñapply for a student loan.in the pilot studies, the u.s. postal service (usps) will be responsiblefor issuing the digital signatures that will identify users through the useof tokens. it will develop an infrastructure for assigning and maintainingthe critical òcertificatesó that are needed for proper authentication.17 manybelieve that the usps is a natural candidate for such a responsibilitybecause of its vast network of postal offices and operations that are aimedspecifically at providing individual and business services. furthermore,the usps is a òtrustedó organization that has the backing of legislation toperform its duties, as well as a mature oversight framework.in addition to the citizentogovernment interactions described above,there is a complete spectrum of cryptographic methods used throughoutthe government for internal communication and processing purposes.the treasury department has long used cryptographic methods for theauthentication, integrity, and confidentiality of financial transactions. thedepartment of energy has also been a longtime user and developer ofcryptographic methods, which are employed to safeguard nuclear controlsystems, among other things. a number of nondefense agencies havebegun to adopt fortezza pcmcia cards (described in chapter 5), including the departments of commerce, justice, energy, state, and treasury,as well as the national aeronautics and space administration, the irs,and the coast guard. the broadbased use of this system among civilianagencies is as yet uncertain.18the effort to make the federal government more efficient often increasesthe need for and difficulty of protecting copyrighted, private, and proprietary information. for example, improving federal services to citizens byproviding them electronically requires more sharing of information andresources among agencies and between federal agencies and state or localagencies. increased sharing of information requires interagency coordination of privacy and security policies to ensure uniformly adequate protection. during a time of tight federal budgets, information security managersin federal agencies increasingly must compete for resources and support toimplement the needed safeguards properly. agencies must look for theleast expensive way to ensure security, and the cost of some encryptionsystems currently is prohibitive for some civilian agencies.17government computer news, november 13, 1995.18òfortezza faces uncertain future,ó federal computer week, november 13, 1995, p. 12.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.469jexamples of risks posed byunprotected informationthe following cases in which commercial, national security, and othersensitive information was compromised illustrate the variety and seriousness of threats to personal assets and privacy, business interests, andpublic wellbeing, among others. no claim is made that cryptographyalone could have prevented these violations, but in the instances cited,cryptography might have had some role in protecting information againstmisappropriation and misuse. as discussed in chapters 1 and 2, cryptographic technologies are part of an overall strategy to reduce informationvulnerability.j.1 risks addressed by cryptography forauthentication¥ a pair of reporters wrote a controversial book about the hackingactivities of a particular group. they subsequently found that their telephone had been òcall forwardedó without their permission to anotherlocation where callers were greeted with obscenities, and that their internet mailboxes had been filled with junk email.1 cryptography for authentication might have reduced the likelihood that the hackers would beable to penetrate the telephone switch servicing the reportersõ homes.¥ secret documents belonging to general motors (gm) containing1philip elmerdewitt, òterror on the internet,ó time, december 12, 1994, p. 73.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.470appendix jinformation about a new gm vehicle to be sold in europe and a topsecretexperimental car were seized at an apartment used by a former gm executive who had since joined volkswagen.2 cryptography for authentication that created an audit trail might have helped to identify the formerexecutive sooner.¥ insiders at the first national bank of chicago transferred $70 million in bogus transactions out of client accounts. one transactionexceeded permissible limits, but the insiders managed to intercept thetelephone request for manual authorization.3 cryptography for authentication might have helped to deny access of the insiders to the telephonerequest for authorization.¥ a dutch bank employee made two bogus computerbased transfers to a swiss account, for $8.4 million and $6.7 million, in 1987. eachtransfer required the password of two different people for authorization;however, the employee knew someone elseõs password as well as hisown.4 cryptography for authentication might have hindered the abilityof a single individual to pretend that he was the second employee.¥ the first interstate bank of california received a bogus request totransfer $70 million over the automated clearinghouse network. the request came via computer tape, accompanied by phony authorizationforms, and was detected and canceled only because it overdrew the debited account.5 cryptography for authentication might have demonstratedthat the authorization was invalid.¥ fortyfive los angeles police officers were cited from 1989 to 1992for using department computers to run background checks for personalreasons.6 cryptography for authentication might have been part of anaudit trail that would have reduced the likelihood of abusing thedepartmentõs computer system.j.2 risks addressed by cryptography forconfidentiality¥ according to unclassified sources, a foreign intelligence serviceconducted signal intelligence (sigint) operations against a major u.s.airplane manufacturer, intercepting telemetry data transmitted from anairplane under development during a particular set of flight tests and a2see frank swoboda and rick atkinson, òlopez said to order gm papers; volkswagendenies receiving documents,ó washington post, july 23, 1993.3see peter g. neumann, computerrelated risks, addisonwesley, reading, mass., 1995, p.166.4neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 168.5neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 167.6neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 184.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of risks posed by unprotected information471video teleconference held among company engineers located at varioussites.7 encryption of the telemetry data and the video conference mighthave kept sensitive information away from the foreign intelligence service.¥ a bounty of $80,000 was reportedly posted on the internet in 1994for a notebook computer belonging to any fortune 100 executive.8 encryption of the files on the laptop might have helped to keep sensitiveinformation confidential).¥ a green bay packer football player was overheard calling a maleescort service and making explicit requests.9 a 23minute conversationallegedly between princess diana and a man who called her òmy darlingsquidgeó was taped by a retired bank manager in oxford and transcribedin the sun.10 the transcript of that conversation has now been circulatedwidely. encryption of these communications would have prevented thedisclosure of the information in question.¥ in one instance relayed to the committee, a large multinationalmanufacturer dispatched a salesperson to engage in negotiations with aforeign nation. a laptop computer that carried a great deal of sensitiveinformation relevant to those negotiations was seized by the border authorities and returned to the salesperson three days later. as the negotiations proceeded, it became clear to the salesperson that his opposites hadall of the information carried on his laptop. in another instance, a majormultinational company with customer support offices in china experienced a breakin in which chinese nationals apparently copied paperdocuments and unencrypted computer files. encryption of the storedfiles might have reduced the likelihood that the data contained thereinwould have been compromised.j.3 risks addressed by cryptography for bothauthentication and confidentialityin the following instances, both authentication and confidentialitymight have had a useful role to play. authentication could have beenuseful to keep intruders out of the computer systems in question, whileconfidentiality could have helped frustrate their attempt to view or obtain7peter schweizer, friendly spies, atlantic monthly press, new york, 1993, pp. 122124.8dan costa, ònotsosoft security,ó mobile office, august 1995, p. 75.9john flinn, san francisco examiner, november 1, 1992; see also neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 186.10flinn, san francisco examiner, 1992; see also neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p.186.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.472appendix jplaintext of information stored on those systems. however, in any individual example, it is not known if cryptographic authentication or encryption was or was not a part of the computer systems or networks thatwere penetrated.¥ a reporter for newsweek who wrote an article on malicious hackingactivities was subjected to an electronic bulletin board trial and pronounced guilty. subsequently, someone accessed a trw credit databaseto obtain and post the reporterõs credit card numbers. as a result, $1,100in merchandise was charged to him, and his home computer was crashedremotely via his unlisted telephone number.11¥ an employee of disney world gained illegal access to disneycomputer systems in 1994, reading confidential data files on employeesand deleting information from the systems.12¥ a major multinational chemical manufacturer headquartered inthe united states has deployed an online videotext system that containsconsiderable amounts of proprietary information about processes usedby that company. this manufacturer has disconnected one of its plants,located in the far east, from the videotext network because of evidencethat the government of the nation in which the plant is located is bothwilling and able to tap into this network to obtain valuable informationthat could be passed on to the manufacturerõs foreign competitors.¥ the domestic security service of a major western european nationfound information belonging to a major multinational manufacturer headquartered in the united states in the private homes of individuals with noconnection to the manufacturer. this information was found marked forsale to a competitor of the manufacturer in question and was apparentlyobtained through the computer hacking efforts of these individuals.j.4 risks addresed by cryptography fordata integrity¥ a convicted forger serving a 33year term was released from jailafter a forged fax had been received ordering his release. a legitimate faxhad been altered to bear his name.13 cryptography to ensure data integrity might have helped to detect the forgery.11neumann, computerrelated risks, 1995, p. 137.12richard burnett, òmore hackers speak in code; rise in peeping toms alarms centralflorida businesses,ó the orlando sentinel, july 4, 1994, p. 10.13see òfraudulent fax gets forger freed,ó san francisco chronicle, december 18, 1991,p. a3.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.examples of risks posed by unprotected information473¥ a prison inmate gained access to the online prison informationsystem and managed to alter his release date. the alteration was detectedby a suspicious deputy comparing the online entry with manual records,after the inmate had bragged about how he was going to get out early.14cryptography to ensure data integrity might have helped to detect thealteration of the files.14san jose mercury news, december 14, 1984.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.474appendix k474kcryptographic applicationsprogramming interfacesmodern software systems are built using various techniques that provide flexibility and reliability. one of the most important techniquescenters on the use of an applications programming interface.an applications programming interface (api) is a welldefined boundary between two system components that isolates a specific process orset of services. for example, it is quite common now for an application tointeract with an electronic mail (email) server through an email api,such as mapi (microsoft), vim (lotus), or aoce (apple), to name a few.in such cases, the api defines a set of services that allow an application toretrieve or submit mail messages from or to the mail server. apis can beimplemented by using hardware, software, or some combination. furthermore, software apis can be implemented by using dynamically linkedlibraries, statically linked libraries, remote procedure calls, or any combination.apis have evolved as the result of both technical and business pressures. technically, software developers have moved increasingly to òopen,óclientserver systems. an open system is one in which interoperable products from different vendors are used to provide the functionality requiredby the users. such systems depend heavily on commercial standards andapis are often used to support those standards. for example, email exchange using the x.400 standard is now supported by the cmc api. anapi allows multiple vendors to develop interoperable products, eventhough individual product versions are continually changing.although apis are used to support open standards, a large number ofcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cryptographic applications programming interfaces475proprietary apis are also used by vendors to safeguard their technicalinvestments. even within these closed environments, apis provide amajor technical and business benefit for those vendors licensed to develop products using that api. for example, novell was one of the firstnetwork operating system vendors to make extensive use of an api tosupport a wide range of addon products. under its approach, aònetwareó loadable module (nlm) can be developed by a thirdpartydeveloper and incorporated into an operational system by the user. theuse of a proprietary api allows vendors to maintain the quality of thirdparty products, to provide a basis for the development of niche products,and to maintain a competitive advantage. in novellõs case, the development of nlms for major database products has boosted its sales in thatcompetitive server market.perhaps the most common api today is microsoftõs object linking andembedding (ole) software technology, which provides generalpurposesockets for modules that can undertake many different functions. forexample, an ole socket can provide the user with the capability to inserta module for file encryption or for file compression. thus, although itmight be possible to use government regulations to prevent the widespread use of sockets for encryption, it would be difficult to dampen thespread of a generalpurpose socket that has many uses. ole interfacescould plausibly support some level of encryption capability; however,since ole interfaces are not specifically designed for security, they mayhave weaknesses that render them unsuitable for securityspecific applications.a cryptographic applications programming interface (capi) is anapi specifically designed to support the introduction of cryptographicfunctions into products. it is not necessary to actually provide the cryptographic functions when the system is initially sold. users would then beable to incorporate the cryptographic addons of their choice. technically, a capi would provide an interface to a set of cryptographic services; it would usually include authentication, digital signature generation, random number generation, and stream or block mode encryption.although there are some technical problems specific to capis, most notably those associated with ensuring the integrity of the security processing,they exhibit, for the most part, the same advantages as any other api.that is, there are strong technical and business reasons for incorporatinga capi into open systems.capis would enable applications developers to take for granted theexistence of cryptographic functionality and not have to provide for suchfunctionality themselves. moreover, by separating the cryptography fromthe baseline product, major system vendors will be able to make changescryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.476appendix kto the baseline product driven by market considerations without waitingfor an export license review that would be necessary for a product withbuiltin cryptographic functionality.cryptographic apis are likely to have a profound effect on the rapidity with which cryptography will diffuse into various information technology applications. if implemented properly (not a trivial task), they canenhance the security of stored data and communications. when effectivecapi technologies are embedded into the operating systems upon whichit applications build, the result will likely be encrypted files and communications galore. operating systems will be shipped with default cryptographic modules that are active òout of the box,ó and users will have theoption of replacing default modules with more capable modules procured from other vendors.the notion of a capi is not new. however, in general, export licensesfor products incorporating capis have been denied, even though suchproducts, with no cryptographic capabilities built into them, have no cryptographic functionality and are therefore not specifically included in category xiii of the international traffic in arms regulations (see appendixn). the reason for such denial has been that strong cryptographic capabilities could be deployed on a vast scale if u.s. vendors exported applications supporting a common capi and a foreign vendor marketed (orsome party made available over the internet) an addon module withstrong cryptography, which foreign users could then plug into the baseline u.s. product.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.477lother looming issues related tocryptography policyl.1 digital cash1national economies are based on money. the most basic form ofmoney is cash. coins, originally made of valuable metals, had intrinsicvalue and came to be more or less universally acceptable. paper money(bills) came to substitute for coins as the value of transactions increasedand it became physically impractical to carry everlarger volumes of coins.however, paper money was originally backed by stores of precious metals (gold and silver). in 1971, the united states abandoned its last effective link to the gold standard, and paper moneyñwith no intrinsic valueñcame to represent value that was backed by the integrity and solvency ofthe (increasingly international) banking system. other mediums of exchange have come to supplement cash, including paper checks written byconsumers; banktobank financial interactions that are electronicallymediated; nonretail business transactions conducted through electronicdata interchange among customers, vendors, and suppliers; and creditand debit cards used to make retail purchases.today, interest in socalled digital cash is increasing. digital cash issimilar to paper cash in the sense that neither the paper on which paper1this section draws heavily on cross industry working team, electronic cash, tokens, andpayments in the national information infrastructure, corporation for national research initiatives, 1895 preston white drive, suite 100, reston, va., 1994; available online atinfoxiwt@cnri.reston.va.us.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.478appendix lbox l.1characteristics of digital cash tokens¥ monetary value. electronic tokens must have a monetary value; they mustrepresent either cash (currency), a bankauthorized credit, or a bankcertified electronic check.¥ exchangeability. electronic tokens must be exchangeable as payment forother electronic tokens, paper cash, goods or services, lines of credit, deposits inbanking accounts, bank notes or obligations, electronic benefits transfers, and thelike.¥ storability and retrievability. electronic tokens must be able to be stored andretrieved. remote storage and retrieval (e.g., from a telephone or personal communications device) would allow users to exchange electronic tokens (e.g., withdrawfrom and deposit into banking accounts) from home or office or while traveling. thetokens could be stored in any appropriate electronic device that might serve as anelectronic òwallet.ó¥ tamperresistance. electronic tokens should be tamperproof and be difficultto copy or forge. this characteristic prevents or detects duplication and doublespending. counterfeiting poses a particular problem, since a counterfeiter may, innetwork applications, be anywhere in the world and consequently be difficult tocatch without appropriate international agreements. detection is essential to determine whether preventive measures are working.source: adapted from cross industry working team, electronic cash, tokens, and payments in the national information infrastructure, corporation fornational research initiatives, reston, va., 1994.money is printed nor the string of bits that represents digital cash hasintrinsic value; value is conferred on a piece of paper or a particular stringof bits if, and only if, an institution is willing to accept responsibility forthem. the basic characteristics of digital cash are described in box l.1.public interest in digital cash is driven largely by pressures for electronic commerce. for example, cash is usually the medium of choice inconducting lowvalue transactions; present mechanisms for conductingtransactions at a distance make economic sense only when the value isrelatively high (the average credit card transaction is several tens of dollars). in addition, these mechanisms generally require a preexisting arrangement between vendors and credit card companies: completely spontaneous transactions between parties without such arrangements are notpossible with credit cards as they are with cash. instant settlement whenconducting financial transactions at a distance and reducing the cost ofmanaging physical cash are still other advantages.both cryptography and information technology, including computercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other looming issues related to cryptography policy479hardware and software, underlie the feasibility of digital cash. strongcryptographic technologies and secure network architectures are necessary to give users of a digital cash system confidence in its security andintegrity, while the exponentially improving priceperformance ratio ofcomputer hardware is needed for the extensive computation required forstrong cryptography in a mobile environment. moreover, important advances in making electronics tamperproofñanother feature needed toensure confidenceñmay be in the hands of any number of users. box l.2describes the properties that a digital cash system must have.digital cash raises many basic questions. for example, if electroniccash is legal tender, who should be authorized to issue it and how shouldthe public be assured that a particular issuing authority is legitimate?how does a digital u.s. dollar affect the u.s. position in the world economy?how will the money supply be controlled or even measured with digital cashbox l.2essential properties of a digital cash systemit is widely accepted that a digital cash system must have the following properties:¥ authentication. users must be assured that digital cash tokens cannot beeasily forged or altered and that, if they are altered, evidence of this tampering willbe apparent immediately.¥ nonrefutable. users must also be able to verify that exchanges have takenplace between the intended parties, despite any complications that may result fromdelivery of services over long periods of time, interruptions in service, or differencesin billing and collection policies of various service providers. (ònonrepudiableó isthe term used in traditional computer and network security work.)¥ accessible and reliable. users must find the exchange process to be accessible, easy to effect, quick, and available when necessary, regardless of componentfailures in other parts of the system.¥ private. users must be assured that knowledge of transactions will be confidential within the limits of policy decisions made about features of the overall system. privacy must be maintained against unauthorized parties.¥ protected. users must be assured that they cannot be easily duped or swindled, or be falsely implicated in a fraudulent transaction. users must be protectedagainst eavesdroppers, impostors, and counterfeiters. for many types of transactions, trusted thirdparty agents will be needed to serve this purpose.all of these features depend on cryptography and secure hardware in varyingdegrees.source: cross industry working team, electronic cash, tokens, and payments in the national information infrastructure, corporation for national research initiatives, reston, va., 1994.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.480appendix lin circulation? apart from such questions, digital cash also raises policyissues that are part of cryptography policy writ large. based largely on thereference in footnote 1, the discussion below sketches some of the main issues.l.1.1 anonymity and criminal activitythe technology of digital cash will support essentially any degree ofanonymity desired. digital cash can be designed so that it is as closelyassociated with the user as electronic funds transfer is today (i.e., highlynonanonymous) or in a way that disassociates it entirely from the user(i.e., more anonymous than physical cash is today). intermediate levels ofanonymity are technically possible as well: for example, transactions couldbe anonymous except when a court order or warrant compelled disclosure of the identities of parties involved in a transaction. furthermore,the various partiesñpayer, payee, and bankñcould be identified or not,depending on policy choices.many privacy advocates support digital cash because such a systemcan provide high levels of anonymity for electronic transactions comparable to the anonymity of facetoface transactions made with physicalcash. such anonymity is not generally possible for other types of electronic payment vehicles. on the other hand, anonymous perpetrators ofcrimes cannot be identified and apprehended. to the extent that digitalcash facilitates the commission of anonymous crimes, it raises importantsocial issues. box l.3 describes what might be considered a òperfectcrimeó possible with anonymous digital cash. fraud, embezzlement, andtransportation of stolen property and information products are othercrimes of direct concern. highly anonymous digital cash may also facilitate money laundering, a key element of many different types of criminalactivity. law enforcement officials consider financial audit trails an essential crimefighting tool; a digital cash system designed to support thehighest levels of anonymity may put such tools at risk.the important policy issue for digital cash is the extent to which theanonymity possible with physical cash in facetoface transactions shouldalso be associated with electronic transactions. note that the question ofthe appropriate degree of anonymity for a digital cash system replays to aconsiderable degree the debate over the conditions, if any, under which lawenforcement officials should have access to encrypted communications.l.1.2 public trustpublic confidence in the monetary system is a prerequisite for itssuccess. most members of the public have sufficient confidence in thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other looming issues related to cryptography policy481box l.3a perfect crime using digital cashanonymous digital cash provides the user with anonymity and untraceability,attributes that could be used, in theory, to commit a òperfect crimeóñthat is, a crimein which the financial trail is untraceable and therefore useless in identifying andcapturing the criminal.a famous kidnapping case in tokyo in the early 1970s serves to illustrate theconcept. a man opened a bank account under the false name kobayashi and obtained a credit card drawing on the account. he kidnapped the baby of a famousactor and demanded that a 5 million yen ransom be deposited in the account. thepolice monitored automated teller machines (atms) drawing on kobayashiõs bank,and when kobayashi later tried to withdraw the ransom money using his card, theyarrested him.kobayashiõs use of a physical token, the credit card, unambiguously linked himto the account. anonymous digital cash presents the opportunity to eliminate thislink. creation of anonymous cash involves a set of calculations performed in turn bythe user who requests the cash and a bank. the userõs calculations involve a blinding factor, chosen and known only by him or her. these procedures yield digitalcash that the merchant and bank can verify is valid when it is presented for a purchase, while simultaneously making it impossible to trace the cash to the user whooriginally requested it from the bank.ordinarily, the procedures by which digital cash is created occur in a realtimetransaction between the userõs and the bankõs computers. however, a criminal suchas the kidnapper kobayashi could choose a set of blinding factors, perform the subsequent calculations, and mail the results to the bank along with the ransom demand. kobayashi could insist that the bank perform its portion of the calculationsand publish the results in a newspaper. he could then complete the procedures onhis own computer. this would give kobayashi valid, untraceable cash, without theneed for any direct link to the bank (such as a visit to an atm or a dialin computerconnection) that could reveal him to waiting authorities.source: adapted from sebastiaan von solms and david naccache, òon blindsignatures and perfect crimes,ó building in big brother, lance j. hoffman(ed.), springerverlag, new york, 1995, pp. 449452.exchange of physical cash and checks and of credit or debit cards to makethe system work. however, the logic underlying these mediums of exchange is straightforward by comparison to the mathematics of digitalcash, which are quite complex; a public understanding of how digitalcash works may be essential to the success of any such system and to theinfrastructure needed to support it.a second major trust issue relates to the counterfeiting of digital cash.with paper money, the liability for a counterfeit bill belongs to the onewho last accepted it because that person could have taken steps to checkcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.482appendix lits legitimacy (e.g., check for a watermark) and thus may not disclaimliability by asserting that it was accepted in good faith. no such protection is available with counterfeit digital cash. an individual can rely onlyupon the cryptographic protection built into the digital cash system. aforged digital bank note that gets into circulation has by definition brokenthrough that protection; thus, it is the bank that purportedly issued thenote that must hold the liability.l.1.3 taxationif a digital cash system is designed to support the highest levels ofanonymity so that financial transactions are effectively untraceable, thecollection of taxes may become problematic. most taxes bear some relationship to a financial quantity that must be determined, such as theincome collected in a year or the amount of a sales transaction. whenmoney flows only between two parties, how will the government determine how much money has changed hands or even know that a transaction has occurred at all?l.1.4 crossborder movements of fundsgovernments find it desirable as an instrument of policy to be able totrack money flows across their borders. today, the òcrossborderó movement of funds does not really transfer cash. instead, messages direct actions in, for example, two banks in the united states and two banks in theunited kingdom to complete a transaction involving dollarstopoundsconversion. moving cash outside national borders has effects on theeconomy, and governments will have to come to terms with these effects.l.2 cryptography for protectingintellectual propertymuch of the interest in a global information infrastructure comesfrom the prospect of transporting digitized information objects over communications lines without the need for transport of physical matter. atthe same time, concerns are raised about the fact that digital informationobjects can be retransmitted in the same way by the receiving party. thus,for example, the entertainment industry looks forward to the possibilityof largescale distribution of its products electronically but is concernedabout how to ensure receipt of appropriate compensation for them. eventoday, cable television vendors encrypt their transmissions domesticallyfor that very reason. the software industry is concerned about the theftthat occurs when a person buys one copy of a software package andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other looming issues related to cryptography policy483duplicates it for resale. thus, a global information infrastructure raisesmany questions about how best to compensate authors and producers ofintellectual property for each use, as well as how to prevent piracy ofintellectual property.2one approach to protecting digital representations of intellectual property involves the use of cryptography to scramble a digital informationobject.3 without the appropriate decryption key, the encrypted object isworthless. the basic notion is that vendors can distribute large digitalobjects in an encrypted form to users, who would then pay the vendor forthe decryption key. since the decryption key is in general much smallerthan the digital object, the cost of transmitting the decryption key is muchlower and, for example, could be performed over the telephone upon submission of a credit card number.the administrationõs working group on intellectual property rightsconcluded the following:development of an optimal nii [national information infrastructure] andgii [global information infrastructure] requires strong security as wellas strong intellectual property rights. copyright owners will not use thenii or gii unless they can be assured of strict security to protect againstpiracy. encryption technology is vital because it gives copyright ownersan additional degree of protection against misappropriation.4using cryptography to protect intellectual property raises questionsrelated to the strength of algorithms used to encrypt and decrypt digitalobjects. specifically, the use of weak cryptography to protect exporteddigital objects could well result in considerable financial damage to theoriginal creators of intellectual property.5 if it proves reasonable to protect intellectual property through encryption, pressures may well grow toallow stronger cryptography to be deployed worldwide so that creatorsof intellectual property can market their products safely and without fearof significant financial loss.2see information infrastructure task force (iitf), working group on intellectual property rights, intellectual property and the national information infrastructure, u.s. governmentprinting office, washington, d.c., 1995.3for example, see carl weinschenk, òcablevision to test antitheft system,ó cable world,february 6, 1995, p. 22.4iitf, intellectual property and the national information infrastructure, 1995.5for example, an article in the wall street journal reports that pirates of direct digitalsatellite television broadcasts are able to obtain decoders that are capable of decryptingencrypted signals that are received, thus allowing these individuals to avoid the monthlyfee for authorized service. see jeffrey trachtenberg and mark robichaux, òcrooks crackdigital codes of satellite tv,ó wall street journal, january 12, 1996, p. b1.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.484appendix lcryptography may also support the embedding of digital òwatermarksó into specific pieces of intellectual property to facilitate tracing thetheft to an original copy. such a scheme would insert information thatwould not affect the use of the object but could be subsequently identifiedshould ownership of that work be called into question. for example, adigital watermark might embed information into a digital representationof a photograph in such a way that it did not affect the visual presentationof the photograph; nevertheless, if the photograph were copied and distributed, all subsequent copies would have that hidden information inthem.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.485mfederal information processingstandardsagencies at all levels of government set regulatory standards for products and processes in order to protect health, safety, and the environment.they also produce specifications for public procurement of goods andservices. the federal register regularly publishes requests for commentson standards proposed by federal agencies. some of these are developedby agencies, while others originate as voluntary standards set in the private sector and are adopted by reference within the text of regulationsand specifications.in 1965 the brooks act gave responsibility for federal informationtechnology procurement standards to the national bureau of standards,now the national institute of standards and technology (nist).1 tomeet this requirement, nist produces federal information processingstandards (fipss). all federal agencies are encouraged to cite fipss intheir procurement specifications.nist has traditionally relied on private sector standardssetting processes when developing fipss.2 many standardssetting bodies follow1carl cargill, information technology standardization, digital press, bedford, mass., 1989,pp. 212213.2many standards related to information used in private industry are developed throughvoluntary consensus processes. among the most active information technology standardsdevelopers are the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee), a professionalsociety; the information technology industry coalition (itic), which administers information processing standards development in committee x3; and the alliance for telecommucryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.486appendix mconsensus standards development procedures promulgated by the american national standards institute (ansi). these include open participation of volunteer technical experts in standardswriting committees; consensus among committee members in support of any proposed standard;and elements of administrative due process, such as opportunities forcomment and voting by affected parties. these procedures increase thelikelihood of achieving a broadbased consensus and enhancing the acceptance of the resulting standard.3nist personnel are frequent participants in consensus standards committees, and fipss generally cite or draw on consensus and de facto industry standards.4 this practice is consistent with governmentwidepolicy; office of management and budget circular a119 requires that allfederal agencies cite existing consensus standards in regulation and procurement wherever possible, rather than develop governmentuniquenications industry solutions (atis), coordinator of committee t1 for telecommunicationstandards. the american banking association sponsors committee x9, which is currentlydeveloping a cryptographic standard for interbank transactions based on the tripledesalgorithm. the internet engineering task force determines the protocols that are used (invarying degrees of compliance) to communicate between internet sites.other private sector standards result from competition in the commercial marketplace.when one firmõs product becomes so widespread that its specifications guide the decisionsof other market participants, those specifications become a de facto industry standard.firms may promote their technologies as de facto standards in pursuit of goals such asgaining economies of scale, protecting or increasing market share, and obtaining revenuesfrom licensing intellectual property, among others. the ibmcompatible personal computer architecture is an example of a de facto industry standard. see michael hergert,òtechnical standards and competition in the microcomputer industry,ó in h. landis gabel(ed.), product standardization and competitive strategy, elsevier science publishers b.v.,amsterdam, 1987.in recent years, some firms in the information technology industry have tried to establish de facto standards by promoting them through industry consortia. the open softwarefoundationõs efforts to set a de facto unix operating system standard are an example. seecarl cargill and martin weiss, òconsortia in the standards development process,ó journalof the american society for information science, volume 43(8), 1992, pp. 559565.the decentralized nature of standard setting in the united states can be confusing andinefficient in specific circumstances. a recent national research council study of standards and international trade in many industry sectors concluded, however, that the existence of multiple standardsetting processes generally serves the national interest well, forreasons that include flexibility in responding to changing technological and market forcesand competitive pressures placed on rival standards developers. see national researchcouncil, standards, conformity assessment, and trade, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1995, pp. 6061.3ross cheit, setting safety standards: regulation in the public and private sectors, universityof california press, berkeley, 1990, p. 15.4cargill, information technology standardization, 1989, pp. 213214.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal information processing standards487standards.5 nistõs participation also reflects its recognition of the factthat the standards it sets will be more likely to succeedñin terms ofreducing procurement costs, raising quality, and influencing the directionof information technology market developmentñif they are supportedby private producers and users.6there is an additional benefit to government reliance on industrystandards that is especially relevant to information technology. recenteconomic analysis and ample experience demonstrate that standards governing the interoperability of information technology products pose special challenges. such standards control the ability of separate users, devices, software, and services to work with each other. examples includecomputer operating systems and cryptographic algorithms used for communication or data exchange.reliance on de facto industry standards may involve problems aswell. for example, the establishment of a formal standard based on defacto informal industry standards may freeze technology prematurely.user commitments to the use of that standard and a hardtochange infrastructure can then restrict the development and deployment of new andmore useful technologies. moreover, a standard that is popular in themarketplace may not necessarily be the most appropriate for all enduserapplications.one vexing problem with industry standards relates to the competitive nature of the marketplace. the setting of a formal standard that hasthe effect of favoring any individual company or set of companies couldbe viewed as unfair and anticompetitive if it has the effect of suppressingother, equally useful technologies. further problems arise if the paymentof royalties is necessary to use a particular formal standard, and manystandardssetting bodies do not adopt patented technology unless thepatent holders agree to certain terms with regard to licensing those whowish to implement the standards.the issuance of a fips can have enormous significance to the privatesector as well, despite the face that the existence of a fips does not legallycompel a private party to adopt it. one reason has already been statedñ5office of management and budget, circular no. a119, revised, federal register, october26, 1993, p. 57644. the department of defense, among others, has experienced dramaticreductions in procurement costs by taking advantage of the economies of scale inherent inlargevolume commercial production relative to production solely for the government market. purchasing commercial products also reduces significant cost burdens on suppliers ofmeeting separate commercial and militaryunique standards. for further discussion ofgovernment use of private standards, see national research council, standards, conformityassessment, and trade, 1995, pp. 5457.6cargill, information technology standardization, 1989, p. 213.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.488appendix mto the extent that a fips is based on existing private sector standards, itcodifies standards of existing practice with all of the benefits (and costs)described above. a second reason is that a fips is often taken as a government endorsement of the procedures, practices, and algorithms contained therein and thus sets a de facto òbestpracticesó standard for theprivate sector. a third reason is related to procurements that are fipscompliant as discussed in chapter 6.products such as computers and communication devices that are intended to interoperate with other equipment are of little value if they arebased on a standard few others useñthere is no one to communicatewith. for this reason, interoperability standards often foster a suddenacceleration in market share growthña bandwagon effectñin which users afraid of being left out rush to adopt a standard once it appears clearthat most other users will adopt that standard. the flip side of this phenomenon is the potential for significant delay in development of a marketprior to this takeoff point: users put off purchasing products and servicesthat might become òorphanedó in the future. during a period in whichmore than one competing standard exists, the entire marketõs growth maybe adversely affected. the failure of a consumer market for am stereoreceivers, for example, was largely due to the lack of a dominant standard.7competing standards developed in the private and public sectorscould be slowing the spread of cryptographic products and services. thetwo cryptographyrelated fipss most recently produced by nist werenot consistent with existing de facto industry standards. as discussedpreviously, the escrowed encryption standard was adopted as fips 185despite the overwhelmingly negative response from private industry andusers to the public notice in the federal register.8 the digital signaturestandard was also adopted despite both negative public comments andthe apparent emergence of a de facto industry based on rsaõs publickeyalgorithm.97for further discussion of the interactions between interoperability standards and development of markets for goods and services, see stanley besen and joseph farrell, òchoosinghow to compete: strategies and tactics in standardization,ó journal of economic perspectives, volume 8(2), spring 1994, pp. 115; and joseph farrell and garth saloner, òcompetition, compatibility and standards,ó product standardization and competitive strategy, h.landis gabel, ed. elsevier science publishers b.v., amsterdam, 1987.8susan landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy, associationfor computing machinery inc., new york, 1994, p. 48.9landau et al., codes, keys, and conflicts, 1994, pp. 4143.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.489n.1 statutesn.1.1wire and electronic communications interceptionand interception of oral communications(u.s. code, title 18, chapter 119)sec. 2510.definitions.as used in this chapter:(1)ôwire communicationõ means any aural transfer made in whole or inpart through the use of facilities for the transmission of communications by theaid of wire, cable, or other like connection between the point of origin and thepoint of reception (including the use of such connection in a switching station)furnished or operated by any person engaged in providing or operating suchfacilities for the transmission of interstate or foreign communications or communications affecting interstate or foreign commerce and such term includes anyelectronic storage of such communication;nlaws, documents, and regulations,relevant to cryptographynote: the material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic filesavailable on the internet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legalresearch or other work requiring authenticated primary sources.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.490appendix n(2)ôoral communicationõ means any oral communication uttered by a person exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to interception under circumstances justifying such expectation, but such term does notinclude any electronic communication;(3)ôstateõ means any state of the united states, the district of columbia,the commonwealth of puerto rico, and any territory or possession of the unitedstates;(4)ôinterceptõ means the aural or other acquisition of the contents of anywire, electronic, or oral communication through the use of any electronic, mechanical, or other device;(5)ôelectronic, mechanical, or other deviceõ means any device or apparatuswhich can be used to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication otherthanñ(a)any telephone or telegraph instrument, equipment or facility, or any component thereof, (i) furnished to the subscriber or user by a provider of wire orelectronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business and beingused by the subscriber or user in the ordinary course of its business or furnishedby such subscriber or user for connection to the facilities of such service and usedin the ordinary course of its business; or (ii) being used by a provider of wire orelectronic communication service in the ordinary course of its business, or by aninvestigative or law enforcement officer in the ordinary course of his duties;(b)a hearing aid or similar device being used to correct subnormal hearing tonot better than normal;(6)ôpersonõ means any employee, or agent of the united states or any stateor political subdivision thereof, and any individual, partnership, association, jointstock company, trust, or corporation;(7)ôinvestigative or law enforcement officerõ means any officer of theunited states or of a state or political subdivision thereof, who is empowered bylaw to conduct investigations of or to make arrests for offenses enumerated in thischapter, and any attorney authorized by law to prosecute or participate in theprosecution of such offenses;(8)ôcontentsõ, when used with respect to any wire, oral, or electronic communication, includes any information concerning the substance, purport, or meaning of that communication;(9)ôjudge of competent jurisdictionõ meansñ(a)a judge of a united states district court or a united states court of appeals; and(b)a judge of any court of general criminal jurisdiction of a state who is authorized by a statute of that state to enter orders authorizing interceptions of wire, oral,or electronic communications;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations491(10)ôcommunication common carrierõ shall have the same meaning which isgiven the term ôcommon carrierõ by section 153(h) of title 47 of the united statescode;(11)ôaggrieved personõ means a person who was a party to any interceptedwire, oral, or electronic communication or a person against whom the interceptionwas directed;(12)ôelectronic communicationõ means any transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or inpart by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photooptical system thataffects interstate or foreign commerce, but does not includeñ(a)any wire or oral communication;(b)any communication made through a toneonly paging device; or(c)any communication from a tracking device (as defined in section 3117 of thistitle);(13)ôuserõ means any person or entity whoñ(a)uses an electronic communication service; and(b)is duly authorized by the provider of such service to engage in such use;(14)ôelectronic communications systemõ means any wire, radio, electromagnetic, photooptical or photoelectronic facilities for the transmission of electroniccommunications, and any computer facilities or related electronic equipment forthe electronic storage of such communications;(15)ôelectronic communication serviceõ means any service which providesto users thereof the ability to send or receive wire or electronic communications;(16)ôreadily accessible to the general publicõ means, with respect to a radiocommunication, that such communication is notñ(a)scrambled or encrypted;(b)transmitted using modulation techniques whose essential parameters havebeen withheld from the public with the intention of preserving the privacy of suchcommunication;(c)carried on a subcarrier or other signal subsidiary to a radio transmission;(d)transmitted over a communication system provided by a common carrier,unless the communication is a tone only paging system communication;(e)transmitted on frequencies allocated under part 25, subpart d, e, or f of part74, or part 94 of the rules of the federal communications commission, unless, inthe case of a communication transmitted on a frequency allocated under part 74that is not exclusively allocated to broadcast auxiliary services, the communication is a twoway voice communication by radio; or(f)an electronic communication;(17)ôelectronic storageõ meansñ(a)any temporary, intermediate storage of a wire or electronic communicationincidental to the electronic transmission thereof; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.492appendix n(b)any storage of such communication by an electronic communication servicefor purposes of backup protection of such communication; and(18)ôaural transferõ means a transfer containing the human voice at anypoint between and including the point of origin and the point of reception.sec. 2511.interception and disclosure of wire, oral, or electronic communications prohibited.(1)except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter any personwhoñ(a)intentionally intercepts, endeavors to intercept, or procures any other personto intercept or endeavor to intercept, any wire, oral, or electronic communication;(b)intentionally uses, endeavors to use, or procures any other person to use orendeavor to use any electronic, mechanical, or other device to intercept any oralcommunication whenñ(i)such device is affixed to, or otherwise transmits a signal through, a wire,cable, or other like connection used in wire communication; or(ii)such device transmits communications by radio, or interferes with the transmission of such communication; or(iii)such person knows, or has reason to know, that such device or any component thereof has been sent through the mail or transported in interstate or foreigncommerce; or(iv)such use or endeavor to use(a)takes place on the premises of any business or other commercial establishment the operations of which affect interstate or foreign commerce; or(b)obtains or is for the purpose of obtaining information relating to the operations of any business or other commercial establishment the operations of whichaffect interstate or foreign commerce; or(v)such person acts in the district of columbia, the commonwealth of puertorico, or any territory or possession of the united states; and(a)intentionally discloses, or endeavors to disclose, to any other person thecontents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication, knowing or having reason to know that the information was obtained through the interception of a wire,oral, or electronic communication in violation of this subsection; or(b)intentionally uses, or endeavors to use, the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication, knowing or having reason to know that the information was obtained through the interception of a wire, oral, or electronic communication in violation of this subsection;shall be punished as provided in subsection (4) or shall be subject to suit asprovided in subsection (5).(2)(a)(i)it shall not be unlawful under this chapter for an operator of aswitchboard, or an officer, employee, or agent of a provider of wire or electroniccommunication service, whose facilities are used in the transmission of a wire orelectronic communication, to intercept, disclose, or use that communication in thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations493normal course of his employment while engaged in any activity which is a necessary incident to the rendition of his service or to the protection of the rights orproperty of the provider of that service, except that a provider of wire communication service to the public shall not utilize service observing or random monitoring except for mechanical or service quality control checks.(ii)notwithstanding any other law, providers of wire or electronic communication service, their officers, employees, and agents, landlords, custodians, or otherpersons, are authorized to provide information, facilities, or technical assistanceto persons authorized by law to intercept wire, oral, or electronic communicationsor to conduct electronic surveillance, as defined in section 101 of the foreignintelligence surveillance act of 1978, if such provider, its officers, employees, oragents, landlord, custodian, or other specified person, has been provided withñ(a)a court order directing such assistance signed by the authorizing judge, or(b)a certification in writing by a person specified in section 2518(7) of this titleor the attorney general of the united states that no warrant or court order isrequired by law, that all statutory requirements have been met, and that thespecified assistance is required, setting forth the period of time during which theprovision of the information, facilities, or technical assistance is authorized andspecifying the information, facilities, or technical assistance required. no providerof wire or electronic communication service, officer, employee, or agent thereof,or landlord, custodian, or other specified person shall disclose the existence of anyinterception or surveillance or the device used to accomplish the interception orsurveillance with respect to which the person has been furnished a court order orcertification under this chapter, except as may otherwise be required by legalprocess and then only after prior notification to the attorney general or to theprincipal prosecuting attorney of a state or any political subdivision of a state, asmay be appropriate. any such disclosure, shall render such person liable for thecivil damages provided for in section 2520. no cause of action shall lie in any courtagainst any provider of wire or electronic communication service, its officers,employees, or agents, landlord, custodian, or other specified person for providinginformation, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court orderor certification under this chapter.(b)it shall not be unlawful under this chapter for an officer, employee, or agentof the federal communications commission, in the normal course of his employment and in discharge of the monitoring responsibilities exercised by the commission in the enforcement of chapter 5 of title 47 of the united states code, tointercept a wire or electronic communication, or oral communication transmittedby radio, or to disclose or use the information thereby obtained.(c)it shall not be unlawful under this chapter for a person acting under color oflaw to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication, where such person is aparty to the communication or one of the parties to the communication has givenprior consent to such interception.(d)it shall not be unlawful under this chapter for a person not acting undercolor of law to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic communication where suchperson is a party to the communication or where one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent to such interception unless such communicationcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.494appendix nis intercepted for the purpose of committing any criminal or tortious act in violation of the constitution or laws of the united states or of any state.(e)notwithstanding any other provision of this title or section 705 or 706 of thecommunications act of 1934, it shall not be unlawful for an officer, employee, oragent of the united states in the normal course of his official duty to conductelectronic surveillance, as defined in section 101 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978, as authorized by that act.(f)nothing contained in this chapter or chapter 121, or section 705 of the communications act of 1934, shall be deemed to affect the acquisition by the unitedstates government of foreign intelligence information from international or foreign communications, or foreign intelligence activities conducted in accordancewith otherwise applicable federal law involving a foreign electronic communications system, utilizing a means other than electronic surveillance as defined insection 101 of the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978, and procedures inthis chapter or chapter 121 and the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978shall be the exclusive means by which electronic surveillance, as defined in section 101 of such act, and the interception of domestic wire and oral communications may be conducted.(g)it shall not be unlawful under this chapter or chapter 121 of this title for anypersonñ(i)to intercept or access an electronic communication made through an electronic communication system that is configured so that such electronic communication is readily accessible to the general public;(ii)to intercept any radio communication which is transmittedñ(i)by any station for the use of the general public, or that relates to ships,aircraft, vehicles, or persons in distress;(ii)by any governmental, law enforcement, civil defense, private land mobile,or public safety communications system, including police and fire, readily accessible to the general public;(iii)by a station operating on an authorized frequency within the bands allocated to the amateur, citizens band, or general mobile radio services; or(iv)by any marine or aeronautical communications system;(iii)to engage in any conduct whichñ(i)is prohibited by section 633 of the communications act of 1934; or(ii)is excepted from the application of section 705(a) of the communicationsact of 1934 by section 705(b) of that act;(iv)to intercept any wire or electronic communication the transmission of whichis causing harmful interference to any lawfully operating station or consumerelectronic equipment, to the extent necessary to identify the source of such interference; or(v)for other users of the same frequency to intercept any radio communicationmade through a system that utilizes frequencies monitored by individuals engaged in the provision or the use of such system, if such communication is notscrambled or encrypted.(h)it shall not be unlawful under this chapterñ(i)to use a pen register or a trap and trace device (as those terms are defined forcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations495the purposes of chapter 206 (relating to pen registers and trap and trace devices)of this title); or(ii)for a provider of electronic communication service to record the fact that awire or electronic communication was initiated or completed in order to protectsuch provider, another provider furnishing service toward the completion of thewire or electronic communication, or a user of that service, from fraudulent, unlawful or abusive use of such service.(3)(a)except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection, a person orentity providing an electronic communication service to the public shall not intentionally divulge the contents of any communication (other than one to such person or entity, or an agent thereof) while in transmission on that service to anyperson or entity other than an addressee or intended recipient of such communication or an agent of such addressee or intended recipient.(b)a person or entity providing electronic communication service to the publicmay divulge the contents of any such communicationñ(i)as otherwise authorized in section 2511(2)(a) or 2517 of this title;(ii)with the lawful consent of the originator or any addressee or intended recipient of such communication;(iii)to a person employed or authorized, or whose facilities are used, to forwardsuch communication to its destination; or(iv)which were inadvertently obtained by the service provider and which appear to pertain to the commission of a crime, if such divulgence is made to a lawenforcement agency.(4)(a)except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection or in subsection (5), whoever violates subsection (1) of this section shall be fined under thistitle or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.(b)if the offense is a first offense under paragraph (a) of this subsection and isnot for a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage or private commercial gain, and the wire or electronic communication with respect to which the offense under paragraph (a) is a radio communication that is not scrambled, encrypted, or transmitted using modulation techniquesthe essential parameters of which have been withheld from the public with theintention of preserving the privacy of such communication, then(i)if the communication is not the radio portion of a cellular telephone communication, a cordless telephone communication that is transmitted between thecordless telephone handset and the base unit, a public land mobile radio servicecommunication or a paging service communication, and the conduct is not thatdescribed in subsection (5), the offender shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and(ii)if the communication is the radio portion of a cellular telephone communication, a cordless telephone communication that is transmitted between the cordless telephone handset and the base unit, a public land mobile radio service communication or a paging service communication, the offender shall be fined notmore than $500.(c)conduct otherwise an offense under this subsection that consists of or recryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.496appendix nlates to the interception of a satellite transmission that is not encrypted orscrambled and that is transmittedñ(i)to a broadcasting station for purposes of retransmission to the general public; or(ii)as an audio subcarrier intended for redistribution to facilities open to thepublic, but not including data transmissions or telephone calls,is not an offense under this subsection unless the conduct is for the purposes ofdirect or indirect commercial advantage or private financial gain.(5)(a)(i)if the communication isñ(a)a private satellite video communication that is not scrambled or encryptedand the conduct in violation of this chapter is the private viewing of that communication and is not for a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct orindirect commercial advantage or private commercial gain; or(b)a radio communication that is transmitted on frequencies allocated undersubpart d of part 74 of the rules of the federal communications commission thatis not scrambled or encrypted and the conduct in violation of this chapter is notfor a tortious or illegal purpose or for purposes of direct or indirect commercialadvantage or private commercial gain,then the person who engages in such conduct shall be subject to suit by thefederal government in a court of competent jurisdiction.(ii)in an action under this subsectionñ(a)if the violation of this chapter is a first offense for the person under paragraph (a) of subsection (4) and such person has not been found liable in a civilaction under section 2520 of this title, the federal government shall be entitled toappropriate injunctive relief; and(b)if the violation of this chapter is a second or subsequent offense underparagraph (a) of subsection (4) or such person has been found liable in any priorcivil action under section 2520, the person shall be subject to a mandatory $500civil fine.(b)the court may use any means within its authority to enforce an injunctionissued under paragraph (ii)(a), and shall impose a civil fine of not less than $500for each violation of such an injunction.sec. 2512.manufacture, distribution, possession, and advertising of wire, oral,or electronic communication intercepting devices prohibited.(1)except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any personwho intentionallyñ(a)sends through the mail, or sends or carries in interstate or foreign commerce, any electronic, mechanical, or other device, knowing or having reason toknow that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose ofthe surreptitious interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications;(b)manufactures, assembles, possesses, or sells any electronic, mechanical, orother device, knowing or having reason to know that the design of such devicerenders it primarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception ofwire, oral, or electronic communications, and that such device or any componentcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations497thereof has been or will be sent through the mail or transported in interstate orforeign commerce; or(c)places in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement ofñ(i)any electronic, mechanical, or other device knowing or having reason toknow that the design of such device renders it primarily useful for the purpose ofthe surreptitious interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications; or(ii)any other electronic, mechanical, or other device, where such advertisementpromotes the use of such device for the purpose of the surreptitious interceptionof wire, oral, or electronic communications, knowing or having reason to knowthat such advertisement will be sent through the mail or transported in interstateor foreign commerce,shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, orboth.(2)it shall not be unlawful under this section forñ(a)a provider of wire or electronic communication service or an officer, agent, oremployee of, or a person under contract with, such a provider, in the normal courseof the business of providing that wire or electronic communication service; or(b)an officer, agent, or employee of, or a person under contract with, the unitedstates, a state, or a political subdivision thereof, in the normal course of the activities of the united states, a state, or a political subdivision thereof,to send through the mail, send or carry in interstate or foreign commerce, ormanufacture, assemble, possess, or sell any electronic, mechanical, or other deviceknowing or having reason to know that the design of such device renders itprimarily useful for the purpose of the surreptitious interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications.sec. 2513. confiscation of wire, oral, or electronic communication intercepting devices.any electronic, mechanical, or other device used, sent, carried, manufactured, assembled, possessed, sold, or advertised in violation of section 2511 orsection 2512 of this chapter may be seized and forfeited to the united states. allprovisions of law relating to (1) the seizure, summary and judicial forfeiture, andcondemnation of vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage for violations of thecustoms laws contained in title 19 of the united states code, (2) the disposition ofsuch vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage or the proceeds from the salethereof, (3) the remission or mitigation of such forfeiture, (4) the compromise ofclaims, and (5) the award of compensation to informers in respect of such forfeitures, shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred, or alleged to have beenincurred, under the provisions of this section, insofar as applicable and not inconcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.498appendix nsistent with the provisions of this section; except that such duties as are imposedupon the collector of customs or any other person with respect to the seizure andforfeiture of vessels, vehicles, merchandise, and baggage under the provisions ofthe customs laws contained in title 19 of the united states code shall be performed with respect to seizure and forfeiture of electronic, mechanical, or otherintercepting devices under this section by such officers, agents, or other personsas may be authorized or designated for that purpose by the attorney general.sec. 2514.repealed.sec. 2515.prohibition of use as evidence of intercepted wire or oral communications.whenever any wire or oral communication has been intercepted, no part ofthe contents of such communication and no evidence derived therefrom may bereceived in evidence in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before anycourt, grand jury, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, legislative committee, or other authority of the united states, a state, or a political subdivisionthereof if the disclosure of that information would be in violation of this chapter.sec. 2516.authorization for interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications.(1)the attorney general, deputy attorney general, associate attorneygeneral,1 or any assistant attorney general, any acting assistant attorney general, or any deputy assistant attorney general or acting deputy assistant attorney general in the criminal division specially designated by the attorney general, may authorize an application to a federal judge of competent jurisdiction for,and such judge may grant in conformity with section 2518 of this chapter an orderauthorizing or approving the interception of wire or oral communications by thefederal bureau of investigation, or a federal agency having responsibility for theinvestigation of the offense as to which the application is made, when such interception may provide or has provided evidence ofñ(a)any offense punishable by death or by imprisonment for more than one yearunder sections 2274 through 2277 of title 42 of the united states code (relating tothe enforcement of the atomic energy act of 1954), section 2284 of title 42 of theunited states code (relating to sabotage of nuclear facilities or fuel), or under thefollowing chapters of this title: chapter 37 (relating to espionage), chapter 105(relating to sabotage), chapter 115 (relating to treason), chapter 102 (relating toriots), chapter 65 (relating to malicious mischief), chapter 111 (relating to destruction of vessels), or chapter 81 (relating to piracy);1see 1984 amendment note below.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations499(b)a violation of section 186 or section 501(c) of title 29, united states code(dealing with restrictions on payments and loans to labor organizations), or anyoffense which involves murder, kidnapping, robbery, or extortion, and which ispunishable under this title;(c)any offense which is punishable under the following sections of this title:section 201 (bribery of public officials and witnesses), section 215 (relating tobribery of bank officials), section 224 (bribery in sporting contests), subsection (d),(e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) of section 844 (unlawful use of explosives), section 1032(relating to concealment of assets), section 1084 (transmission of wagering information), section 751 (relating to escape), section 1014 (relating to loans and creditapplications generally; renewals and discounts), sections 1503, 1512, and 1513(influencing or injuring an officer, juror, or witness generally), section 1510 (obstruction of criminal investigations), section 1511 (obstruction of state or local lawenforcement), section 1751 (presidential and presidential staff assassination, kidnaping, and assault), section 1951 (interference with commerce by threats or violence), section 1952 (interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of racketeering enterprises), section 1958 (relating to use of interstate commerce facilitiesin the commission of murder for hire), section 1959 (relating to violent crimes inaid of racketeering activity), section 1954 (offer, acceptance, or solicitation to influence operations of employee benefit plan), section 1955 (prohibition of businessenterprises of gambling), section 1956 (laundering of monetary instruments), section 1957 (relating to engaging in monetary transactions in property derived fromspecified unlawful activity), section 659 (theft from interstate shipment), section664 (embezzlement from pension and welfare funds), section 1343 (fraud by wire,radio, or television), section 1344 (relating to bank fraud), sections 2251 and 2252(sexual exploitation of children), sections 2312, 2313, 2314, and 2315 (interstatetransportation of stolen property), section 2321 (relating to trafficking in certainmotor vehicles or motor vehicle parts), section 1203 (relating to hostage taking),section 1029 (relating to fraud and related activity in connection with access devices), section 3146 (relating to penalty for failure to appear), section 3521(b)(3)(relating to witness relocation and assistance), section 32 (relating to destructionof aircraft or aircraft facilities), section 1963 (violations with respect to racketeerinfluenced and corrupt organizations), section 115 (relating to threatening or retaliating against a federal official), and section 1341 (relating to mail fraud), section 351 (violations with respect to congressional, cabinet, or supreme courtassassinations, kidnaping, and assault), section 831 (relating to prohibited transactions involving nuclear materials), section 33 (relating to destruction of motorvehicles or motor vehicle facilities), section 175 (relating to biological weapons),or section 1992 (relating to wrecking trains);(d)any offense involving counterfeiting punishable under section 471, 472, or473 of this title;(e)any offense involving fraud connected with a case under title 11 or themanufacture, importation, receiving, concealment, buying, selling, or otherwisedealing in narcotic drugs, marihuana, or other dangerous drugs, punishable under any law of the united states;(f)any offense including extortionate credit transactions under sections 892,893, or 894 of this title;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.500appendix n(g)a violation of section 5322 of title 31, united states code (dealing with thereporting of currency transactions);(h)any felony violation of sections 2511 and 2512 (relating to interception anddisclosure of certain communications and to certain intercepting devices) of this title;(i)any felony violation of chapter 71 (relating to obscenity) of this title;(j)any violation of section 11(c)(2) of the natural gas pipeline safety act of1968 (relating to destruction of a natural gas pipeline) or subsection (i) or (n) ofsection 902 of the federal aviation act of 1958 (relating to aircraft piracy);(k)any criminal violation of section 2778 of title 22 (relating to the arms exportcontrol act);(l)the location of any fugitive from justice from an offense described in thissection; or2(m)any felony violation of sections 922 and 924 of title 18, united states code(relating to firearms);(n)any violation of section 5861 of the internal revenue code of 1986 (relatingto firearms); and3(o)any conspiracy to commit any offense described in any subparagraph of thisparagraph.(2)the principal prosecuting attorney of any state, or the principal prosecuting attorney of any political subdivision thereof, if such attorney is authorizedby a statute of that state to make application to a state court judge of competentjurisdiction for an order authorizing or approving the interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications, may apply to such judge for, and such judge maygrant in conformity with section 2518 of this chapter and with the applicable statestatute an order authorizing, or approving the interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications by investigative or law enforcement officers having responsibility for the investigation of the offense as to which the application ismade, when such interception may provide or has provided evidence of the commission of the offense of murder, kidnapping, gambling, robbery, bribery, extortion, or dealing in narcotic drugs, marihuana or other dangerous drugs, or othercrime dangerous to life, limb, or property, and punishable by imprisonment formore than one year, designated in any applicable state statute authorizing suchinterception, or any conspiracy to commit any of the foregoing offenses.(3)any attorney for the government (as such term is defined for the purposes of the federal rules of criminal procedure) may authorize an application toa federal judge of competent jurisdiction for, and such judge may grant, in conformity with section 2518 of this title, an order authorizing or approving theinterception of electronic communications by an investigative or law enforcementofficer having responsibility for the investigation of the offense as to which theapplication is made, when such interception may provide or has provided evidence of any federal felony.2so in original. the word ôorõ probably should not appear.3so in original. probably should be ôorõ.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations501sec. 2517.authorization for disclosure and use of intercepted wire, oral, orelectronic communications.(1)any investigative or law enforcement officer who, by any means authorized by this chapter, has obtained knowledge of the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication, or evidence derived therefrom, may disclose such contents to another investigative or law enforcement officer to the extent that suchdisclosure is appropriate to the proper performance of the official duties of theofficer making or receiving the disclosure.(2)any investigative or law enforcement officer who, by any means authorized by this chapter, has obtained knowledge of the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication or evidence derived therefrom may use such contentsto the extent such use is appropriate to the proper performance of his officialduties.(3)any person who has received, by any means authorized by this chapter, any information concerning a wire, oral, or electronic communication, orevidence derived therefrom intercepted in accordance with the provisions of thischapter may disclose the contents of that communication or such derivative evidence while giving testimony under oath or affirmation in any proceeding heldunder the authority of the united states or of any state or political subdivisionthereof.(4)no otherwise privileged wire, oral, or electronic communication intercepted in accordance with, or in violation of, the provisions of this chapter shalllose its privileged character.(5)when an investigative or law enforcement officer, while engaged inintercepting wire, oral, or electronic communications in the manner authorizedherein, intercepts wire, oral, or electronic communications relating to offensesother than those specified in the order of authorization or approval, the contentsthereof, and evidence derived therefrom, may be disclosed or used as provided insubsections (1) and (2) of this section. such contents and any evidence derivedtherefrom may be used under subsection (3) of this section when authorized orapproved by a judge of competent jurisdiction where such judge finds on subsequent application that the contents were otherwise intercepted in accordance withthe provisions of this chapter. such application shall be made as soon as practicable.sec. 2518.procedure for interception of wire, oral, or electronic communications.(1)each application for an order authorizing or approving the interceptionof a wire, oral, or electronic communication under this chapter shall be made inwriting upon oath or affirmation to a judge of competent jurisdiction and shallcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.502appendix nstate the applicantõs authority to make such application. each application shallinclude the following information:(a)the identity of the investigative or law enforcement officer making the application, and the officer authorizing the application;(b)a full and complete statement of the facts and circumstances relied upon bythe applicant, to justify his belief that an order should be issued, including (i)details as to the particular offense that has been, is being, or is about to be committed, (ii) except as provided in subsection (11), a particular description of the nature and location of the facilities from which or the place where the communication is to be intercepted, (iii) a particular description of the type of communicationssought to be intercepted, (iv) the identity of the person, if known, committing theoffense and whose communications are to be intercepted;(c)a full and complete statement as to whether or not other investigative procedures have been tried and failed or why they reasonably appear to be unlikely tosucceed if tried or to be too dangerous;(d)a statement of the period of time for which the interception is required to bemaintained. if the nature of the investigation is such that the authorization forinterception should not automatically terminate when the described type of communication has been first obtained, a particular description of facts establishingprobable cause to believe that additional communications of the same type willoccur thereafter;(e)a full and complete statement of the facts concerning all previous applications known to the individual authorizing and making the application, made toany judge for authorization to intercept, or for approval of interceptions of, wire,oral, or electronic communications involving any of the same persons, facilities orplaces specified in the application, and the action taken by the judge on each suchapplication; and(f)where the application is for the extension of an order, a statement settingforth the results thus far obtained from the interception, or a reasonable explanation of the failure to obtain such results.(2)the judge may require the applicant to furnish additional testimony ordocumentary evidence in support of the application.(3)upon such application the judge may enter an ex parte order, as requested or as modified, authorizing or approving interception of wire, oral, orelectronic communications within the territorial jurisdiction of the court in whichthe judge is sitting (and outside that jurisdiction but within the united states inthe case of a mobile interception device authorized by a federal court within suchjurisdiction), if the judge determines on the basis of the facts submitted by theapplicant thatñ(a)there is probable cause for belief that an individual is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a particular offense enumerated in section 2516 ofthis chapter;(b)there is probable cause for belief that particular communications concerningthat offense will be obtained through such interception;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations503(c)normal investigative procedures have been tried and have failed or reasonably appear to be unlikely to succeed if tried or to be too dangerous;(d)except as provided in subsection (11), there is probable cause for belief thatthe facilities from which, or the place where, the wire, oral, or electronic communications are to be intercepted are being used, or are about to be used, in connection with the commission of such offense, or are leased to, listed in the name of, orcommonly used by such person.(4)each order authorizing or approving the interception of any wire, oral,or electronic communication under this chapter shall specifyñ(a)the identity of the person, if known, whose communications are to be intercepted;(b)the nature and location of the communications facilities as to which, or theplace where, authority to intercept is granted;(c)a particular description of the type of communication sought to be intercepted, and a statement of the particular offense to which it relates;(d)the identity of the agency authorized to intercept the communications, andof the person authorizing the application; and(e)the period of time during which such interception is authorized, including astatement as to whether or not the interception shall automatically terminatewhen the described communication has been first obtained. an order authorizingthe interception of a wire, oral, or electronic communication under this chaptershall, upon request of the applicant, direct that a provider of wire or electroniccommunication service, landlord, custodian or other person shall furnish the applicant forthwith all information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary toaccomplish the interception unobtrusively and with a minimum of interferencewith the services that such service provider, landlord, custodian, or person isaccording the person whose communications are to be intercepted. any providerof wire or electronic communication service, landlord, custodian or other personfurnishing such facilities or technical assistance shall be compensated therefor bythe applicant for reasonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities or assistance.pursuant to section 2522 of this chapter, an order may also be issued to enforce theassistance capability and capacity requirements under the communications assistance for law enforcement act.(5)no order entered under this section may authorize or approve the interception of any wire, oral, or electronic communication for any period longerthan is necessary to achieve the objective of the authorization, nor in any eventlonger than thirty days. such thirtyday period begins on the earlier of the day onwhich the investigative or law enforcement officer first begins to conduct aninterception under the order or ten days after the order is entered. extensions ofan order may be granted, but only upon application for an extension made inaccordance with subsection (1) of this section and the court making the findingsrequired by subsection (3) of this section. the period of extension shall be nolonger than the authorizing judge deems necessary to achieve the purposes forcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.504appendix nwhich it was granted and in no event for longer than thirty days. every order andextension thereof shall contain a provision that the authorization to intercept shallbe executed as soon as practicable, shall be conducted in such a way as to minimize the interception of communications not otherwise subject to interceptionunder this chapter, and must terminate upon attainment of the authorized objective, or in any event in thirty days. in the event the intercepted communication isin a code or foreign language, and an expert in that foreign language or code is notreasonably available during the interception period, minimization may be accomplished as soon as practicable after such interception. an interception under thischapter may be conducted in whole or in part by government personnel, or by anindividual operating under a contract with the government, acting under thesupervision of an investigative or law enforcement officer authorized to conductthe interception.(6)whenever an order authorizing interception is entered pursuant to thischapter, the order may require reports to be made to the judge who issued theorder showing what progress has been made toward achievement of the authorized objective and the need for continued interception. such reports shall bemade at such intervals as the judge may require.(7)notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any investigativeor law enforcement officer, specially designated by the attorney general, thedeputy attorney general, the associate attorney general, or by the principalprosecuting attorney of any state or subdivision thereof acting pursuant to astatute of that state, who reasonably determines thatñ(a)an emergency situation exists that involvesñ(i)immediate danger of death or serious physical injury to any person,(ii)conspiratorial activities threatening the national security interest, or(iii)conspiratorial activities characteristic of organized crime, that requires awire, oral, or electronic communication to be intercepted before an order authorizing such interception can, with due diligence, be obtained, and(b)there are grounds upon which an order could be entered under this chapterto authorize such interception,may intercept such wire, oral, or electronic communication if an application for anorder approving the interception is made in accordance with this section withinfortyeight hours after the interception has occurred, or begins to occur. in theabsence of an order, such interception shall immediately terminate when the communication sought is obtained or when the application for the order is denied,whichever is earlier. in the event such application for approval is denied, or in anyother case where the interception is terminated without an order having beenissued, the contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication interceptedshall be treated as having been obtained in violation of this chapter, and an inventory shall be served as provided for in subsection (d) of this section on the personnamed in the application.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations505(8)(a)the contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication intercepted by any means authorized by this chapter shall, if possible, be recorded ontape or wire or other comparable device. the recording of the contents of anywire, oral, or electronic communication under this subsection shall be done insuch a way as will protect the recording from editing or other alterations. immediately upon the expiration of the period of the order, or extensions thereof, suchrecordings shall be made available to the judge issuing such order and sealedunder his directions. custody of the recordings shall be wherever the judge orders. they shall not be destroyed except upon an order of the issuing or denyingjudge and in any event shall be kept for ten years. duplicate recordings may bemade for use or disclosure pursuant to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) ofsection 2517 of this chapter for investigations. the presence of the seal providedfor by this subsection, or a satisfactory explanation for the absence thereof, shallbe a prerequisite for the use or disclosure of the contents of any wire, oral, orelectronic communication or evidence derived therefrom under subsection (3) ofsection 2517.(b)applications made and orders granted under this chapter shall be sealed bythe judge. custody of the applications and orders shall be wherever the judgedirects. such applications and orders shall be disclosed only upon a showing ofgood cause before a judge of competent jurisdiction and shall not be destroyedexcept on order of the issuing or denying judge, and in any event shall be kept forten years.(c)any violation of the provisions of this subsection may be punished as contempt of the issuing or denying judge.(d)within a reasonable time but not later than ninety days after the filing of anapplication for an order of approval under section 2518(7)(b) which is denied orthe termination of the period of an order or extensions thereof, the issuing ordenying judge shall cause to be served, on the persons named in the order or theapplication, and such other parties to intercepted communications as the judgemay determine in his discretion that is in the interest of justice, an inventorywhich shall include notice ofñ(1)the fact of the entry of the order or the application;(2)the date of the entry and the period of authorized, approved or disapprovedinterception, or the denial of the application; and(3)the fact that during the period wire, oral, or electronic communications wereor were not intercepted.the judge, upon the filing of a motion, may in his discretion make available tosuch person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the intercepted communications, applications and orders as the judge determines to be in the interest ofjustice. on an ex parte showing of good cause to a judge of competent jurisdictionthe serving of the inventory required by this subsection may be postponed.(9)the contents of any wire, oral, or electronic communication interceptedpursuant to this chapter or evidence derived therefrom shall not be received inevidence or otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in afederal or state court unless each party, not less than ten days before the trial,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.506appendix nhearing, or proceeding, has been furnished with a copy of the court order, andaccompanying application, under which the interception was authorized or approved. this tenday period may be waived by the judge if he finds that it was notpossible to furnish the party with the above information ten days before the trial,hearing, or proceeding and that the party will not be prejudiced by the delay inreceiving such information.(10)(a)any aggrieved person in any trial, hearing, or proceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, or other authority ofthe united states, a state, or a political subdivision thereof, may move to suppressthe contents of any wire or oral communication intercepted pursuant to this chapter, or evidence derived therefrom, on the grounds thatñ(i)the communication was unlawfully intercepted;(ii)the order of authorization or approval under which it was intercepted isinsufficient on its face; or(iii)the interception was not made in conformity with the order of authorizationor approval.such motion shall be made before the trial, hearing, or proceeding unless therewas no opportunity to make such motion or the person was not aware of thegrounds of the motion. if the motion is granted, the contents of the interceptedwire or oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom, shall be treated ashaving been obtained in violation of this chapter. the judge, upon the filing ofsuch motion by the aggrieved person, may in his discretion make available to theaggrieved person or his counsel for inspection such portions of the interceptedcommunication or evidence derived therefrom as the judge determines to be inthe interests of justice.(b)in addition to any other right to appeal, the united states shall have theright to appeal from an order granting a motion to suppress made under paragraph (a) of this subsection, or the denial of an application for an order of approval, if the united states attorney shall certify to the judge or other officialgranting such motion or denying such application that the appeal is not taken forpurposes of delay. such appeal shall be taken within thirty days after the date theorder was entered and shall be diligently prosecuted.(c)the remedies and sanctions described in this chapter with respect to theinterception of electronic communications are the only judicial remedies and sanctions for nonconstitutional violations of this chapter involving such communications.(11)the requirements of subsections (1)(b)(ii) and (3)(d) of this section relating to the specification of the facilities from which, or the place where, the communication is to be intercepted do not apply ifñ(a)in the case of an application with respect to the interception of an oralcommunicationñ(i)the application is by a federal investigative or law enforcement officer andis approved by the attorney general, the deputy attorney general, the associatecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations507attorney general, an assistant attorney general, or an acting assistant attorneygeneral;(ii)the application contains a full and complete statement as to why such specification is not practical and identifies the person committing the offense andwhose communications are to be intercepted; and(iii)the judge finds that such specification is not practical; and(b)in the case of an application with respect to a wire or electronic communicationñ(i)the application is by a federal investigative or law enforcement officer andis approved by the attorney general, the deputy attorney general, the associateattorney general, an assistant attorney general, or an acting assistant attorneygeneral;(ii)the application identifies the person believed to be committing the offenseand whose communications are to be intercepted and the applicant makes a showing of a purpose, on the part of that person, to thwart interception by changingfacilities; and(iii)the judge finds that such purpose has been adequately shown.(12)an interception of a communication under an order with respect towhich the requirements of subsections (1)(b)(ii) and (3)(d) of this section do notapply by reason of subsection (11) shall not begin until the facilities from which,or the place where, the communication is to be intercepted is ascertained by theperson implementing the interception order. a provider of wire or electroniccommunications service that has received an order as provided for in subsection(11)(b) may move the court to modify or quash the order on the ground that itsassistance with respect to the interception cannot be performed in a timely orreasonable fashion. the court, upon notice to the government, shall decide such amotion expeditiously.sec. 2519.reports concerning intercepted wire, oral, or electronic communications.(1)within thirty days after the expiration of an order (or each extensionthereof) entered under section 2518, or the denial of an order approving an interception, the issuing or denying judge shall report to the administrative office ofthe united states courtsñ(a)the fact that an order or extension was applied for;(b)the kind of order or extension applied for (including whether or not theorder was an order with respect to which the requirements of sections 2518(1)(b)(ii)and 2518(3)(d) of this title did not apply by reason of section 2518(11) of this title);(c)the fact that the order or extension was granted as applied for, was modified, or was denied;(d)the period of interceptions authorized by the order, and the number andduration of any extensions of the order;(e)the offense specified in the order or application, or extension of an order;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.508appendix n(f)the identity of the applying investigative or law enforcement officer andagency making the application and the person authorizing the application; and(g)the nature of the facilities from which or the place where communicationswere to be intercepted.(2)in january of each year the attorney general, an assistant attorneygeneral specially designated by the attorney general, or the principal prosecuting attorney of a state, or the principal prosecuting attorney for any politicalsubdivision of a state, shall report to the administrative office of the unitedstates courtsñ(a)the information required by paragraphs (a) through (g) of subsection (1) ofthis section with respect to each application for an order or extension made during the preceding calendar year;(b)a general description of the interceptions made under such order or extension, including (i) the approximate nature and frequency of incriminating communications intercepted, (ii) the approximate nature and frequency of other communications intercepted, (iii) the approximate number of persons whosecommunications were intercepted, and (iv) the approximate nature, amount, andcost of the manpower and other resources used in the interceptions;(c)the number of arrests resulting from interceptions made under such orderor extension, and the offenses for which arrests were made;(d)the number of trials resulting from such interceptions;(e)the number of motions to suppress made with respect to such interceptions,and the number granted or denied;(f)the number of convictions resulting from such interceptions and the offenses for which the convictions were obtained and a general assessment of theimportance of the interceptions; and(g)the information required by paragraphs (b) through (f) of this subsectionwith respect to orders or extensions obtained in a preceding calendar year.(3)in april of each year the director of the administrative office of theunited states courts shall transmit to the congress a full and complete reportconcerning the number of applications for orders authorizing or approving theinterception of wire, oral, or electronic communications pursuant to this chapterand the number of orders and extensions granted or denied pursuant to thischapter during the preceding calendar year. such report shall include a summaryand analysis of the data required to be filed with the administrative office bysubsections (1) and (2) of this section. the director of the administrative office ofthe united states courts is authorized to issue binding regulations dealing withthe content and form of the reports required to be filed by subsections (1) and (2)of this section.sec. 2520.recovery of civil damages authorized.(a)in general.ñexcept as provided in section 2511(2)(a)(ii), any personwhose wire, oral, or electronic communication is intercepted, disclosed, or intencryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations509tionally used in violation of this chapter may in a civil action recover from theperson or entity which engaged in that violation such relief as may be appropriate.(b)relief.ñin an action under this section, appropriate relief includesñ(1)such preliminary and other equitable or declaratory relief as may be appropriate;(2)damages under subsection (c) and punitive damages in appropriate cases;and(3)a reasonable attorneyõs fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.(c)computation of damages.ñ(1) in an action under this section, if theconduct in violation of this chapter is the private viewing of a private satellitevideo communication that is not scrambled or encrypted or if the communicationis a radio communication that is transmitted on frequencies allocated under subpart d of part 74 of the rules of the federal communications commission that isnot scrambled or encrypted and the conduct is not for a tortious or illegal purposeor for purposes of direct or indirect commercial advantage or private commercialgain, then the court shall assess damages as follows:(a)if the person who engaged in that conduct has not previously been enjoinedunder section 2511(5) and has not been found liable in a prior civil action underthis section, the court shall assess the greater of the sum of actual damages suffered by the plaintiff, or statutory damages of not less than $50 and not more than$500.(b)if, on one prior occasion, the person who engaged in that conduct has beenenjoined under section 2511(5) or has been found liable in a civil action under thissection, the court shall assess the greater of the sum of actual damages suffered bythe plaintiff, or statutory damages of not less than $100 and not more than $1000.(2)in any other action under this section, the court may assess as damageswhichever is the greater ofñ(a)the sum of the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff and any profits madeby the violator as a result of the violation; or(b)statutory damages of whichever is the greater of $100 a day for each day ofviolation or $10,000.(d)defense.ña good faith reliance onñ(1)a court warrant or order, a grand jury subpoena, a legislative authorization,or a statutory authorization;(2)a request of an investigative or law enforcement officer under section 2518(7)of this title; or(3)a good faith determination that section 2511(3) of this title permitted theconduct complained of;is a complete defense against any civil or criminal action brought under thischapter or any other law.(e)limitation.ña civil action under this section may not be commencedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.510appendix nlater than two years after the date upon which the claimant first has a reasonableopportunity to discover the violation.sec. 2521.injunction against illegal interception.whenever it shall appear that any person is engaged or is about to engage inany act which constitutes or will constitute a felony violation of this chapter, theattorney general may initiate a civil action in a district court of the united statesto enjoin such violation. the court shall proceed as soon as practicable to thehearing and determination of such an action, and may, at any time before finaldetermination, enter such a restraining order or prohibition, or take such otheraction, as is warranted to prevent a continuing and substantial injury to the unitedstates or to any person or class of persons for whose protection the action isbrought. a proceeding under this section is governed by the federal rules of civilprocedure, except that, if an indictment has been returned against the respondent,discovery is governed by the federal rules of criminal procedure.sec. 2522.enforcement of the communications assistance for law enforcement act.(a)enforcement by court issuing surveillance order.ñif a court authorizing an interception under this chapter, a state statute, or the foreign intelligencesurveillance act of 1978 (50 u.s.c. 1801 et seq.) or authorizing use of a pen register or a trap and trace device under chapter 206 or a state statute finds that atelecommunications carrier has failed to comply with the requirements of thecommunications assistance for law enforcement act, the court may, in accordance with section 108 of such act, direct that the carrier comply forthwith andmay direct that a provider of support services to the carrier or the manufacturer ofthe carrierõs transmission or switching equipment furnish forthwith modifications necessary for the carrier to comply.(b)enforcement upon application by attorney general.ñthe attorneygeneral may, in a civil action in the appropriate united states district court,obtain an order, in accordance with section 108 of the communications assistancefor law enforcement act, directing that a telecommunications carrier, a manufacturer of telecommunications transmission or switching equipment, or a providerof telecommunications support services comply with such act.(c)civil penalty.ñ(1)in general.ña court issuing an order under this section against a telecommunications carrier, a manufacturer of telecommunications transmission orswitching equipment, or a provider of telecommunications support services maycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations511impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 per day for each day in violation after theissuance of the order or after such future date as the court may specify.(2)considerations.ñin determining whether to impose a civil penalty and indetermining its amount, the court shall take into accountñ(a)the nature, circumstances, and extent of the violation;(b)the violatorõs ability to pay, the violatorõs good faith efforts to comply in atimely manner, any effect on the violatorõs ability to continue to do business, thedegree of culpability, and the length of any delay in undertaking efforts to comply; and(c)such other matters as justice may require.(d)definitions.ñas used in this section, the terms defined in section 102 ofthe communications assistance for law enforcement act have the meaningsprovided, respectively, in such section.n.1.2foreign intelligence surveillance(u.s. code, title 50, chapter 36)sec. 1801.definitions.as used in this chapter:(a)ôforeign powerõ meansñ(1)a foreign government or any component thereof, whether or not recognizedby the united states;(2)a faction of a foreign nation or nations, not substantially composed of unitedstates persons;(3)an entity that is openly acknowledged by a foreign government or governments to be directed and controlled by such foreign government or governments;(4)a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor;(5)a foreignbased political organization, not substantially composed of unitedstates persons; or(6)an entity that is directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments.(b)ôagent of a foreign powerõ meansñ(1)any person other than a united states person, whoñ(a)acts in the united states as an officer or employee of a foreign power, or asa member of a foreign power as defined in subsection (a)(4) of this section;(b)acts for or on behalf of a foreign power which engages in clandestine intelligence activities in the united states contrary to the interests of the united states,when the circumstances of such personõs presence in the united states indicatethat such person may engage in such activities in the united states, or when suchperson knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of such activities orknowingly conspires with any person to engage in such activities; or(2)any person whoñcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.512appendix n(a)knowingly engages in clandestine intelligence gathering activities for or onbehalf of a foreign power, which activities involve or may involve a violation ofthe criminal statutes of the united states;(b)pursuant to the direction of an intelligence service or network of a foreignpower, knowingly engages in any other clandestine intelligence activities for oron behalf of such foreign power, which activities involve or are about to involve aviolation of the criminal statutes of the united states;(c)knowingly engages in sabotage or international terrorism, or activities thatare in preparation therefor, for or on behalf of a foreign power; or(d)knowingly aids or abets any person in the conduct of activities described insubparagraph (a), (b), or (c) or knowingly conspires with any person to engagein activities described in subparagraph (a), (b), or (c).(c)ôinternational terrorismõ means activities thatñ(1)involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that are a violation ofthe criminal laws of the united states or of any state, or that would be a criminalviolation if committed within the jurisdiction of the united states or any state;(2)appear to be intendedñ(a)to intimidate or coerce a civilian population;(b)to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or(c)to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping; and(3)occur totally outside the united states, or transcend national boundaries interms of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appearintended to coerce or intimidate, or the locale in which their perpetrators operateor seek asylum.(d)ôsabotageõ means activities that involve a violation of chapter 105 oftitle 18, or that would involve such a violation if committed against the unitedstates.(e)ôforeign intelligence informationõ meansñ(1)information that relates to, and if concerning a united states person is necessary to, the ability of the united states to protect againstñ(a)actual or potential attack or other grave hostile acts of a foreign power or anagent of a foreign power;(b)sabotage or international terrorism by a foreign power or an agent of aforeign power; or(c)clandestine intelligence activities by an intelligence service or network of aforeign power or by an agent of a foreign power; or(2)information with respect to a foreign power or foreign territory that relatesto, and if concerning a united states person is necessary toñ(a)the national defense or the security of the united states; or(b)the conduct of the foreign affairs of the united states.(f)ôelectronic surveillanceõ meansñ(1)the acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device ofthe contents of any wire or radio communication sent by or intended to be recryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations513ceived by a particular, known united states person who is in the united states, ifthe contents are acquired by intentionally targeting that united states person,under circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacyand a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes;(2)the acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device ofthe contents of any wire communication to or from a person in the united states,without the consent of any party thereto, if such acquisition occurs in the unitedstates;(3)the intentional acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device of the contents of any radio communication, under circumstances inwhich a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would berequired for law enforcement purposes, and if both the sender and all intendedrecipients are located within the united states; or(4)the installation or use of an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillancedevice in the united states for monitoring to acquire information, other than froma wire or radio communication, under circumstances in which a person has areasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes.(g)ôattorney generalõ means the attorney general of the united states (oracting attorney general) or the deputy attorney general.(h)ôminimization proceduresõ, with respect to electronic surveillance, meansñ(1)specific procedures, which shall be adopted by the attorney general, thatare reasonably designed in light of the purpose and technique of the particularsurveillance, to minimize the acquisition and retention, and prohibit the dissemination, of nonpublicly available information concerning unconsenting unitedstates persons consistent with the need of the united states to obtain, produce,and disseminate foreign intelligence information;(2)procedures that require that nonpublicly available information, which is notforeign intelligence information, as defined in subsection (e)(1) of this section,shall not be disseminated in a manner that identifies any united states person,without such personõs consent, unless such personõs identity is necessary to understand foreign intelligence information or assess its importance;(3)notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), procedures that allow for the retention and dissemination of information that is evidence of a crime which has been,is being, or is about to be committed and that is to be retained or disseminated forlaw enforcement purposes; and(4)notwithstanding paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), with respect to any electronicsurveillance approved pursuant to section 1802(a) of this title, procedures thatrequire that no contents of any communication to which a united states person isa party shall be disclosed, disseminated, or used for any purpose or retained forlonger than twentyfour hours unless a court order under section 1805 of this titleis obtained or unless the attorney general determines that the information indicates a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person.(i)ôunited states personõ means a citizen of the united states, an aliencryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.514appendix nlawfully admitted for permanent residence (as defined in section 1101(a)(20) oftitle 8), an unincorporated association a substantial number of members of whichare citizens of the united states or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or a corporation which is incorporated in the united states, but does notinclude a corporation or an association which is a foreign power, as defined insubsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) of this section.(j)ôunited statesõ, when used in a geographic sense, means all areas underthe territorial sovereignty of the united states and the trust territory of thepacific islands.(k)ôaggrieved personõ means a person who is the target of an electronicsurveillance or any other person whose communications or activities were subjectto electronic surveillance.(l)ôwire communicationõ means any communication while it is being carried by a wire, cable, or other like connection furnished or operated by any personengaged as a common carrier in providing or operating such facilities for thetransmission of interstate or foreign communications.(m)ôpersonõ means any individual, including any officer or employee of thefederal government, or any group, entity, association, corporation, or foreignpower.(n)ôcontentsõ, when used with respect to a communication, includes anyinformation concerning the identity of the parties to such communication or theexistence, substance, purport, or meaning of that communication.(o)ôstateõ means any state of the united states, the district of columbia,the commonwealth of puerto rico, the trust territory of the pacific islands, andany territory or possession of the united states.sec. 1802.electronic surveillance authorization without court order; certification by attorney general; reports to congressional committees; transmittal under seal; duties and compensation of communication common carrier; applications; jurisdiction of court.(a)(1)notwithstanding any other law, the president, through the attorneygeneral, may authorize electronic surveillance without a court order under thischapter to acquire foreign intelligence information for periods of up to one year ifthe attorney general certifies in writing under oath thatñ(a)the electronic surveillance is solely directed atñ(i)the acquisition of the contents of communications transmitted by means ofcommunications used exclusively between or among foreign powers, as definedin section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title; or(ii)the acquisition of technical intelligence, other than the spoken communicacryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations515tions of individuals, from property or premises under the open and exclusivecontrol of a foreign power, as defined in section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title;(b)there is no substantial likelihood that the surveillance will acquire the contents of any communication to which a united states person is a party; and(c)the proposed minimization procedures with respect to such surveillancemeet the definition of minimization procedures under section 1801(h) of this title;and if the attorney general reports such minimization procedures and any changesthereto to the house permanent select committee on intelligence and the senateselect committee on intelligence at least thirty days prior to their effective date,unless the attorney general determines immediate action is required and notifiesthe committees immediately of such minimization procedures and the reason fortheir becoming effective immediately.(a)(2)an electronic surveillance authorized by this subsection may be conductedonly in accordance with the attorney generalõs certification and the minimizationprocedures adopted by him. the attorney general shall assess compliance withsuch procedures and shall report such assessments to the house permanent selectcommittee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence underthe provisions of section 1808(a) of this title.(a)(3)the attorney general shall immediately transmit under seal to the courtestablished under section 1803(a) of this title a copy of his certification. suchcertification shall be maintained under security measures established by the chiefjustice with the concurrence of the attorney general, in consultation with thedirector of central intelligence, and shall remain sealed unlessñ(a)an application for a court order with respect to the surveillance is madeunder sections 1801(h)(4) and 1804 of this title; or(b)the certification is necessary to determine the legality of the surveillanceunder section 1806(f) of this title.(a)(4)with respect to electronic surveillance authorized by this subsection, theattorney general may direct a specified communication common carrier toñ(a)furnish all information, facilities, or technical assistance necessary to accomplish the electronic surveillance in such a manner as will protect its secrecy andproduce a minimum of interference with the services that such carrier is providing its customers; and(b)maintain under security procedures approved by the attorney general andthe director of central intelligence any records concerning the surveillance or theaid furnished which such carrier wishes to retain. the government shall compensate, at the prevailing rate, such carrier for furnishing such aid.(b)applications for a court order under this chapter are authorized if thepresident has, by written authorization, empowered the attorney general to approve applications to the court having jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title,and a judge to whom an application is made may, notwithstanding any other law,grant an order, in conformity with section 1805 of this title, approving electronicsurveillance of a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power for the purpose ofobtaining foreign intelligence information, except that the court shall not havejurisdiction to grant any order approving electronic surveillance directed solely ascryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.516appendix ndescribed in paragraph (1)(a) of subsection (a) of this section unless such surveillance may involve the acquisition of communications of any united states person.sec. 1803.designation of judges.(a)court to hear applications and grant orders; record of denial; transmittal to court of review.ñthe chief justice of the united states shall publicly designate seven district court judges from seven of the united states judicial circuitswho shall constitute a court which shall have jurisdiction to hear applications forand grant orders approving electronic surveillance anywhere within the unitedstates under the procedures set forth in this act, except that no judge designatedunder this subsection shall hear the same application for electronic surveillanceunder this act which has been denied previously by another judge designatedunder this subsection. if any judge so designated denies an application for anorder authorizing electronic surveillance under this act, such judge shall provideimmediately for the record a written statement of each reason of his decision and,on motion of the united states, the record shall be transmitted, under seal, to thecourt of review established in subsection (b) of this section.(b)court of review; record, transmittal to supreme court;ñthe chief justice shall publicly designate three judges, one of whom shall be publicly designated as the presiding judge, from the united states district courts or courts ofappeals who together shall comprise a court of review which shall have jurisdiction to review the denial of any application made under this act. if such courtdetermines that the application was properly denied, the court shall immediatelyprovide for the record a written statement of each reason for its decision and, onpetition of the united states for a writ of certiorari, the record shall be transmittedunder seal to the supreme court, which shall have jurisdiction to review suchdecision.(c)expeditious conduct of proceedings; security measures for maintenanceof records.ñproceedings under this act shall be conducted as expeditiously aspossible. the record of proceedings under this act, including applications madeand orders granted, shall be maintained under security measures established bythe chief justice in consultation with the attorney general and the director ofcentral intelligence.(d)tenure;ñeach judge designated under this section shall so serve for amaximum of seven years and shall not be eligible for redesignation, except thatthe judges first designated under subsection (a) of this section shall be designatedfor terms of from one to seven years so that one term expires each year, and thatjudges first designated under subsection (b) of this section shall be designated forterms of three, five, and seven years.sec. 1804.applications for court orders.(a)submission by federal officer; approval of attorney general; concryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations517tents.ñeach application for an order approving electronic surveillance under thischapter shall be made by a federal officer in writing upon oath or affirmation to ajudge having jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title. each application shallrequire the approval of the attorney general based upon his finding that it satisfies the criteria and requirements of such application as set forth in this chapter. itshall includeñ(1)the identity of the federal officer making the application;(2)the authority conferred on the attorney general by the president of theunited states and the approval of the attorney general to make the application;(3)the identity, if known, or a description of the target of the electronic surveillance;(4)a statement of the facts and circumstances relied upon by the applicant tojustify his belief thatñ(a)the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of aforeign power; and(b)each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance is directedis being used, or is about to be used, by a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower;(5)a statement of the proposed minimization procedures;(6)a detailed description of the nature of the information sought and the typeof communications or activities to be subjected to the surveillance;(7)a certification or certifications by the assistant to the president for nationalsecurity affairs or an executive branch official or officials designated by the president from among those executive officers employed in the area of national security or defense and appointed by the president with the advice and consent of thesenateñ(a)that the certifying official deems the information sought to be foreign intelligence information;(b)that the purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligence information;(c)that such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investigative techniques;(d)that designates the type of foreign intelligence information being soughtaccording to the categories described in section 1801(e) of this title; and(e)including a statement of the basis for the certification thatñ(i)the information sought is the type of foreign intelligence information designated; and(ii)such information cannot reasonably be obtained by normal investigativetechniques;(8)a statement of the means by which the surveillance will be effected and astatement whether physical entry is required to effect the surveillance;(9)a statement of the facts concerning all previous applications that have beenmade to any judge under this chapter involving any of the persons, facilities, or placesspecified in the application, and the action taken on each previous application;(10)a statement of the period of time for which the electronic surveillance isrequired to be maintained, and if the nature of the intelligence gathering is suchthat the approval of the use of electronic surveillance under this chapter shouldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.518appendix nnot automatically terminate when the described type of information has first beenobtained, a description of facts supporting the belief that additional informationof the same type will be obtained thereafter; and(11)whenever more than one electronic, mechanical or other surveillance deviceis to be used with respect to a particular proposed electronic surveillance, thecoverage of the devices involved and what minimization procedures apply toinformation acquired by each device.(b)exclusion of certain information respecting foreign power targets.ñwhenever the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power, as defined insection 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title, and each of the facilities or places at whichthe surveillance is directed is owned, leased, or exclusively used by that foreignpower, the application need not contain the information required by paragraphs(6), (7)(e), (8), and (11) of subsection (a) of this section, but shall state whetherphysical entry is required to effect the surveillance and shall contain such information about the surveillance techniques and communications or other information concerning united states persons likely to be obtained as may be necessary toassess the proposed minimization procedures.(c)additional affidavits or certifications.ñthe attorney general may require any other affidavit or certification from any other officer in connection withthe application.(d)additional information.ñthe judge may require the applicant to furnish such other information as may be necessary to make the determinationsrequired by section 1805 of this title.sec. 1805.issuance of order.(a)necessary findings.ñupon an application made pursuant to section1804 of this title, the judge shall enter an ex parte order as requested or as modified approving the electronic surveillance if he finds thatñ(1)the president has authorized the attorney general to approve applicationsfor electronic surveillance for foreign intelligence information;(2)the application has been made by a federal officer and approved by theattorney general;(3)on the basis of the facts submitted by the applicant there is probable cause tobelieve thatñ(a)the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power or an agent of aforeign power: provided, that no united states person may be considered a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power solely upon the basis of activitiesprotected by the first amendment to the constitution of the united states; and(b)each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance is directedis being used, or is about to be used, by a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations519(4)the proposed minimization procedures meet the definition of minimizationprocedures under section 1804(h) of this title; and(5)the application which has been filed contains all statements and certifications required by section 1804 of this title and, if the target is a united statesperson, the certification or certifications are not clearly erroneous on the basis ofthe statement made under section 1804(a)(7)(e) of this title and any other information furnished under section 1804(d) of this title.(b)specifications and directions of orders.ñan order approving an electronic surveillance under this section shallñ(1)specifyñ(a)the identity, if known, or a description of the target of the electronic surveillance;(b)the nature and location of each of the facilities or places at which the electronic surveillance will be directed;(c)the type of information sought to be acquired and the type of communications or activities to be subjected to the surveillance;(d)the means by which the electronic surveillance will be effected and whetherphysical entry will be used to effect the surveillance;(e)the period of time during which the electronic surveillance is approved; and(f)whenever more than one electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device is to be used under the order, the authorized coverage of the devices involvedand what minimization procedures shall apply to information subject to acquisition by each device; and(2)directñ(a)that the minimization procedures be followed;(b)that, upon the request of the applicant, a specified communication or othercommon carrier, landlord, custodian, or other specified person furnish the applicant forthwith all information, facilities, or technical assistance necessary to accomplish the electronic surveillance in such a manner as will protect its secrecyand produce a minimum of interference with the services that such carrier, landlord, custodian, or other person is providing that target of electronic surveillance;(c)that such carrier, landlord, custodian, or other person maintain under security procedures approved by the attorney general and the director of centralintelligence any records concerning the surveillance or the aid furnished that suchperson wishes to retain; and(d)that the applicant compensate, at the prevailing rate, such carrier, landlord,custodian, or other person for furnishing such aid.(c)exclusion of certain information respecting foreign power targets.ñwhenever the target of the electronic surveillance is a foreign power, as defined insection 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this title, and each of the facilities or places at whichthe surveillance is directed is owned, leased, or exclusively used by that foreignpower, the order need not contain the information required by subparagraphs(c), (d), and (f) of subsection (b)(1) of this section, but shall generally describe theinformation sought, the communications or activities to be subjected to the surcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.520appendix nveillance, and the type of electronic surveillance involved, including whetherphysical entry is required.(d)duration of order; extensions; review of circumstances under whichinformation was acquired, retained or disseminated.(1)an order issued under this section may approve an electronic surveillance forthe period necessary to achieve its purpose, or for ninety days, whichever is less,except that an order under this section shall approve an electronic surveillancetargeted against a foreign power, as defined in section 1801(a)(1), (2), or (3) of thistitle, for the period specified in the application or for one year, whichever is less.(2)extensions of an order issued under this chapter may be granted on thesame basis as an original order upon an application for an extension and newfindings made in the same manner as required for an original order, except that anextension of an order under this act for a surveillance targeted against a foreignpower, as defined in section 1801(a)(5) or (6) of this title, or against a foreignpower as defined in section 1801(a)(4) of this title that is not a united statesperson, may be for a period not to exceed one year if the judge finds probablecause to believe that no communication of any individual united states personwill be acquired during the period.(3)at or before the end of the period of time for which electronic surveillance isapproved by an order or an extension, the judge may assess compliance with theminimization procedures by reviewing the circumstances under which information concerning united states persons was acquired, retained, or disseminated.(e)emergency orders.ñnotwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when the attorney general reasonably determines thatñ(1)an emergency situation exists with respect to the employment of electronicsurveillance to obtain foreign intelligence information before an order authorizing such surveillance can with due diligence be obtained; and(2)the factual basis for issuance of an order under this chapter to approve suchsurveillance exists;he may authorize the emergency employment of electronic surveillance if a judgehaving jurisdiction under section 1803 of this title is informed by the attorneygeneral or his designee at the time of such authorization that the decision hasbeen made to employ emergency electronic surveillance and if an application inaccordance with this chapter is made to that judge as soon as practicable, but notmore than twentyfour hours after the attorney general authorizes such surveillance. if the attorney general authorizes such emergency employment of electronic surveillance, he shall require that the minimization procedures required bythis chapter for the issuance of a judicial order be followed. in the absence of ajudicial order approving such electronic surveillance, the surveillance shall terminate when the information sought is obtained, when the application for the orderis denied, or after the expiration of twentyfour hours from the time of authorization by the attorney general, whichever is earliest. in the event that such application for approval is denied, or in any other case where the electronic surveillanceis terminated and no order is issued approving the surveillance, no informationcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations521obtained or evidence derived from such surveillance shall be received in evidenceor otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before anycourt, grand jury, department, office, agency, regulatory body, legislative committee, or other authority of the united states, a state, or political subdivisionthereof, and no information concerning any united states person acquired fromsuch surveillance shall subsequently be used or disclosed in any other manner byfederal officers or employees without the consent of such person, except with theapproval of the attorney general if the information indicates a threat of death orserious bodily harm to any person. a denial of the application made under thissubsection may be reviewed as provided in section 1803 of this title.(f)testing of electronic equipment; discovering unauthorized electronicsurveillance; training of intelligence personnel.ñnotwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, officers, employees, or agents of the united states are authorized in the normal course of their official duties to conduct electronic surveillance not targeted against the communications of any particular person or persons,under procedures approved by the attorney general, solely toñ(1)test the capability of electronic equipment, ifñ(a)it is not reasonable to obtain the consent of the persons incidentally subjected to the surveillance;(b)the test is limited in extent and duration to that necessary to determine thecapability of the equipment;(c)the contents of any communication acquired are retained and used only forthe purpose of determining the capability of the equipment, are disclosed only totest personnel, and are destroyed before or immediately upon completion of thetest; and:(d)provided, that the test may exceed ninety days only with the prior approvalof the attorney general;(2)determine the existence and capability of electronic surveillance equipmentbeing used by persons not authorized to conduct electronic surveillance, ifñ(a)it is not reasonable to obtain the consent of persons incidentally subjected tothe surveillance;(b)such electronic surveillance is limited in extent and duration to that necessary to determine the existence and capability of such equipment; and(c)any information acquired by such surveillance is used only to enforce chapter 119 of title 18, or section 605 of title 47, or to protect information from unauthorized surveillance; or(3)train intelligence personnel in the use of electronic surveillance equipment, ifñ(a)it is not reasonable toñ(i)obtain the consent of the persons incidentally subjected to the surveillance;(ii)train persons in the course of surveillances otherwise authorized by thischapter; or(iii)train persons in the use of such equipment without engaging in electronicsurveillance;(b)such electronic surveillance is limited in extent and duration to that necessary to train the personnel in the use of the equipment; and(c)no contents of any communication acquired are retained or disseminatedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.522appendix nfor any purpose, but are destroyed as soon as reasonably possible.(g)retention of certifications, applications and orders.ñcertifications madeby the attorney general pursuant to section 1802(a) of this title and applicationsmade and orders granted under this chapter shall be retained for a period of atleast ten years from the date of the certification or application.sec. 1806.use of information.(a)compliance with minimization procedures; privileged communications;lawful purposes.ñinformation acquired from an electronic surveillance conductedpursuant to this chapter concerning any united states person may be used anddisclosed by federal officers and employees without the consent of the unitedstates person only in accordance with the minimization procedures required bythis chapter. no otherwise privileged communication obtained in accordance with,or in violation of, the provisions of this chapter shall lose its privileged character.no information acquired from an electronic surveillance pursuant to this chaptermay be used or disclosed by federal officers or employees except for lawfulpurposes.(b)statement for disclosure.ñno information acquired pursuant to thischapter shall be disclosed for law enforcement purposes unless such disclosure isaccompanied by a statement that such information, or any information derivedtherefrom, may only be used in a criminal proceeding with the advance authorization of the attorney general.(c)notification by united states.ñwhenever the government intends toenter into evidence or otherwise use or disclose in any trial, hearing, or otherproceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatory body,or other authority of the united states, against an aggrieved person, any information obtained or derived from an electronic surveillance of that aggrieved personpursuant to the authority of this chapter, the government shall, prior to the trial,hearing, or other proceeding or at a reasonable time prior to an effort to so disclose or so use that information or submit it in evidence, notify the aggrievedperson and the court or other authority in which the information is to be disclosedor used that the government intends to so disclose or so use such information.(d)notification by states or political subdivisions.ñwhenever any state orpolitical subdivision thereof intends to enter into evidence or otherwise use ordisclose in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, or other authority of a state or a politicalsubdivision thereof, against an aggrieved person any information obtained orderived from an electronic surveillance of that aggrieved person pursuant to theauthority of this chapter, the state or political subdivision thereof shall notify theaggrieved person, the court or other authority in which the information is to becryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations523disclosed or used, and the attorney general that the state or political subdivisionthereof intends to so disclose or so use such information.(e)motion to suppress.ñany person against whom evidence obtained orderived from an electronic surveillance to which he is an aggrieved person is tobe, or has been, introduced or otherwise used or disclosed in any trial, hearing, orother proceeding in or before any court, department, officer, agency, regulatorybody, or other authority of the united states, a state, or a political subdivisionthereof, may move to suppress the evidence obtained or derived from such electronic surveillance on the grounds thatñ(1)the information was unlawfully acquired; or(2)the surveillance was not made in conformity with an order of authorizationor approval.such a motion shall be made before the trial, hearing, or other proceeding unlessthere was no opportunity to make such a motion or the person was not aware ofthe grounds of the motion.(f)in camera and ex parte review by district court.ñwhenever a court orother authority is notified pursuant to subsection (c) or (d) of this section, orwhenever a motion is made pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, or wheneverany motion or request is made by an aggrieved person pursuant to any otherstatute or rule of the united states or any state before any court or other authorityof the united states or any state to discover or obtain applications or orders orother materials relating to electronic surveillance or to discover, obtain, or suppress evidence or information obtained or derived from electronic surveillanceunder this act, the united states district court or, where the motion is madebefore another authority, the united states district court in the same district as theauthority, shall, notwithstanding any other law, if the attorney general files anaffidavit under oath that disclosure or an adversary hearing would harm thenational security of the united states, review in camera and ex parte the application, order, and such other materials relating to the surveillance as may be necessary to determine whether the surveillance of the aggrieved person was lawfullyauthorized and conducted. in making this determination, the court may discloseto the aggrieved person, under appropriate security procedures and protectiveorders, portions of the application, order, or other materials relating to the surveillance only where such disclosure is necessary to make an accurate determinationof the legality of the surveillance.(g)suppression of evidence; denial of motion.ñif the united states districtcourt pursuant to subsection (f) of this section determines that the surveillancewas not lawfully authorized or conducted, it shall, in accordance with the requirements of law, suppress the evidence which was unlawfully obtained or derivedfrom electronic surveillance of the aggrieved person or otherwise grant the motion of the aggrieved person. if the court determines that the surveillance waslawfully authorized and conducted, it shall deny the motion of the aggrievedperson except to the extent that due process requires discovery or disclosure.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.524appendix n(h)finality of orders.ñorders granting motions or requests under subsection (g) of this section, decisions under this section that electronic surveillancewas not lawfully authorized or conducted, and orders of the united states districtcourt requiring review or granting disclosure of applications, orders, or othermaterials relating to a surveillance shall be final orders and binding upon allcourts of the united states and the several states except a united states court ofappeals and the supreme court.(i)destruction of unintentionally acquired information.ñin circumstancesinvolving the unintentional acquisition by an electronic, mechanical, or other surveillance device of the contents of any radio communication, under circumstancesin which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would berequired for law enforcement purposes, and if both the sender and all intendedrecipients are located within the united states, such contents shall be destroyedupon recognition, unless the attorney general determines that the contents indicate a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person.(j)notification of emergency employment of electronic surveillance; contents; postponement, suspension or elimination.ñif an emergency employmentof electronic surveillance is authorized under section 1805(e) of this title and asubsequent order approving the surveillance is not obtained, the judge shall causeto be served on any united states person named in the application and on suchother united states persons subject to electronic surveillance as the judge maydetermine in his discretion it is in the interest of justice to serve, notice ofñ(1)the fact of the application;(2)the period of the surveillance; and(3)the fact that during the period information was or was not obtained.on an ex parte showing of good cause to the judge the serving of the notice requiredby this subsection may be postponed or suspended for a period not to exceed ninetydays. thereafter, on a further ex parte showing of good cause, the court shall foregoordering the serving of the notice required under this subsection.sec. 1807.report to administrative office of the united states court and tocongress.in april of each year, the attorney general shall transmit to the administrative office of the united states court and to congress a report setting forth withrespect to the preceding calendar yearñ(a)the total number of applications made for orders and extensions oforders approving electronic surveillance under this chapter; and(b)the total number of such orders and extensions either granted, modified, or denied.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations525sec. 1808.report of attorney general to congressional committees; limitation on authority or responsibility of information gathering activities of congressional committees; report of congressional committees to congress.(a)on a semiannual basis the attorney general shall fully inform thehouse permanent select committee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence concerning all electronic surveillance under this chapter.nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the authority and responsibilityof the appropriate committees of each house of congress to obtain such information as they may need to carry out their respective functions and duties.(b)on or before one year after october 25, 1978, and on the same day eachyear for four years thereafter, the permanent select committee on intelligenceand the senate select committee on intelligence shall report respectively to thehouse of representatives and the senate, concerning the implementation of thisact. said reports shall include but not be limited to an analysis and recommendations concerning whether this act should be(1)amended,(2)repealed, or(3)permitted to continue in effect without amendment.sec. 1809.criminal sanctions.(a)prohibited activitiesa person is guilty of an offense if he intentionallyñ(1)engages in electronic surveillance under color of law except as authorizedby statute; or(2)discloses or uses information obtained under color of law by electronic surveillance, knowing or having reason to know that the information was obtainedthrough electronic surveillance not authorized by statute.(b)defenseit is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) of thissection that the defendant was a law enforcement or investigative officer engagedin the course of his official duties and the electronic surveillance was authorizedby and conducted pursuant to a search warrant or court order of a court of competent jurisdiction.(c)penaltiesan offense described in this section is punishable by a fine ofnot more than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than five years, or both.(d)federal jurisdictionthere is federal jurisdiction over an offense underthis section if the person committing the offense was an officer or employee of theunited states at the time the offense was committed.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.526appendix nsec. 1810. civil liability.an aggrieved person, other than a foreign power or an agent of a foreignpower, as defined in section 1801(a) or (b)(1)(a) of this title, respectively, who hasbeen subjected to an electronic surveillance or about whom information obtainedby electronic surveillance of such person has been disclosed or used in violation ofsection 1809 of this title shall have a cause of action against any person whocommitted such violation and shall be entitled to recoverñ(a)actual damages, but not less than liquidated damages of $1,000 or $100 perday for each day of violation, whichever is greater;(b)punitive damages; and(c)reasonable attorneyõs fees and other investigation and litigation costs reasonably incurred.sec. 1811.authorization during time of war.notwithstanding any other law, the president, through the attorney general, may authorize electronic surveillance without a court order under this chapter to acquire foreign intelligence information for a period not to exceed fifteencalendar days following a declaration of war by the congress.n.1.3pen register and traffic analysis (u.s. code, title 18,chapters 121 and 206)chapter 121sec. 2701.unlawful access to stored communications.(a)offense.ñexcept as provided in subsection (c) of this section whoeverñ(1)intentionally accesses without authorization a facility through which anelectronic communication service is provided; or(2)intentionally exceeds an authorization to access that facility;and thereby obtains, alters, or prevents authorized access to a wire or electroniccommunication while it is in electronic storage in such system shall be punishedas provided in subsection (b) of this section.(b)punishment.ñ the punishment for an offense under subsection (a) ofthis section isñ(1)if the offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, maliciousdestruction or damage, or private commercial gainñ(a)a fine of not more than $250,000 or imprisonment for not more than oneyear, or both, in the case of a first offense under this subparagraph; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations527(b)a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than two years, or both,for any subsequent offense under this subparagraph; and(2)a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than six months,or both, in any other case.(c)exceptions.ñ subsection (a) of this section does not apply with respectto conduct authorizedñ(1)by the person or entity providing a wire or electronic communications service;(2)by a user of that service with respect to a communication of or intended forthat user; or(3)in section 2703, 2704 or 2518 of this title.sec. 2702.disclosure of contents.(a)prohibitions.ñexcept as provided in subsection (b)ñ(1)a person or entity providing an electronic communication service to thepublic shall not knowingly divulge to any person or entity the contents of acommunication while in electronic storage by that service; and(2)a person or entity providing remote computing service to the public shallnot knowingly divulge to any person or entity the contents of any communicationwhich is carried or maintained on that serviceñ(a)on behalf of, and received by means of electronic transmission from (orcreated by means of computer processing of communications received by meansof electronic transmission from), a subscriber or customer of such service; and(b)solely for the purpose of providing storage or computer processing servicesto such subscriber or customer, if the provider is not authorized to access thecontents of any such communications for purposes of providing any servicesother than storage or computer processing.(b)exceptions.ña person or entity may divulge the contents of a communicationñ(1)to an addressee or intended recipient of such communication or an agent ofsuch addressee or intended recipient;(2)as otherwise authorized in section 2517, 2511(2)(a), or 2703 of this title;(3)with the lawful consent of the originator or an addressee or intended recipient of such communication, or the subscriber in the case of remote computingservice;(4)to a person employed or authorized or whose facilities are used to forwardsuch communication to its destination;(5)as may be necessarily incident to the rendition of the service or to the protection of the rights or property of the provider of that service; or(6)to a law enforcement agency, if such contentsñ(a)were inadvertently obtained by the service provider; and(b)appear to pertain to the commission of a crime.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.528appendix nsec. 2703.requirements for governmental access.(a)contents of electronic communications in electronic storage.ña governmental entity may require the disclosure by a provider of electronic communication service of the contents of an electronic communication, that is in electronicstorage in an electronic communications system for one hundred and eighty daysor less, only pursuant to a warrant issued under the federal rules of criminalprocedure or equivalent state warrant. a governmental entity may require thedisclosure by a provider of electronic communications services of the contents ofan electronic communication that has been in electronic storage in an electroniccommunications system for more than one hundred and eighty days by the meansavailable under subsection (b) of this section.(b)contents of electronic communications in a remote computing service.ñ(1)a governmental entity may require a provider of remote computing serviceto disclose the contents of any electronic communication to which this paragraphis made applicable by paragraph (2) of this subsectionñ(a)without required notice to the subscriber or customer, if the governmentalentity obtains a warrant issued under the federal rules of criminal procedure orequivalent state warrant; or (b) with prior notice from the governmental entity tothe subscriber or customer if the governmental entityñ(i)uses an administrative subpoena authorized by a federal or state statute ora federal or state grand jury or trial subpoena; or(ii)obtains a court order for such disclosure under subsection (d) of this section;except that delayed notice may be given pursuant to section 2705 of this title.(2)paragraph one is applicable with respect to any electronic communicationthat is held or maintained on that serviceñ(a)on behalf of, and received by means of electronic transmission from (orcreated by means of computer processing of communications received by meansof electronic transmission from), a subscriber or customer of such remote computing service; and(b)solely for the purpose of providing storage or computer processing servicesto such subscriber or customer, if the provider is not authorized to access thecontents of any such communications for purposes of providing any servicesother than storage or computer processing.(c)records concerning electronic communication service or remotecomputing service.ñ(1)(a)except as provided in subparagraph (b), a provider of electronic communication service or remote service may disclose a record or other informationpertaining to a subscriber to or customer of such service (not including the contents of communications covered by subsection (a) or (b) of this section) to anyperson other than a governmental entity.(b)a provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service shall disclose a record or other information pertaining to a subscriber to orcustomer of such service (not including the contents of communications coveredcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations529by subsection (a) or (b) of this section) to a governmental entity only when thegovernmental entityñ(i)obtains a warrant issued under the federal rules of criminal procedure orequivalent state warrant;(ii)obtains a court order for such disclosure under subsection (d) of this section; or(iii)has the consent of the subscriber or customer to such disclosure.(c)a provider of electronic communication service or remote computing serviceshall disclose to a governmental entity the name, address, telephone toll billingrecords, telephone number or other subscriber number or identity, and length ofservice of a subscriber to or customer of such service and the types of services thesubscriber or customer utilized, when the governmental entity uses an administrative subpoena authorized by a federal or state statute or a federal or state grandjury or trial subpoena or any means available under subparagraph (b).(2)a governmental entity receiving records or information under this subsection is not required to provide notice to a subscriber or customer.(d)requirements for court order.ña court order for disclosure undersubsection (b) or (c) may be issued by any court that is a court of competentjurisdiction described in section 3126(2)(a) and shall issue only if the governmental entity offers specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonablegrounds to believe that the contents of a wire or electronic communication, or therecords or other information sought, are relevant and material to an ongoingcriminal investigation. in the case of a state governmental authority, such a courtorder shall not issue if prohibited by the law of such state. a court issuing anorder pursuant to this section, on a motion made promptly by the service provider, may quash or modify such order, if the information or records requestedare unusually voluminous in nature or compliance with such order otherwisewould cause an undue burden on such provider.(e)no cause of action against a provider disclosing information underthis chapter.ñno cause of action shall lie in any court against any provider ofwire or electronic communication service, its officers, employees, agents, or otherspecified persons for providing information, facilities, or assistance in accordancewith the terms of a court order, warrant, subpoena, or certification under thischapter.sec. 2704.backup preservation.(a)backup preservation.ñ(1)a governmental entity acting under section 2703(b)(2) may include in itssubpoena or court order a requirement that the service provider to whom therequest is directed create a backup copy of the contents of the electronic communications sought in order to preserve those communications.without notifying the subscriber or customer of such subpoena or courtorder, such service provider shall create such backup copy as soon as practicablecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.530appendix nconsistent with its regular business practices and shall confirm to the governmental entity that such backup copy has been made. such backup copy shall be created within two business days after receipt by the service provider of the subpoena or court order.(2)notice to the subscriber or customer shall be made by the governmentalentity within three days after receipt of such confirmation, unless such notice isdelayed pursuant to section 2705(a).(3)the service provider shall not destroy such backup copy until the later ofñ(a)the delivery of the information; or(b)the resolution of any proceedings (including appeals of any proceeding)concerning the governmentõs subpoena or court order.(4)the service provider shall release such backup copy to the requesting governmental entity no sooner than fourteen days after the governmental entityõsnotice to the subscriber or customer if such service providerñ(a)has not received notice from the subscriber or customer that the subscriberor customer has challenged the governmental entityõs request; and(b)has not initiated proceedings to challenge the request of the governmentalentity.(5)a governmental entity may seek to require the creation of a backup copyunder subsection (a)(1) of this section if in its sole discretion such entity determines that there is reason to believe that notification under section 2703 of thistitle of the existence of the subpoena or court order may result in destruction of ortampering with evidence. this determination is not subject to challenge by thesubscriber or customer or service provider.(b)customer challenges.ñ(1)within fourteen days after notice by the governmental entity to the subscriber or customer under subsection (a)(2) of this section, such subscriber orcustomer may file a motion to quash such subpoena or vacate such court order,with copies served upon the governmental entity and with written notice of suchchallenge to the service provider. a motion to vacate a court order shall be filed inthe court which issued such order. a motion to quash a subpoena shall be filed inthe appropriate united states district court or state court. such motion or application shall contain an affidavit or sworn statementñ(a)stating that the applicant is a customer or subscriber to the service fromwhich the contents of electronic communications maintained for him have beensought; and(b)stating the applicantõs reasons for believing that the records sought are notrelevant to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry or that there has not been substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter in some other respect.(2)service shall be made under this section upon a governmental entity bydelivering or mailing by registered or certified mail a copy of the papers to theperson, office, or department specified in the notice which the customer has received pursuant to this chapter. for the purposes of this section, the term ôdeliveryõ has the meaning given that term in the federal rules of civil procedure.(3)if the court finds that the customer has complied with paragraphs (1) and (2)of this subsection, the court shall order the governmental entity to file a sworncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations531response, which may be filed in camera if the governmental entity includes in itsresponse the reasons which make in camera review appropriate. if the court isunable to determine the motion or application on the basis of the partiesõ initialallegations and response, the court may conduct such additional proceedings as itdeems appropriate. all such proceedings shall be completed and the motion orapplication decided as soon as practicable after the filing of the governmentalentityõs response.(4)if the court finds that the applicant is not the subscriber or customer forwhom the communications sought by the governmental entity are maintained, orthat there is a reason to believe that the law enforcement inquiry is legitimate andthat the communications sought are relevant to that inquiry, it shall deny themotion or application and order such process enforced. if the court finds that theapplicant is the subscriber or customer for whom the communications sought bythe governmental entity are maintained, and that there is not a reason to believethat the communications sought are relevant to a legitimate law enforcementinquiry, or that there has not been substantial compliance with the provisions ofthis chapter, it shall order the process quashed.(5)a court order denying a motion or application under this section shall notbe deemed a final order and no interlocutory appeal may be taken therefrom bythe customer.sec. 2705.delayed notice.(a)delay of notification.ñ(1)a governmental entity acting under section 2703(b) of this title mayñ(a)where a court order is sought, include in the application a request, whichthe court shall grant, for an order delaying the notification required under section2703(b) of this title for a period not to exceed ninety days, if the court determinesthat there is reason to believe that notification of the existence of the court ordermay have an adverse result described in paragraph (2) of this subsection; or(b)where an administrative subpoena authorized by a federal or state statuteor a federal or state grand jury subpoena is obtained, delay the notification required under section 2703(b) of this title for a period not to exceed ninety daysupon the execution of a written certification of a supervisory official that there isreason to believe that notification of the existence of the subpoena may have anadverse result described in paragraph (2) of this subsection.(2)an adverse result for the purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection isñ(a)endangering the life or physical safety of an individual;(b)flight from prosecution;(c)destruction of or tampering with evidence;(d)intimidation of potential witnesses; or(e)otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly delaying a trial.(3)the governmental entity shall maintain a true copy of certification underparagraph (1)(b).(4)extensions of the delay of notification provided in section 2703 of up to ninetycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.532appendix ndays each may be granted by the court upon application, or by certification by agovernmental entity, but only in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.(5)upon expiration of the period of delay of notification under paragraph (1)or (4) of this subsection, the governmental entity shall serve upon, or deliver byregistered or firstclass mail to, the customer or subscriber a copy of the process orrequest together with notice thatñ(a)states with reasonable specificity the nature of the law enforcement inquiry;and(b)informs such customer or subscriberñ(i)that information maintained for such customer or subscriber by the serviceprovider named in such process or request was supplied to or requested by thatgovernmental authority and the date on which the supplying or request tookplace;(ii)that notification of such customer or subscriber was delayed;(iii)what governmental entity or court made the certification or determinationpursuant to which that delay was made; and(iv)which provision of this chapter allowed such delay.(6)as used in this subsection, the term ôsupervisory officialõ means the investigative agent in charge or assistant investigative agent in charge or an equivalentof an investigating agencyõs headquarters or regional office, or the chief prosecuting attorney or the first assistant prosecuting attorney or an equivalent of a prosecuting attorneyõs headquarters or regional office.(b)preclusion of notice to subject of governmental access.ña governmental entity acting under section 2703, when it is not required to notify thesubscriber or customer under section 2703(b)(1), or to the extent that it may delaysuch notice pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, may apply to a court for anorder commanding a provider of electronic communications service or remotecomputing service to whom a warrant, subpoena, or court order is directed, forsuch period as the court deems appropriate, not to notify any other person of theexistence of the warrant, subpoena, or court order. the court shall enter such anorder if it determines that there is reason to believe that notification of the existence of the warrant, subpoena, or court order will result inñ(1)endangering the life or physical safety of an individual;(2)flight from prosecution;(3)destruction of or tampering with evidence;(4)intimidation of potential witnesses; or(5)otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly delaying a trial.sec. 2706.cost reimbursement.(a)payment.ñexcept as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a governmental entity obtaining the contents of communications, records, or other information under section 2702, 2703, or 2704 of this title shall pay to the person orentity assembling or providing such information a fee for reimbursement for suchcosts as are reasonably necessary and which have been directly incurred in searchcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations533ing for, assembling, reproducing, or otherwise providing such information. suchreimbursable costs shall include any costs due to necessary disruption of normaloperations of any electronic communication service or remote computing servicein which such information may be stored.(b)amount.ñthe amount of the fee provided by subsection (a) shall be asmutually agreed by the governmental entity and the person or entity providingthe information, or, in the absence of agreement, shall be as determined by thecourt which issued the order for production of such information (or the courtbefore which a criminal prosecution relating to such information would bebrought, if no court order was issued for production of the information).(c)exception.ñthe requirement of subsection (a) of this section does notapply with respect to records or other information maintained by a communications common carrier that relate to telephone toll records and telephone listingsobtained under section 2703 of this title. the court may, however, order a payment as described in subsection (a) if the court determines the information required is unusually voluminous in nature or otherwise caused an undue burdenon the provider.sec. 2707.civil action.(a)cause of action.ñexcept as provided in section 2703(e), any providerof electronic communication service, subscriber, or customer aggrieved by anyviolation of this chapter in which the conduct constituting the violation is engaged in with a knowing or intentional state of mind may, in a civil action, recoverfrom the person or entity which engaged in that violation such relief as may beappropriate.(b)relief.ñin a civil action under this section, appropriate relief includesñ(1)such preliminary and other equitable or declaratory relief as may be appropriate;(2)damages under subsection (c); and(3)a reasonable attorneyõs fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred.(c)damages.ñthe court may assess as damages in a civil action under thissection the sum of the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff and any profitsmade by the violator as a result of the violation, but in no case shall a personentitled to recover receive less than the sum of $1,000.(d)defense.ña good faith reliance onñ(1)a court warrant or order, a grand jury subpoena, a legislative authorization,or a statutory authorization;(2)a request of an investigative or law enforcement officer under section 2518(7)of this title; or(3)a good faith determination that section 2511(3) of this title permitted thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.534appendix nconduct complained of; is a complete defense to any civil or criminal actionbrought under this chapter or any other law.(e)limitation.ña civil action under this section may not be commencedlater than two years after the date upon which the claimant first discovered or hada reasonable opportunity to discover the violation.sec. 2708.exclusivity of remedies.the remedies and sanctions described in this chapter are the only judicialremedies and sanctions for nonconstitutional violations of this chapter.sec. 2709.counterintelligence access to telephone toll and transactionalrecords.(a)duty to provide.ña wire or electronic communication service provider shall comply with a request for subscriber information and toll billingrecords information, or electronic communication transactional records in its custody or possession made by the director of the federal bureau of investigationunder subsection (b) of this section.(b)required certification.ñthe director of the federal bureau of investigation (or an individual within the federal bureau of investigation designated forthis purpose by the director) may request any such information and records if thedirector (or the directorõs designee) certifies in writing to the wire or electroniccommunication service provider to which the request is made thatñ(1)the information sought is relevant to an authorized foreign counterintelligence investigation; and(2)there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the person or entity to whom the information sought pertains is a foreign power or anagent of a foreign power as defined in section 101 of the foreign intelligencesurveillance act of 1978 (50 u.s.c. 1801).(c)prohibition of certain disclosure.ñno wire or electronic communication service provider, or officer, employee, or agent thereof, shall disclose to anyperson that the federal bureau of investigation has sought or obtained access toinformation or records under this section.(d)dissemination by bureau.ñthe federal bureau of investigation maydisseminate information and records obtained under this section only as provided in guidelines approved by the attorney general for foreign intelligencecollection and foreign counterintelligence investigations conducted by the federal bureau of investigation, and, with respect to dissemination to an agency ofthe united states, only if such information is clearly relevant to the authorizedresponsibilities of such agency.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations535(e)requirement that certain congressional bodies be informed.ñon asemiannual basis the director of the federal bureau of investigation shall fullyinform the permanent select committee on intelligence of the house of representatives and the select committee on intelligence of the senate concerning all requests made under subsection (b) of this section.sec. 2710.wrongful disclosure of video tape rental or sale records. . . .sec. 2711.definitions for chapter.as used in this chapterñ(1)the terms defined in section 2510 of this title have, respectively, thedefinitions given such terms in that section; and(2)the term ôremote computing serviceõ means the provision to the publicof computer storage or processing services by means of an electronic communications system.chapter 206sec. 3121.general prohibition on pen register and trap and trace device use;exception.(a)in general.ñexcept as provided in this section, no person may installor use a pen register or a trap and trace device without first obtaining a courtorder under section 3123 of this title or under the foreign intelligence surveillanceact of 1978 (50 u.s.c. 1801 et seq.).(b)exception.ñthe prohibition of subsection (a) does not apply with respect to the use of a pen register or a trap and trace device by a provider ofelectronic or wire communication serviceñ(1)relating to the operation, maintenance, and testing of a wire or electroniccommunication service or to the protection of the rights or property of such provider, or to the protection of users of that service from abuse of service or unlawful use of service; or(2)to record the fact that a wire or electronic communication was initiated orcompleted in order to protect such provider, another provider furnishing servicetoward the completion of the wire communication, or a user of that service, fromfraudulent, unlawful or abusive use of service; or(3)where the consent of the user of that service has been obtained.(c)limitation.ña government agency authorized to install and use a penregister under this chapter or under state law shall use technology reasonablyavailable to it that restricts the recording or decoding of electronic or other impulses to the dialing and signaling information utilized in call processing.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.536appendix n(d)penalty.ñwhoever knowingly violates subsection (a) shall be finedunder this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.sec. 3122.application for an order for a pen register or a trap and trace device.(a)application.ñ(1) an attorney for the government may make application for an order or an extension of an order under section 3123 of this titleauthorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen register or a trap andtrace device under this chapter, in writing under oath or equivalent affirmation, toa court of competent jurisdiction.(2)unless prohibited by state law, a state investigative or law enforcementofficer may make application for an order or an extension of an order undersection 3123 of this title authorizing or approving the installation and use of a penregister or a trap and trace device under this chapter, in writing under oath orequivalent affirmation, to a court of competent jurisdiction of such state.(b)contents of application.ñan application under subsection (a) of thissection shall includeñ(1)the identity of the attorney for the government or the state law enforcementor investigative officer making the application and the identity of the law enforcement agency conducting the investigation; and(2)a certification by the applicant that the information likely to be obtained isrelevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by that agency.sec. 3123.issuance of an order for a pen register or a trap and trace device.(a)in general.ñupon an application made under section 3122 of this title,the court shall enter an ex parte order authorizing the installation and use of a penregister or a trap and trace device within the jurisdiction of the court if the courtfinds that the attorney for the government or the state law enforcement or investigative officer has certified to the court that the information likely to be obtainedby such installation and use is relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation.(b)contents of order.ñan order issued under this sectionñ(1)shall specifyñ(a)the identity, if known, of the person to whom is leased or in whose name islisted the telephone line to which the pen register or trap and trace device is to beattached;(b)the identity, if known, of the person who is the subject of the criminalinvestigation;(c)the number and, if known, physical location of the telephone line to whichthe pen register or trap and trace device is to be attached and, in the case of a trapand trace device, the geographic limits of the trap and trace order; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations537(d)a statement of the offense to which the information likely to be obtained bythe pen register or trap and trace device relates; and(2)shall direct, upon the request of the applicant, the furnishing of information,facilities, and technical assistance necessary to accomplish the installation of thepen register or trap and trace device under section 3124 of this title.(c)time period and extensions.ñ(1)an order issued under this section shall authorize the installation and use ofa pen register or a trap and trace device for a period not to exceed sixty days.(2)extensions of such an order may be granted, but only upon an applicationfor an order under section 3122 of this title and upon the judicial finding requiredby subsection (a) of this section. the period of extension shall be for a period notto exceed sixty days.(d)nondisclosure of existence of pen register or a trap and trace device.ñan order authorizing or approving the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace device shall direct thatñ(1)the order be sealed until otherwise ordered by the court; and(2)the person owning or leasing the line to which the pen register or a trap andtrace device is attached, or who has been ordered by the court to provide assistance to the applicant, not disclose the existence of the pen register or trap andtrace device or the existence of the investigation to the listed subscriber, or to anyother person, unless or until otherwise ordered by the court.sec. 3124.assistance in installation and use of a pen register or a trap andtrace device.(a)pen registers.ñupon the request of an attorney for the government oran officer of a law enforcement agency authorized to install and use a pen registerunder this chapter, a provider of wire or electronic communication service, landlord, custodian, or other person shall furnish such investigative or law enforcement officer forthwith all information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to accomplish the installation of the pen register unobtrusively and with aminimum of interference with the services that the person so ordered by the courtaccords the party with respect to whom the installation and use is to take place, ifsuch assistance is directed by a court order as provided in section 3123(b)(2) ofthis title.(b)trap and trace device.ñupon the request of an attorney for the government or an officer of a law enforcement agency authorized to receive theresults of a trap and trace device under this chapter, a provider of a wire orelectronic communication service, landlord, custodian, or other person shall install such device forthwith on the appropriate line and shall furnish such investigative or law enforcement officer all additional information, facilities and technicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.538appendix ncal assistance including installation and operation of the device unobtrusivelyand with a minimum of interference with the services that the person so orderedby the court accords the party with respect to whom the installation and use is totake place, if such installation and assistance is directed by a court order as provided in section 3123(b)(2) of this title. unless otherwise ordered by the court, theresults of the trap and trace device shall be furnished, pursuant to section 3123(b)or section 3125 of this title, to the officer of a law enforcement agency, designatedin the court order, at reasonable intervals during regular business hours for theduration of the order.(c)compensation.ña provider of a wire or electronic communication service, landlord, custodian, or other person who furnishes facilities or technicalassistance pursuant to this section shall be reasonably compensated for such reasonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities and assistance.(d)no cause of action against a provider disclosing information underthis chapter.ñno cause of action shall lie in any court against any provider of awire or electronic communication service, its officers, employees, agents, or otherspecified persons for providing information, facilities, or assistance in accordancewith the terms of a court order under this chapter or request pursuant to section3125 of this title.(e)defense.ña good faith reliance on a court order under this chapter, arequest pursuant to section 3125 of this title, a legislative authorization, or a statutory authorization is a complete defense against any civil or criminal action broughtunder this chapter or any other law.sec. 3125.emergency pen register and trap and trace device installation.(a)notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any investigativeor law enforcement officer, specially designated by the attorney general, thedeputy attorney general, the associate attorney general, any assistant attorney general, any acting assistant attorney general, or any deputy assistantattorney general, or by the principal prosecuting attorney of any state or subdivision thereof acting pursuant to a statute of that state, who reasonably determines thatñ(1)an emergency situation exists that involvesñ(a)immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury to any person; or(b)conspiratorial activities characteristic of organized crime,that requires the installation and use of a pen register or a trap and trace devicebefore an order authorizing such installation and use can, with due diligence, beobtained, and(2)there are grounds upon which an order could be entered under this chapterto authorize such installation and use ôõ1 may have installed and use a pen registercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations539or trap and trace device if, within fortyeight hours after the installation hasoccurred, or begins to occur, an order approving the installation or use is issued inaccordance with section 3123 of this title.õõ4(b)in the absence of an authorizing order, such use shall immediatelyterminate when the information sought is obtained, when the application for theorder is denied or when fortyeight hours have lapsed since the installation of thepen register or trap and trace device, whichever is earlier.(c)the knowing installation or use by any investigative or law enforcement officer of a pen register or trap and trace device pursuant to subsection (a)without application for the authorizing order within fortyeight hours of the installation shall constitute a violation of this chapter.(d)a provider for a wire or electronic service, landlord, custodian, or otherperson who furnished facilities or technical assistance pursuant to this sectionshall be reasonably compensated for such reasonable expenses incurred in providing such facilities and assistance.sec. 3126.reports concerning pen registers and trap and trace devices.the attorney general shall annually report to congress on the number ofpen register orders and orders for trap and trace devices applied for by lawenforcement agencies of the department of justice.sec. 3127.definitions for chapter.as used in this chapterñ(1)the terms ôõwire communicationõõ, ôõelectronic communicationõõ, andôõelectronic communication serviceõõ have the meanings set forth for such terms insection 2510 of this title;(2)the term ôõcourt of competent jurisdictionõõ meansñ(a)a district court of the united states (including a magistrate of such a court)or a united states court of appeals; or(b)a court of general criminal jurisdiction of a state authorized by the law ofthat state to enter orders authorizing the use of a pen register or a trap and tracedevice;4so in original. a comma probably should appear after the word ôõuseõõ, the quotationmarks probably should not appear, and the words beginning with ôõmayõõ probably shouldappear flush left.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.540appendix n(3)the term ôõpen registerõõ means a device which records or decodes electronic or other impulses which identify the numbers dialed or otherwise transmitted on the telephone line to which such device is attached, but such term does notinclude any device used by a provider or customer of a wire or electronic communication service for billing, or recording as an incident to billing, for communications services provided by such provider or any device used by a provider orcustomer of a wire communication service for cost accounting or other like purposes in the ordinary course of its business;(4)the term ôõtrap and trace deviceõõ means a device which captures theincoming electronic or other impulses which identify the originating number ofan instrument or device from which a wire or electronic communication wastransmitted;(5)the term ôõattorney for the governmentõõ has the meaning given suchterm for the purposes of the federal rules of criminal procedure; and(6)the term ôõstateõõ means a state, the district of columbia, puerto rico,and any other possession or territory of the united states.n.1.4communications assistance forlaw enforcement act of 1995title iñinterception of digital and other communicationssec. 101.short title.this title may be cited as the òcommunications assistance for law enforcement actó.sec. 102.definitions.for purposes of this titleñ(1)the terms defined in section 2510 of title 18, united states code, have,respectively, the meanings stated in that section.(2)the term òcallidentifying informationó means dialing or signaling information that identifies the origin, direction, destination, or termination of eachcommunication generated or received by a subscriber by means of any equipment, facility, or service of a telecommunications carrier.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations541(3)the term òcommissionó means the federal communications commission.(4)the term òelectronic messaging servicesó means softwarebased services that enable the sharing of data, images, sound, writing, or other informationamong computing devices controlled by the senders or recipients of the messages.(5)the term ògovernmentó means the government of the united statesand any agency or instrumentality thereof, the district of columbia, any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the united states, and any state or politicalsubdivision thereof authorized by law to conduct electronic surveillance.(6)the term òinformation servicesóñ(a)means the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information viatelecommunications; and(b)includesñ(i)a service that permits a customer to retrieve stored information from, or fileinformation for storage in, information storage facilities;(ii)electronic publishing; and(iii)electronic messaging services; but(c)does not include any capability for a telecommunications carrierõs internalmanagement, control, or operation of its telecommunications network.(7)the term òtelecommunications support servicesó means a product, software, or service used by a telecommunications carrier for the internal signaling orswitching functions of its telecommunications network.(8)the term òtelecommunications carrieróñ(a)means a person or entity engaged in the transmission or switching of wireor electronic communications as a common carrier for hire; and(b)includesñ(i)a person or entity engaged in providing commercial mobile service (as defined in section 332(d) of the communications act of 1934 (47 u.s.c. 332(d))); or(ii)a person or entity engaged in providing wire or electronic communicationswitching or transmission service to the extent that the commission finds thatsuch service is a replacement for a substantial portion of the local telephone exchange service and that it is in the public interest to deem such a person or entityto be a telecommunications carrier for purposes of this title; but(c)does not includeñ(i)persons or entities insofar as they are engaged in providing informationservices; and(ii)any class or category of telecommunications carriers that the commissionexempts by rule after consultation with the attorney general.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.542appendix nsec. 103.assistance capability requirements.(a)capability requirements.ñexcept as provided in subsections (b), (c),and (d) of this section and sections 108(a) and 109(b) and (d), a telecommunications carrier shall ensure that its equipment, facilities, or services that provide acustomer or subscriber with the ability to originate, terminate, or direct communications are capable ofñ(1)expeditiously isolating and enabling the government, pursuant to a courtorder or other lawful authorization, to intercept, to the exclusion of any othercommunications, all wire and electronic communications carried by the carrierwithin a service area to or from equipment, facilities, or services of a subscriber ofsuch carrier concurrently with their transmission to or from the subscriberõs equipment, facility, or service, or at such later time as may be acceptable to the government;(2)expeditiously isolating and enabling the government, pursuant to a courtorder or other lawful authorization, to access callidentifying information that isreasonably available to the carrierñ(a)before, during, or immediately after the transmission of a wire or electroniccommunication (or at such later time as may be acceptable to the government);and(b)in a manner that allows it to be associated with the communication to whichit pertains, except that, with regard to information acquired solely pursuant to theauthority for pen registers and trap and trace devices (as defined in section 3127 oftitle 18, united states code), such callidentifying information shall not includeany information that may disclose the physical location of the subscriber (exceptto the extent that the location may be determined from the telephone number);(3)delivering intercepted communications and callidentifying information tothe government, pursuant to a court order or other lawful authorization, in aformat such that they may be transmitted by means of equipment, facilities, orservices procured by the government to a location other than the premises of thecarrier; and(4)facilitating authorized communications interceptions and access to callidentifying information unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with anysubscriberõs telecommunications service and in a manner that protectsñ(a)the privacy and security of communications and callidentifying information not authorized to be intercepted; and(b)information regarding the governmentõs interception of communicationsand access to callidentifying information.(b)limitations.ñ(1)design of features and systems configurations.ñthis title does not authorize any law enforcement agency or officerñ(a)to require any specific design of equipment, facilities, services, features, orsystem configurations to be adopted by any provider of a wire or electronic communication service, any manufacturer of telecommunications equipment, or anyprovider of telecommunications support services; orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations543(b)to prohibit the adoption of any equipment, facility, service, or feature by anyprovider of a wire or electronic communication service, any manufacturer of telecommunications equipment, or any provider of telecommunications support services.(2)information services; private networks and interconnection services andfacilities.ñthe requirements of subsection (a) do not apply toñ(a)information services; or(b)equipment, facilities, or services that support the transport or switching ofcommunications for private networks or for the sole purpose of interconnectingtelecommunications carriers.(3)encryption.ña telecommunications carrier shall not be responsible for decrypting, or ensuring the governmentõs ability to decrypt, any communicationencrypted by a subscriber or customer, unless the encryption was provided by thecarrier and the carrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt the communication.(c)emergency or exigent circumstances.ñin emergency or exigent circumstances (including those described in sections 2518 (7) or (11)(b) and 3125 oftitle 18, united states code, and section 1805(e) of title 50 of such code), a carrierat its discretion may comply with subsection (a)(3) by allowing monitoring at itspremises if that is the only means of accomplishing the interception or access.(d)mobile service assistance requirements.ña telecommunications carrier that is a provider of commercial mobile service (as defined in section 332(d) ofthe communications act of 1934) offering a feature or service that allows subscribers to redirect, hand off, or assign their wire or electronic communications toanother service area or another service provider or to utilize facilities in anotherservice area or of another service provider shall ensure that, when the carrier thathad been providing assistance for the interception of wire or electronic communications or access to callidentifying information pursuant to a court order or lawful authorization no longer has access to the content of such communications orcallidentifying information within the service area in which interception has beenoccurring as a result of the subscriberõs use of such a feature or service, information is made available to the government (before, during, or immediately after thetransfer of such communications) identifying the provider of wire or electroniccommunication service that has acquired access to the communications.sec. 104.notices of capacity requirements.(a)notices of maximum and actual capacity requirements.ñ(1)in general.ñnot later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title,after consulting with state and local law enforcement agencies, telecommunications carriers, providers of telecommunications support services, and manufacturers of telecommunications equipment, and after notice and comment, the attorney general shall publish in the federal register and provide to appropriatetelecommunications industry associations and standardsetting organizationsñcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.544appendix n(a)notice of the actual number of communication interceptions, pen registers,and trap and trace devices, representing a portion of the maximum capacity setforth under subparagraph (b), that the attorney general estimates that government agencies authorized to conduct electronic surveillance may conduct and usesimultaneously by the date that is 4 years after the date of enactment of this title;and(b)notice of the maximum capacity required to accommodate all of the communication interceptions, pen registers, and trap and trace devices that the attorneygeneral estimates that government agencies authorized to conduct electronic surveillance may conduct and use simultaneously after the date that is 4 years afterthe date of enactment of this title.(2)basis of notices.ñthe notices issued under paragraph (1)ñ(a)may be based upon the type of equipment, type of service, number of subscribers, type or size or carrier, nature of service area, or any other measure; and(b)shall identify, to the maximum extent practicable, the capacity required atspecific geographic locations.(b)compliance with capacity notices.ñ(1)initial capacity.ñwithin 3 years after the publication by the attorney general of a notice of capacity requirements or within 4 years after the date of enactment of this title, whichever is longer, a telecommunications carrier shall, subjectto subsection (e), ensure that its systems are capable ofñ(a)accommodating simultaneously the number of interceptions, pen registers,and trap and trace devices set forth in the notice under subsection (a)(1)(a); and(b)expanding to the maximum capacity set forth in the notice under subsection(a)(1)(b).(2)expansion to maximum capacity.ñafter the date described in paragraph(1), a telecommunications carrier shall, subject to subsection (e), ensure that it canaccommodate expeditiously any increase in the actual number of communicationinterceptions, pen registers, and trap and trace devices that authorized agenciesmay seek to conduct and use, up to the maximum capacity requirement set forthin the notice under subsection (a)(1)(b).(c)notices of increased maximum capacity requirements.ñ(1)notice.ñthe attorney general shall periodically publish in the federal register, after notice and comment, notice of any necessary increases in the maximumcapacity requirement set forth in the notice under subsection (a)(1)(b).(2)compliance.ñwithin 3 years after notice of increased maximum capacityrequirements is published under paragraph (1), or within such longer time periodas the attorney general may specify, a telecommunications carrier shall, subjectto subsection (e), ensure that its systems are capable of expanding to the increasedmaximum capacity set forth in the notice.(d)carrier statement.ñwithin 180 days after the publication by the attorney general of a notice of capacity requirements pursuant to subsection (a) or (c),a telecommunications carrier shall submit to the attorney general a statementidentifying any of its systems or services that do not have the capacity to accomcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations545modate simultaneously the number of interceptions, pen registers, and trap andtrace devices set forth in the notice under such subsection.(e)reimbursement required for compliance.ñthe attorney general shallreview the statements submitted under subsection (d) and may, subject to theavailability of appropriations, agree to reimburse a telecommunications carrierfor costs directly associated with modifications to attain such capacity requirement that are determined to be reasonable in accordance with section 109(e). untilthe attorney general agrees to reimburse such carrier for such modification, suchcarrier shall be considered to be in compliance with the capacity notices undersubsection (a) or (c).sec. 105.systems security and integrity.a telecommunications carrier shall ensure that any interception of communications or access to callidentifying information effected within its switchingpremises can be activated only in accordance with a court order or other lawfulauthorization and with the affirmative intervention of an individual officer oremployee of the carrier acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by thecommission.sec. 106.cooperation of equipment manufacturers and providers of telecommunications support services.(a)consultation.ña telecommunications carrier shall consult, as necessary, in a timely fashion with manufacturers of its telecommunications transmission and switching equipment and its providers of telecommunications supportservices for the purpose of ensuring that current and planned equipment, facilities, and services comply with the capability requirements of section 103 and thecapacity requirements identified by the attorney general under section 104.(b)cooperation.ñsubject to sections 104(e), 108(a), and 109(b) and (d), amanufacturer of telecommunications transmission or switching equipment and aprovider of telecommunications support services shall, on a reasonably timelybasis and at a reasonable charge, make available to the telecommunications carriers using its equipment, facilities, or services such features or modifications as arenecessary to permit such carriers to comply with the capability requirements ofsection 103 and the capacity requirements identified by the attorney generalunder section 104.sec. 107.technical requirements and standards; extension of compliance date.(a)safe harbor.ñ(1)consultation.ñto ensure the efficient and industrywide implementationcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.546appendix nof the assistance capability requirements under section 103, the attorney general,in coordination with other federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies,shall consult with appropriate associations and standardsetting organizations ofthe telecommunications industry, with representatives of users of telecommunications equipment, facilities, and services, and with state utility commissions.(2)compliance under accepted standards.ña telecommunications carrier shallbe found to be in compliance with the assistance capability requirements undersection 103, and a manufacturer of telecommunications transmission or switchingequipment or a provider of telecommunications support services shall be found tobe in compliance with section 106, if the carrier, manufacturer, or support serviceprovider is in compliance with publicly available technical requirements or standards adopted by an industry association or standardsetting organization, or bythe commission under subsection (b), to meet the requirements of section 103.(3)absence of standards.ñthe absence of technical requirements or standardsfor implementing the assistance capability requirements of section 103 shall notñ(a)preclude a telecommunications carrier, manufacturer, or telecommunications support services provider from deploying a technology or service; or(b)relieve a carrier, manufacturer, or telecommunications support services provider of the obligations imposed by section 103 or 106, as applicable.(b)commission authority.ñif industry associations or standardsettingorganizations fail to issue technical requirements or standards or if a governmentagency or any other person believes that such requirements or standards aredeficient, the agency or person may petition the commission to establish, by rule,technical requirements or standards thatñ(1)meet the assistance capability requirements of section 103 by costeffectivemethods;(2)protect the privacy and security of communications not authorized to beintercepted;(3)minimize the cost of such compliance on residential ratepayers;(4)serve the policy of the united states to encourage the provision of newtechnologies and services to the public; and(5)provide a reasonable time and conditions for compliance with and the transition to any new standard, including defining the obligations of telecommunications carriers under section 103 during any transition period.(c)extension of compliance date for equipment, facilities, and services.ñ(1)petition.ña telecommunications carrier proposing to install or deploy, orhaving installed or deployed, any equipment, facility, or service prior to the effective date of section 103 may petition the commission for 1 or more extensions ofthe deadline for complying with the assistance capability requirements undersection 103.(2)grounds for extension.ñthe commission may, after consultation with theattorney general, grant an extension under this subsection, if the commissiondetermines that compliance with the assistance capability requirements undersection 103 is not reasonably achievable through application of technology available within the compliance period.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations547(3)length of extension.ñan extension under this subsection shall extend forno longer than the earlier ofñ(a)the date determined by the commission as necessary for the carrier to comply with the assistance capability requirements under section 103; or(b)the date that is 2 years after the date on which the extension is granted.(4)applicability of extension.ñan extension under this subsection shall applyto only that part of the carrierõs business on which the new equipment, facility, orservice is used.sec. 108.enforcement orders.(a)grounds for issuance.ña court shall issue an order enforcing this titleunder section 2522 of title 18, united states code, only if the court finds thatñ(1)alternative technologies or capabilities or the facilities of another carrier arenot reasonably available to law enforcement for implementing the interception ofcommunications or access to callidentifying information; and(2)compliance with the requirements of this title is reasonably achievable throughthe application of available technology to the equipment, facility, or service at issueor would have been reasonably achievable if timely action had been taken.(b)time for compliance.ñupon issuing an order enforcing this title, thecourt shall specify a reasonable time and conditions for complying with its order,considering the good faith efforts to comply in a timely manner, any effect on thecarrierõs, manufacturerõs, or service providerõs ability to continue to do business,the degree of culpability or delay in undertaking efforts to comply, and such othermatters as justice may require.(c)limitations.ñan order enforcing this title may notñ(1)require a telecommunications carrier to meet the governmentõs demand forinterception of communications and acquisition of callidentifying information toany extent in excess of the capacity for which the attorney general has agreed toreimburse such carrier;(2)require any telecommunications carrier to comply with assistance capabilityrequirement of section 103 if the commission has determined (pursuant to section109(b)(1)) that compliance is not reasonably achievable, unless the attorney general has agreed (pursuant to section 109(b)(2)) to pay the costs described in section109(b)(2)(a); or(3)require a telecommunications carrier to modify, for the purpose of complying with the assistance capability requirements of section 103, any equipment,facility, or service deployed on or before january 1, 1995, unlessñ(a)the attorney general has agreed to pay the telecommunications carrier forall reasonable costs directly associated with modifications necessary to bring theequipment, facility, or service into compliance with those requirements; or(b)the equipment, facility, or service has been replaced or significantly upgraded or otherwise undergoes major modification.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.548appendix nsec. 109.payment of costs of telecommunications carriers to comply with capability requirements.(a)equipment, facilities, and services deployed on or before january 1,1995.ñthe attorney general may, subject to the availability of appropriations,agree to pay telecommunications carriers for all reasonable costs directly associated with the modifications performed by carriers in connection with equipment,facilities, and services installed or deployed on or before january 1, 1995, to establish the capabilities necessary to comply with section 103.(b)equipment, facilities, and services deployed after january 1, 1995.ñ(1)determinations of reasonably achievable.ñthe commission, on petitionfrom a telecommunications carrier or any other interested person, and after noticeto the attorney general, shall determine whether compliance with the assistancecapability requirements of section 103 is reasonably achievable with respect toany equipment, facility, or service installed or deployed after january 1, 1995. thecommission shall make such determination within 1 year after the date suchpetition is filed. in making such determination, the commission shall determinewhether compliance would impose significant difficulty or expense on the carrieror on the users of the carrierõs systems and shall consider the following factors:(a)the effect on public safety and national security.(b)the effect on rates for basic residential telephone service.(c)the need to protect the privacy and security of communications not authorized to be intercepted.(d)the need to achieve the capability assistance requirements of section 103 bycosteffective methods.(e)the effect on the nature and cost of the equipment, facility, or service atissue.(f)the effect on the operation of the equipment, facility, or service at issue.(g)the policy of the united states to encourage the provision of new technologies and services to the public.(h)the financial resources of the telecommunications carrier.(i)the effect on competition in the provision of telecommunications services.(j)the extent to which the design and development of the equipment, facility,or service was initiated before january 1, 1995.(k)such other factors as the commission determines are appropriate.(2)compensation.ñif compliance with the assistance capability requirementsof section 103 is not reasonably achievable with respect to equipment, facilities, orservices deployed after january 1, 1995ñ(a)the attorney general, on application of a telecommunications carrier, mayagree, subject to the availability of appropriations, to pay the telecommunicationscarrier for the additional reasonable costs of making compliance with such assistance capability requirements reasonably achievable; and(b)if the attorney general does not agree to pay such costs, the telecommunications carrier shall be deemed to be in compliance with such capability requirements.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations549(c)allocation of funds for payment.ñthe attorney general shall allocatefunds appropriated to carry out this title in accordance with law enforcementpriorities determined by the attorney general.(d)failure to make payment with respect to equipment, facilities, andservices deployed on or before january 1, 1995.ñif a carrier has requested payment in accordance with procedures promulgated pursuant to subsection (e), andthe attorney general has not agreed to pay the telecommunications carrier for allreasonable costs directly associated with modifications necessary to bring anyequipment, facility, or service deployed on or before january 1, 1995, into compliance with the assistance capability requirements of section 103, such equipment,facility, or service shall be considered to be in compliance with the assistancecapability requirements of section 103 until the equipment, facility, or service isreplaced or significantly upgraded or otherwise undergoes major modification.(e)cost control regulations.ñ(1)in general.ñthe attorney general shall, after notice and comment, establish regulations necessary to effectuate timely and costefficient payment to telecommunications carriers under this title, under chapters 119 and 121 of title 18,united states code, and under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978(50 u.s.c. 1801 et seq.).(2)contents of regulations.ñthe attorney general, after consultation with thecommission, shall prescribe regulations for purposes of determining reasonablecosts under this title. such regulations shall seek to minimize the cost to thefederal government and shallñ(a)permit recovery from the federal government ofñ(i)the direct costs of developing the modifications described in subsection (a),of providing the capabilities requested under subsection (b)(2), or of providingthe capacities requested under section 104(e), but only to the extent that such costshave not been recovered from any other governmental or nongovernmental entity;(ii)the costs of training personnel in the use of such capabilities or capacities;and(iii)the direct costs of deploying or installing such capabilities or capacities;(b)in the case of any modification that may be used for any purpose other thanlawfully authorized electronic surveillance by a law enforcement agency of agovernment, permit recovery of only the incremental cost of making the modification suitable for such law enforcement purposes; and(c)maintain the confidentiality of trade secrets.(3)submission of claims.ñsuch regulations shall require any telecommunications carrier that the attorney general has agreed to pay for modifications pursuant to this section and that has installed or deployed such modification to submitto the attorney general a claim for payment that contains or is accompanied bysuch information as the attorney general may require.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.550appendix nsec. 110.authorization of appropriations.there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title a total of$500,000,000 for fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998. such sums are authorizedto remain available until expended.sec. 111.effective date.(a)in general.ñexcept as provided in subsection (b), this title shall takeeffect on the date of enactment of this act.(b)assistance capability and systems security and integrity requirements.ñsections 103 and 105 of this title shall take effect on the date that is 4 yearsafter the date of enactment of this act.sec. 112.reports.(a)reports by the attorney general.ñ(1)in general.ñon or before november 30, 1995, and on or before november30 of each year thereafter, the attorney general shall submit to congress andmake available to the public a report on the amounts paid during the precedingfiscal year to telecommunications carriers under sections 104(e) and 109.(2)contents.ña report under paragraph (1) shall includeñ(a)a detailed accounting of the amounts paid to each carrier and the equipment, facility, or service for which the amounts were paid; and(b)projections of the amounts expected to be paid in the current fiscal year, thecarriers to which payment is expected to be made, and the equipment, facilities, orservices for which payment is expected to be made.(b)reports by the comptroller general.ñ(1)payments for modifications.ñon or before april 1, 1996, and every 2 yearsthereafter, the comptroller general of the united states, after consultation withthe attorney general and the telecommunications industry, shall submit to thecongress a reportñ(a)describing the type of equipment, facilities, and services that have beenbrought into compliance under this title; and(b)reflecting its analysis of the reasonableness and costeffectiveness of thepayments made by the attorney general to telecommunications carriers for modifications necessary to ensure compliance with this title.(2)compliance cost estimates.ña report under paragraph (1) shall include thefindings and conclusions of the comptroller general on the costs to be incurredby telecommunications carriers to comply with the assistance capability requirements of section 103 after the effective date of such section 103, including projections of the amounts expected to be incurred and a description of the equipment,facilities, or services for which they are expected to be incurred.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations551n.1.5computer security act of 1987sec. 1.short title.the act may be cited as the òcomputer security act of 1987ó.sec. 2.purpose.(a)in general.ñthe congress declares that improving the security andprivacy of sensitive information in federal computer systems is in the publicinterest, and hereby creates a means for establishing minimum acceptable security practices for such systems, without limiting the scope of security measuresalready planned or in use.(b)specific purposes.ñthe purposes of this act areñ(1)by amending the act of march 3, 1901, to assign to thenational bureau ofstandards responsibility for developing standards and guidelines for federal computer systems, including responsibility for developing standards and guidelinesneeded to assure the costeffective security and privacy of sensitive information infederal computer systems, drawing on the technical advice and assistance (including work products) of the national security agency, where appropriate;(2)to provide for promulgation of such standards and guidelines by amendingsection 111(d) of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949;(3)to require establishment of security plans by all operators of federal computer systems that contain sensitive information; and(4)to require mandatory periodic training for all persons involved in management, use, or operation of federal computer systems that contain sensitive information.sec. 3.establishment of computer standards program.the act of march 3, 1901, (15 u.s.c. 271278h), is amendedñ(1)in section 2(f), by striking out òandó at the end of paragraph (18), bystriking out the period at the end of paragraph (19) and inserting in lieu thereof: ò; andó, and by inserting after such paragraph the following:ò(20) the study of computer systems (as that term is defined in section 20(d) ofthis act) and their use to control machinery and processes.ó;(2)by redesignating section 20 as section 22, and by inserting after section19 the following new sections:òsec. 20. (a) the national bureau of standards shallñò(1) have the mission of developing standards, guidelines, and associated methods and techniques for computer systems;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.552appendix nò(2) except as described in paragraph (3) of this subsection (relating to securitystandards), develop uniform standards and guidelines for federal computer systems, except those systems excluded by section 2315 of title 10, united statescode, or section 3502(2) of title 44, united states code.ò(3) have responsibility within the federal government for developing technical,management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the costeffective security and privacy of sensitive information in federal computer systems exceptñò(a) those systems excluded by section 2315 of title 10, united states code, orsection 3502(2) of title 44, united states code; andò(b) those systems which are protected at all times by procedures established forinformation which has been specifically authorized under criteria established byan executive order or an act of congress to be kept secret in the interest ofnational defense or foreign policy, the primary purpose of which standards andguidelines shall be to control loss and unauthorized modification or disclosure ofsensitive information in such systems and to prevent computerrelated fraud andmisuse;ò(4) submit standards and guidelines developed pursuant to paragraphs (2) and(3) of this subsection, along with recommendations as to the extent to which theseshould be made compulsory and binding, to the secretary of commerce for promulgation under section 111(d) of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949;ò(5) develop guidelines for use by operators of federal computer systems thatcontain sensitive information in training their employees in security awarenessand accepted security practice, as required by section 5 of the computer securityact of 1987; andò(6) develop validation procedures for, and evaluate the effectiveness of, standards and guidelines developed pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of thissubsection through research and liaison with other government and private agencies.ò(b) in fulfilling subsection (a) of this section, the national bureau of standards isauthorizedñò(1) to assist the private sector, upon request, in using and applying the results ofthe programs and activities under this section;ò(2) to make recommendations, as appropriate, to the administrator of generalservices on policies and regulations proposed pursuant to section 111(d) of thefederal property and administrative services act of 1949;ò(3) as requested, to provide to operators of federal computer systems technicalassistance in implementing the standards and guidelines promulgated pursuantto section 111(d) of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949;ò(4) to assist, as appropriate, the office of personnel management in developingregulations pertaining to training, as required by section 5 of the computer security act of 1987;ò(5) to perform research and to conduct studies, as needed, to determine thenature and extent of the vulnerabilities of, and to devise techniques for the costcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations553effective security and privacy of sensitive information in federal computer systems; andò(6) to coordinate closely with other agencies and offices (including, but not limited to, the departments of defense and energy, the national security agency,the general accounting office, the office of technology assessment, and theoffice of management and budget)ñò(a) to assure maximum use of all existing and planned programs, materials,studies, and reports relating to computer systems security and privacy, in order toavoid unnecessary and costly duplication of effort; andò(b) to assure, to the maximum extent feasible, that standards developed pursuant to subsection (a) (3) and (5) are consistent and compatible with standards andprocedures developed for the protection of information in federal computer systems which is authorized under criteria established by executive order or an actof congress to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.ò(c) for the purposes ofñò(1) developing standards and guidelines for the protection of sensitive information in federal computer systems under subsections (a)(1) and (a)(3), andò(2) performing research and conducting studies under subsection (b)(5), the national bureau of standards shall draw upon computer system technical securityguidelines developed by the national security agency to the extent that the national bureau of standards determines that such guidelines are consistent withthe requirements for protecting sensitive information in federal computer systems.ò(d) as used in this sectionñò(1) the term ôcomputer systemõñò(a) means any equipment or interconnected system or subsystems of equipmentthat is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management,movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception, ofdata or information; andò(b) includesñò(i) computers;ò(ii) ancillary equipment;ò(iii) software, firmware, and similar procedures;ò(iv) services, including support services; andò(v) related resources as defined by regulations issued by the administrator forgeneral services pursuant to section 111 of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949;ò(2) the term ôfederal computer systemõñò(a) means a computer system operated by a federal agency or by a contractor ofa federal agency or other organization that processes information (using a computer system) on behalf of the federal government to accomplish a federal function; andò(b) includes automatic data processing equipment as that term is defined insection 111(a)(2) of the federal property and administrative services act of 1949;ò(3) the term ôoperator of a federal computer systemõ means a federal agency,contractor of a federal agency, or other organization that processes informationcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.554appendix nusing a computer system on behalf of the federal government to accomplish afederal function;ò(4) the term ôsensitive informationõ means any information, the loss, misuse, orunauthorized access to or modification of which could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of federal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled under section 552a of title 5, united states code (the privacyact), but which has not been specifically authorized under criteria established byan executive order or an act of congress to be kept secret in the interest ofnational defense or foreign policy; andò(5) the term ôfederal agencyõ has the meaning given such term by section 3(b) ofthe federal property and administrative services act of 1949.òsec. 21. (a) there is hereby established a computer system security and privacy advisory board within the department of commerce. the secretary of commerce shall appoint the chairman of the board. the board shall be composed oftwelve additional members appointed by the secretary of commerce as follows:ò(1) four members from outside the federal government who are eminent in thecomputer or telecommunications industry, at least one of whom is representativeof small or medium sized companies in such industries;ò(2) four members from outside the federal government who are eminent in thefields of computer or telecommunications technology, or related disciplines, butwho are not employed by or representative of a producer of computer or telecommunications equipment; andò(3) four members from the federal government who have computer systemsmanagement experience, including experience in computer systems security andprivacy, at least one of whom shall be from the national security agency.ò(b) the duties of the board shall beñò(1) to identify emerging managerial, technical, administrative, and physical safeguard issues relative to computer systems security and privacy;ò(2) to advise the bureau of standards and the secretary of commerce on securityand privacy issues pertaining to federal computer systems; andò(3) to report its findings to the secretary of commerce, the director of the officeof management and budget, the director of the national security agency, and theappropriate committees of the congress.ò(c) the term of office of each member of the board shall be four years, exceptthatñò(1) of the initial members, three shall be appointed for terms of one year, threeshall be appointed for terms of two years, three shall be appointed for terms ofthree years, and three shall be appointed for terms of four years; andò(2) any member appointed to fill a vacancy in the board shall serve for theremainder of the term for which his predecessor was appointed.ò(d) the board shall not act in the absence of a quorum, which shall consist ofseven members.ò(e) members of the board, other than fulltime employees of the federal government while attending meetings of such committees or while otherwise performcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations555ing duties at the request of the board chairman while away from their homes ora regular place of business, may be allowed travel expenses in accordance withsubchapter i of chapter 57 of title 5, united states code.ò(f) to provide the staff services necessary to assist the board in carrying out itsfunctions, the board may utilize personnel from the national bureau of standardsor any other agency of the federal government with the consent of the head of theagency.ò(g) as used in this section, the terms ôcomputer systemõ and ôfederal computersystemõ have the meanings given in section 20(d) of this act.ó; and(3) by adding at the end thereof the following new section:òsec. 23.this act may be cited as the national bureau of standards act.ósec. 4.amendment to brooks act.section 111(d) of the federal property and administrative services act of1949 (40 u.s.c. 759(d)) is amended to read as follows:ò(d)(1) the secretary of commerce shall, on the basis of standards and guidelinesdeveloped by the national bureau of standards pursuant to section 20(a) (2) and(3) of the national bureau of standards act, promulgate standards and guidelinespertaining to federal computer systems, making such standards compulsory andbinding to the extent to which the secretary determines necessary to improve theefficiency of operation or security and privacy of federal computer systems. thepresident may disapprove or modify such standards and guidelines if he determines such action to be in the public interest. the presidentõs authority to disapprove or modify such standards and guidelines may not be delegated. notice ofsuch disapproval or modification shall be submitted promptly to the committeeon government operations of the house of representatives and the committeeon governmental affairs of the senate and shall be published promptly in thefederal register. upon receiving notice of such disapproval or modification, thesecretary of commerce shall immediately rescind or modify such standards orguidelines as directed by the president.ò(2) the head of a federal agency may employ standards for the cost effectivesecurity and privacy of sensitive information in a federal computer system withinor under the supervision of that agency that are more stringent than the standardspromulgated by the secretary of commerce, if such standards contain, at a minimum, the provisions of those applicable standards made compulsory and bindingby the secretary of commerce.ò(3) the standards determined to be compulsory and binding may be waived bythe secretary of commerce in writing upon a determination that compliancewould adversely affect the accomplishment of the mission of an operator of afederal computer system, or cause a major adverse financial impact on the operator which is not offset by governmentwide savings. the secretary may delegatecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.556appendix nto the head of one or more federal agencies authority to waive such standards tothe extent to which the secretary determines such action to be necessary anddesirable to allow for timely and effective implementation of federal computersystems standards. the head of such agency may redelegate such authority onlyto a senior official designated pursuant to section 3506(b) of title 44, united statescode. notice of each such waiver and delegation shall be transmitted promptly tothe committee on government operations of the house of representatives andthe committee on governmental affairs of the senate and shall be publishedpromptly in the federal register.ò(4) the administrator shall revise the federal information resources management regulations (41 cfr ch. 201) to be consistent with the standards and guidelines promulgated by the secretary of commerce under this subsection.ò(5) as used in this subsection, the terms ôfederal computer systemõ and ôoperatorof a federal computer systemõ have the meanings given in section 20(d) of thenational bureau of standards act.ó.sec. 5.federal computer system security training.(a)in general.ñeach federal agency shall provide for the mandatory periodic training in computer security awareness and accepted computer securitypractice of all employees who are involved with the management, use, or operation of each federal computer system within or under the supervision of thatagency. such training shall beñ(1)provided in accordance with the guidelines developed pursuant to section20(a)(5) of the national bureau of standards act (as added by section 3 of thisact), and in accordance with the regulations issued under subsection (c) of thissection for federal civilian employees; or(2)provided by an alternative training program approved by the head of thatagency on the basis of a determination that the alternative training program is atleast as effective in accomplishing the objectives of such guidelines and regulations.(b)training objectives.ñtraining under this section shall be started within60 days after the issuance of the regulations described in subsection (c). suchtraining shall be designedñ(1)to enhance employeesõ awareness of the threats to and vulnerability of computer systems; and(2)to encourage the use of improved computer security practices.(c)regulations.ñwithin six months after the date of the enactment of thisact, the director of the office of personnel management shall issue regulationsprescribing the procedures and scope of the training to be provided federal civilian employees under subsection (a) and the manner in which such training is to becarried out.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations557sec. 6.additional responsibilities for computer systems security and privacy.(a)identification of systems that contain sensitive informationñwithin 6months after the date of enactment of this act, each federal agency shall identifyeach federal computer system, and system under development, which is withinor under the supervision of that agency and which contains sensitive information.(b)security plan.ñwithin one year after the date of enactment of this act,each such agency shall, consistent with the standards, guidelines, policies, andregulations prescribed pursuant to section 111(d) of the federal property andadministrative services act of 1949, establish a plan for the security and privacyof each federal computer system identified by that agency pursuant to subsection(a) that is commensurate with the risk and magnitude or the harm resulting fromthe loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of the informationcontained in such system. copies of each such plan shall be transmitted to thenational bureau of standards and the national security agency for advice andcomment. a summary of such plan shall be included in the agencyõs fiveyearplan required by section 3505 of title 44, united states code. such plan shall besubject to disapproval by the director of the office of management and budget.such plan shall be revised annually as necessary.sec. 7.definitions.as used in this act, the terms òcomputer systemó, òfederal computer systemó, òoperator of a federal computer systemó, òsensitive informationó, and òfederal agencyó have the meanings given in section 20(d) of the national bureau ofstandards act (as added by section 3 of this act).sec. 8.rules of construction of act.nothing in this act, or in any amendment made by this act, shallbe construedñ(1) to constitute authority to withhold information sought pursuant tosection 552 of title 5, united states code; or(2)to authorize any federal agency to limit, restrict, regulate, or control thecollection, maintenance, disclosure, use, transfer, or sale of any information (regardless of the medium in which the information may be maintained) that isñ(a)privatelyowned information;(b)disclosable under section 552 of title 5, united states code, orother lawrequiring or authorizing the public disclosure of information; or(c)public domain information.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.558appendix nn.1.6arms export control act (u.s. code, title 22, chapter 39)sec. 2751.need for international defense cooperation and military export controls; presidential waiver; report to congress; arms sales policy.as declared by the congress in the arms control and disarmament act (22u.s.c. 2551 et seq.), an ultimate goal of the united states continues to be a worldwhich is free from the scourge of war and the dangers and burdens of armaments;in which the use of force has been subordinated to the rule of law; and in whichinternational adjustments to a changing world are achieved peacefully. in furtherance of that goal, it remains the policy of the united states to encourage regionalarms control and disarmament agreements and to discourage arms races.the congress recognizes, however, that the united states and other free andindependent countries continue to have valid requirements for effective and mutually beneficial defense relationships in order to maintain and foster the environment of international peace and security essential to social, economic, and political progress. because of the growing cost and complexity of defense equipment, itis increasingly difficult and uneconomic for any country, particularly a developing country, to fill all of its legitimate defense requirements from its own designand production base. the need for international defense cooperation among theunited states and those friendly countries to which it is allied by mutual defensetreaties is especially important, since the effectiveness of their armed forces to actin concert to deter or defeat aggression is directly related to the operational compatibility of their defense equipment.accordingly, it remains the policy of the united states to facilitate the common defense by entering into international arrangements with friendly countrieswhich further the objective of applying agreed resources of each country to programs and projects of cooperative exchange of data, research, development, production, procurement, and logistics support to achieve specific national defenserequirements and objectives of mutual concern. to this end, this chapter authorizes sales by the united states government to friendly countries having sufficient wealth to maintain and equip their own military forces at adequate strength,or to assume progressively larger shares of the costs thereof, without undue burden to their economies, in accordance with the restraints and control measuresspecified herein and in furtherance of the security objectives of the united statesand of the purposes and principles of the united nations charter.it is the sense of the congress that all such sales be approved only when theyare consistent with the foreign policy interests of the united states, the purposesof the foreign assistance program of the united states as embodied in the foreignassistance act of 1961, as amended (22 u.s.c. 2151 et seq.), the extent and character of the military requirement, and the economic and financial capability of therecipient country, with particular regard being given, where appropriate, toproper balance among such sales, grant military assistance, and economic assistance as well as to the impact of the sales on programs of social and economicdevelopment and on existing or incipient arms races.it shall be the policy of the united states to exert leadership in the worldcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations559community to bring about arrangements for reducing the international trade inimplements of war and to lessen the danger of outbreak of regional conflict andthe burdens of armaments. united states programs for or procedures governingthe export, sale, and grant of defense articles and defense services to foreigncountries and international organizations shall be administered in a manner whichwill carry out this policy.it is the sense of the congress that the president should seek to initiatemultilateral discussions for the purpose of reaching agreements among the principal arms suppliers and arms purchasers and other countries with respect to thecontrol of the international trade in armaments. it is further the sense of congressthat the president should work actively with all nations to check and control theinternational sale and distribution of conventional weapons of death and destruction and to encourage regional arms control arrangements. in furtherance of thispolicy, the president should undertake a concerted effort to convene an international conference of major armssupplying and armspurchasing nations whichshall consider measures to limit conventional arms transfers in the interest ofinternational peace and stability.it is the sense of the congress that the aggregate value of defense articlesand defense servicesñ(1)which are sold under section 2761 or section 2762 of this title; or(2)which are licensed or approved for export under section 2778 of this title to,for the use, or for benefit of the armed forces, police, intelligence, or other internalsecurity forces of a foreign country or international organization under a commercial sales contract;in any fiscal year should not exceed current levels.it is the sense of the congress that the president maintain adherence to apolicy of restraint in conventional arms transfers and that, in implementing thispolicy worldwide, a balanced approach should be taken and full regard given tothe security interests of the united states in all regions of the world and thatparticular attention should be paid to controlling the flow of conventional arms tothe nations of the developing world. to this end, the president is encouraged tocontinue discussions with other arms suppliers in order to restrain the flow ofconventional arms to less developed countries.sec. 2752.coordination with foreign policy.(a)noninfringement of powers or functions of secretary of state. nothingcontained in this chapter shall be construed to infringe upon the powers or functions of the secretary of state.(b)responsibility for supervision and direction of sales, leases, financing,cooperative projects, and exports. under the direction of the president, the secretary of state (taking into account other united states activities abroad, such asmilitary assistance, economic assistance, and the food for peace program) shall becryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.560appendix nresponsible for the continuous supervision and general direction of sales, leases,financing, cooperative projects, and exports under this chapter, including, but notlimited to, determiningñ(1)whether there will be a sale to or financing for a country and the amountthereof;(2)whether there will be a lease to a country;(3)whether there will be a cooperative project and the scope thereof; and(4)whether there will be delivery or other performance under such sale, lease,cooperative project, or export,to the end that sales, financing, leases, cooperative projects, and exports will beintegrated with other united states activities and to the end that the foreign policyof the united states would be best served thereby.(c)coordination among representatives of the united states. the president shall prescribe appropriate procedures to assure coordination among representatives of the united states government in each country, under the leadershipof the chief of the united states diplomatic mission. the chief of the diplomaticmission shall make sure that recommendations of such representatives pertainingto sales are coordinated with political and economic considerations, and his comments shall accompany such recommendations if he so desires.sec. 2753.eligibility for defense services or defense articles.(a)prerequisites for consent by president; report to congress.no defense article or defense service shall be sold or leased by the united statesgovernment under this chapter to any country or international organization, andno agreement shall be entered into for a cooperative project (as defined in section2767 of this title), unlessñ(1)the president finds that the furnishing of defense articles and defense services to such country or international organization will strengthen the security ofthe united states and promote world peace;(2)the country or international organization shall have agreed not to transfertitle to, or possession of, any defense article or related training or other defenseservice so furnished to it, or produced in a cooperative project (as defined insection 2767 of this title), to anyone not an officer, employee, or agent of thatcountry or international organization (or the north atlantic treaty organizationor the specified member countries (other than the united states) in the case of acooperative project) and not to use or permit the use of such article or relatedtraining or other defense service for purposes other than those for which furnished unless the consent of the president has first been obtained:(3)the country or international organization shall have agreed that it will maintain the security of such article or service and will provide substantially the samedegree of security protection afforded to such article or service by the unitedstates government; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations561(4)the country or international organization is otherwise eligible to purchase orlease defense articles or defense services.in considering a request for approval of any transfer of any weapon, weaponssystem, munitions, aircraft, military boat, military vessel, or other implement ofwar to another country, the president shall not give his consent under paragraph(2) to the transfer unless the united states itself would transfer the defense articleunder consideration to that country. in addition, the president shall not give hisconsent under paragraph (2) to the transfer of any significant defense articles onthe united states munitions list unless the foreign country requesting consent totransfer agrees to demilitarize such defense articles prior to transfer, or the proposed recipient foreign country provides a commitment in writing to the unitedstates government that it will not transfer such defense articles, if not demilitarized, to any other foreign country or person without first obtaining the consent ofthe president. the president shall promptly submit a report to the speaker of thehouse of representatives and to the committee on foreign relations of the senate on the implementation of each agreement entered into pursuant to clause (2)of this subsection. . . .sec. 2754.purposes for which military sales or leases by the united states areauthorized; report to congress.defense articles and defense services shall be sold or leased by the unitedstates government under this chapter to friendly countries solely for internalsecurity, for legitimate selfdefense, to permit the recipient country to participatein regional or collective arrangements or measures consistent with the charter ofthe united nations, or otherwise to permit the recipient country to participate incollective measures requested by the united nations for the purpose of maintaining or restoring international peace and security, or for the purpose of enablingforeign military forces in less developed friendly countries to construct publicworks and to engage in other activities helpful to the economic and social development of such friendly countries. it is the sense of the congress that such foreignmilitary forces should not be maintained or established solely for civic actionactivities and that such civic action activities not significantly detract from thecapability of the military forces to perform their military missions and be coordinated with and form part of the total economic and social development effort:provided, that none of the funds contained in this authorization shall be used toguarantee, or extend credit, or participate in an extension of credit in connectionwith any sale of sophisticated weapons systems, such as missile systems and jetaircraft for military purposes, to any underdeveloped country other than greece,turkey, iran, israel, the republic of china, the philippines and korea unless thepresident determines that such financing is important to the national security ofthe united states and reports within thirty days each such determination to thecongress. . . .cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.562appendix nsec. 2770.general authority.(a)sale of defense articles and services by the president to united statescompanies; restriction on performance of services; reimbursement credited to selling agency. subject to the conditions specified in subsection (b) of this section, thepresident may, on a negotiated contract basis, under cash terms (1) sell defensearticles at not less than their estimated replacement cost (or actual cost in the caseof services), or (2) procure or manufacture and sell defense articles at not less thantheir contract or manufacturing cost to the united states government, to anyunited states company for incorporation into end items (and for concurrent orfollowon support) to be sold by such a company either (i) on a direct commercialbasis to a friendly foreign country or international organization pursuant to anexport license or approval under section 2778 of this title or (ii) in the case ofammunition parts subject to subsection (b) of this section, using commercial practices which restrict actual delivery directly to a friendly foreign country or international organization pursuant to approval under section 2778 of this title. thepresident may also sell defense services in support of such sales of defense articles, subject to the requirements of this chapter: provided, however, that suchservices may be performed only in the united states. the amount of reimbursement received from such sales shall be credited to the current applicable appropriation, fund, or account of the selling agency of the united states government.(b)conditions of sale. defense articles and defense services may be sold,procured and sold, or manufactured and sold, pursuant to subsection (a) of thissection only if (1) the end item to which the articles apply is to be procured for thearmed forces of a friendly country or international organization, (2) the articleswould be supplied to the prime contractor as governmentfurnished equipmentor materials if the end item were being procured for the use of the united statesarmed forces, and (3) the articles and services are available only from unitedstates government sources or are not available to the prime contractor directlyfrom united states commercial sources at such times as may be required to meetthe prime contractorõs delivery schedule.(c)ôdefense articlesõ and ôdefense servicesõ defined. for the purpose of thissection, the terms ôdefense articlesõ and ôdefense servicesõ mean defense articlesand defense services as defined in section 2794(3) and (4) of this title. . . .sec. 2778.control of arms exports and imports.(a)presidential control of exports and imports of defense articles and services, guidance of policy, etc.; designation of united states munitions list; issuance of export licenses; condition for export; negotiations information.(1)in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of theunited states, the president is authorized to control the import and the export ofdefense articles and defense services and to provide foreign policy guidance topersons of the united states involved in the export and import of such articles andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations563services. the president is authorized to designate those items which shall beconsidered as defense articles and defense services for the purposes of this sectionand to promulgate regulations for the import and export of such articles andservices. the items so designated shall constitute the united states munitionslist.(2)decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall be made incoordination with the director of the united states arms control and disarmament agency and shall take into account the directorõs opinion as to whether theexport of an article will contribute to an arms race, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice thedevelopment of bilateral or multilateral arms control arrangements.(3)in exercising the authorities conferred by this section, the president mayrequire that any defense article or defense service be sold under this chapter as acondition of its eligibility for export, and may require that persons engaged in thenegotiation for the export of defense articles and services keep the president fullyand currently informed of the progress and future prospects of such negotiations.(b)registration and licensing requirements for manufacturers, exporters,or importers of designated defense articles and defense services.(1)(a)as prescribed in regulations issued under this section, every person (otherthan an officer or employee of the united states government acting in an officialcapacity) who engages in the business of manufacturing, exporting, or importingany defense articles or defense services designated by the president under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall register with the united states government agencycharged with the administration of this section, and shall pay a registration feewhich shall be prescribed by such regulations. such regulations shall prohibit thereturn to the united states for sale in the united states (other than for the armedforces of the united states and its allies or for any state or local law enforcementagency) of any military firearms or ammunition of united states manufacturefurnished to foreign governments by the united states under this chapter or anyother foreign assistance or sales program of the united states, whether or notenhanced in value or improved in condition in a foreign country. this prohibitionshall not extend to similar firearms that have been so substantially transformed asto become, in effect, articles of foreign manufacture.(b)the prohibition under such regulations required by the second sentence ofsubparagraph (a) shall not extend to any military firearms (or ammunition, components, parts, accessories, and attachments for such firearms) of united statesmanufacture furnished to any foreign government by the united states under thischapter or any other foreign assistance or sales program of the united states ifñ(i)such firearms are among those firearms that the secretary of the treasury is,or was at any time, required to authorize the importation of by reason of theprovisions of section 925(e) of title 18 (including the requirement for the listing ofsuch firearms as curios or relics under section 921(a)(13) of that title); and(ii)such foreign government certifies to the united states government thatsuch firearms are owned by such foreign government.(c)a copy of each registration made under this paragraph shall be transmittedcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.564appendix nto the secretary of the treasury for review regarding law enforcement concerns.the secretary shall report to the president regarding such concerns as necessary.(2)except as otherwise specifically provided in regulations issued under subsection (a)(1) of this section, no defense articles or defense services designated bythe president under subsection (a)(1) of this section may be exported or importedwithout a license for such export or import, issued in accordance with this chapterand regulations issued under this chapter, except that no license shall be requiredfor exports or imports made by or for an agency of the united states government(a)for official use by a department or agency of the united states government,or(b)for carrying out any foreign assistance or sales program authorized by lawand subject to the control of the president by other means.(3)(a)for each of the fiscal years 1988 and 1989, $250,000 of registration feescollected pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be credited to a department of stateaccount, to be available without fiscal year limitation. fees credited to that account shall be available only for the payment of expenses incurred forñ(i)contract personnel to assist in the evaluation of munitions control licenseapplications, reduce processing time for license applications, and improve monitoring of compliance with the terms of licenses; and(ii)the automation of munitions control functions and the processing of munitions control license applications, including the development, procurement, andutilization of computer equipment and related software.(b)the authority of this paragraph may be exercised only to such extent or insuch amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation acts.(c)criminal violations; punishment. any person who willfully violatesany provision of this section or section 2779 of this title, or any rule or regulationissued under either section, or who willfully, in a registration or license application or required report, makes any untrue statement of a material fact or omits tostate a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein not misleading, shall upon conviction be fined for each violationnot more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both.(d)repealed. pub. l. 9670, title iii, sec. 3303(a)(4), sept. 27, 1979, 93 stat. 499.(e)enforcement powers of president. in carrying out functions under thissection with respect to the export of defense articles and defense services, thepresident is authorized to exercise the same powers concerning violations andenforcement which are conferred upon departments, agencies and officials bysubsections (c), (d), (e), and (g) of section 11 of the export administration act of1979 (50 app. u.s.c. 2410(c), (d), (e), and (g)), and by subsections (a) and (c) ofsection 12 of such act (50 app. u.s.c. 2411(a) and (c)), subject to the same termsand conditions as are applicable to such powers under such act (50 app. u.s.c.2401 et seq.). nothing in this subsection shall be construed as authorizing thewithholding of information from the congress. notwithstanding section 11(c) ofthe export administration act of 1979, the civil penalty for each violation involving controls imposed on the export of defense articles and defense services underthis section may not exceed $500,000.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations565(f)periodic review of items on munitions list. the president shall periodically review the items on the united states munitions list to determine whatitems, if any, no longer warrant export controls under this section. the results ofsuch reviews shall be reported to the speaker of the house of representatives andto the committee on foreign relations and the committee on banking, housing,and urban affairs of the senate. such a report shall be submitted at least 30 daysbefore any item is removed from the munitions list and shall describe the natureof any controls to be imposed on that item under the export administration act of1979 (50 app. u.s.c. 2401 et seq.).(g)identification of persons convicted or subject to indictment for violations of certain provisions.(1)the president shall develop appropriate mechanisms to identify, in connection with the export licensing process under this sectionñ(a)persons who are the subject of an indictment for, or have been convicted of,a violation underñ(i)this section,(ii)section 11 of the export administration act of 1979 (50 u.s.c. app. 2410),(iii)section 793, 794, or 798 of title 18 (relating to espionage involving defense orclassified information),(iv)section 16 of the trading with the enemy act (50 u.s.c. app. 16),(v)section 206 of the international emergency economic powers act (relatingto foreign assets controls; 50 u.s.c. app. 1705) (50 u.s.c. 1705),(vi)section 30a of the securities exchange act of 1934 (15 u.s.c. 78dd1) orsection 104 of the foreign corrupt practices act (15 u.s.c. 78dd2),(vii)chapter 105 of title 18 (relating to sabotage),(viii)section 4(b) of the internal security act of 1950 (relating to communicationof classified information; 50 u.s.c. 783(b)),(ix)section 57, 92, 101, 104, 222, 224, 225, or 226 of the atomic energy act of 1954(42 u.s.c. 2077, 2122, 2131, 2134, 2272, 2274, 2275, and 2276),(x)section 601 of the national security act of 1947 (relating to intelligenceidentities protection; 50 u.s.c. 421), or(xi)section 603(b) or (c) of the comprehensive antiapartheid act of 1986 (22u.s.c. 5113(b) and (c));(b)persons who are the subject of an indictment or have been convicted undersection 371 of title 18 for conspiracy to violate any of the statutes cited in subparagraph (a); and(c)persons who are ineligibleñ(i)to contract with,(ii)to receive a license or other form of authorization to export from, or(iii)to receive a license or other form of authorization to import defense articlesor defense services from,any agency of the united states government.(2)the president shall require that each applicant for a license to export an itemon the united states munitions list identify in the application all consignees andfreight forwarders involved in the proposed export.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.566appendix n(3)if the president determinesñ(a)that an applicant for a license to export under this section is the subject of anindictment for a violation of any of the statutes cited in paragraph (1),(b)that there is reasonable cause to believe that an applicant for a license toexport under this section has violated any of the statutes cited in paragraph (1), or(c)that an applicant for a license to export under this section is ineligible tocontract with, or to receive a license or other form of authorization to importdefense articles or defense services from, any agency of the united states government,the president may disapprove the application. the president shall consider requests by the secretary of the treasury to disapprove any export license application based on these criteria.(4)a license to export an item on the united states munitions list may not beissued to a personñ(a)if that person, or any party to the export, has been convicted of violating astatute cited in paragraph (1), or(b)if that person, or any party to the export, is at the time of the license reviewineligible to receive export licenses (or other forms of authorization to export)from any agency of the united states government,except as may be determined on a casebycase basis by the president, after consultation with the secretary of the treasury, after a thorough review of the circumstances surrounding the conviction or ineligibility to export and a finding bythe president that appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate any law enforcement concerns.(5)a license to export an item on the united states munitions list may not beissued to a foreign person (other than a foreign government).(6)the president may require a license (or other form of authorization) beforeany item on the united states munitions list is sold or otherwise transferred tothe control or possession of a foreign person or a person acting on behalf of aforeign person.(7)the president shall, in coordination with law enforcement and nationalsecurity agencies, develop standards for identifying highrisk exports for regularenduse verification. these standards shall be published in the federal registerand the initial standards shall be published not later than october 1, 1988.(8)upon request of the secretary of state, the secretary of defense and thesecretary of the treasury shall detail to the office primarily responsible for exportlicensing functions under this section, on a nonreimbursable basis, personnel withappropriate expertise to assist in the initial screening of applications for exportlicenses under this section in order to determine the need for further review ofthose applications for foreign policy, national security, and law enforcement concerns.(9)for purposes of this subsectionñ(a)the term ôforeign corporationõ means a corporation that is not incorporatedin the united states;(b)the term ôforeign governmentõ includes any agency or subdivision of a foreign government, including an official mission of a foreign government;(c)the term ôforeign personõ means any person who is not a citizen or nationalcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations567of the united states or lawfully admitted to the united states for permanentresidence under the immigration and nationality act (8 u.s.c. 1101 et seq.), andincludes foreign corporations, international organizations, and foreign governments;(d)the term ôparty to the exportõ meansñ(i)the president, the chief executive officer, and other senior officers of thelicense applicant;(ii)the freight forwarders or designated exporting agent of the license application; and(iii)any consignee or end user of any item to be exported; and(e)the term ôpersonõ means a natural person as well as a corporation, businessassociation, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization, or group,including governmental entities.(h)judicial review of designation of items as defense articles or services.the designation by the president (or by an official to whom the presidentõs functions under subsection (a) of this section have been duly delegated), in regulationsissued under this section, of items as defense articles or defense services for purposes of this section shall not be subject to judicial review. . . .sec. 2780.transactions with countries supporting acts of international terrorism.(a)prohibited transactions by united states government. the followingtransactions by the united states government are prohibited:(1)exporting or otherwise providing (by sale, lease or loan, grant, or othermeans), directly or indirectly, any munitions item to a country described in subsection (d) of this section under the authority of this chapter, the foreign assistance act of 1961 (22 u.s.c. 2151 et seq.), or any other law (except as provided insubsection (h) of this section). in implementing this paragraph, the united statesgovernmentñ(a)shall suspend delivery to such country of any such item pursuant to anysuch transaction which has not been completed at the time the secretary of statemakes the determination described in subsection (d) of this section, and(b)shall terminate any lease or loan to such country of any such item which isin effect at the time the secretary of state makes that determination.(2)providing credits, guarantees, or other financial assistance under the authority of this chapter, the foreign assistance act of 1961 (22 u.s.c. 2151 et seq.),or any other law (except as provided in subsection (h) of this section), with respectto the acquisition of any munitions item by a country described in subsection (d)of this section. in implementing this paragraph, the united states governmentshall suspend expenditures pursuant to any such assistance obligated before thesecretary of state makes the determination described in subsection (d) of thissection. the president may authorize expenditures otherwise required to be suspended pursuant to the preceding sentence if the president has determined, andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.568appendix nreported to the congress, that suspension of those expenditures causes unduefinancial hardship to a supplier, shipper, or similar person and allowing the expenditure will not result in any munitions item being made available for use bysuch country.(3)consenting under section 2753(a) of this title, under section 505(a) of theforeign assistance act of 1961 (22 u.s.c. 2314(a)), under the regulations issued tocarry out section 2778 of this title, or under any other law (except as provided insubsection (h) of this section), to any transfer of any munitions item to a countrydescribed in subsection (d) of this section. in implementing this paragraph, theunited states government shall withdraw any such consent which is in effect atthe time the secretary of state makes the determination described in subsection(d) of this section, except that this sentence does not apply with respect to anyitem that has already been transferred to such country.(4)providing any license or other approval under section 2778 of this title forany export or other transfer (including by means of a technical assistance agreement, manufacturing licensing agreement, or coproduction agreement) of anymunitions item to a country described in subsection (d) of this section. in implementing this paragraph, the united states government shall suspend any suchlicense or other approval which is in effect at the time the secretary of state makesthe determination described in subsection (d) of this section, except that this sentence does not apply with respect to any item that has already been exported orotherwise transferred to such country.(5)otherwise facilitating the acquisition of any munitions item by a countrydescribed in subsection (d) of this section. this paragraph applies with respect toactivities undertakenñ(a)by any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the government,(b)by any officer or employee of the government (including members of theunited states armed forces), or(c)by any other person at the request or on behalf of the government.the secretary of state may waive the requirements of the second sentence ofparagraph (1), the second sentence of paragraph (3), and the second sentence ofparagraph (4) to the extent that the secretary determines, after consultation withthe congress, that unusual and compelling circumstances require that the unitedstates government not take the actions specified in that sentence.(b)prohibited transactions by united states persons.(1)in general. a united states person may not take any of the following actions:(a)exporting any munitions item to any country described in subsection (d) ofthis section.(b)selling, leasing, loaning, granting, or otherwise providing any munitionsitem to any country described in subsection (d) of this section.(c)selling, leasing, loaning, granting, or otherwise providing any munitionsitem to any recipient which is not the government of or a person in a countrydescribed in subsection (d) of this section if the united states person has reason tocryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations569know that the munitions item will be made available to any country described insubsection (d) of this section.(d)taking any other action which would facilitate the acquisition, directly orindirectly, of any munitions item by the government of any country described insubsection (d) of this section, or any person acting on behalf of that government, ifthe united states person has reason to know that that action will facilitate theacquisition of that item by such a government or person.(2)liability for actions of foreign subsidiaries, etc. a united states person violates this subsection if a corporation or other person that is controlled in fact bythat united states person (as determined under regulations, which the presidentshall issue) takes an action described in paragraph (1) outside the united states.(3)applicability to actions outside the united states. paragraph (1) applieswith respect to actions described in that paragraph which are taken either withinor outside the united states by a united states person described in subsection(l)(3)(a) or (b) of this section. to the extent provided in regulations issued undersubsection (l)(3)(d) of this section, paragraph (1) applies with respect to actionsdescribed in that paragraph which are taken outside the united states by a persondesignated as a united states person in those regulations.(c)transfers to governments and persons covered. this section applieswith respect toñ(1)the acquisition of munitions items by the government of a country describedin subsection (d) of this section; and(2)the acquisition of munitions items by any individual, group, or other personwithin a country described in subsection (d) of this section, except to the extentthat subparagraph (d) of subsection (b)(1) of this section provides otherwise.(d)countries covered by prohibition. the prohibitions contained in thissection apply with respect to a country if the secretary of state determines that thegovernment of that country has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.(e)publication of determinations. each determination of the secretary ofstate under subsection (d) of this section shall be published in the federal register.(f)rescission.(1)a determination made by the secretary of state under subsection (d) of thissection may not be rescinded unless the president submits to the speaker of thehouse of representatives and the chairman of the committee on foreign relations of the senateñ(a)before the proposed rescission would take effect, a report certifying thatñ(i)there has been a fundamental change in the leadership and policies of thegovernment of the country concerned;(ii)that government is not supporting acts of international terrorism; and(iii)that government has provided assurances that it will not support acts ofinternational terrorism in the future; orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.570appendix n(b)at least 45 days before the proposed rescission would take effect, a reportjustifying the rescission and certifying thatñ(i)the government concerned has not provided any support for internationalterrorism during the preceding 6month period; and(ii)the government concerned has provided assurances that it will not supportacts of international terrorism in the future.(2)(a) no rescission under paragraph (1)(b) of a determination under subsection(d) of this section may be made if the congress, within 45 days after receipt of areport under paragraph (1)(b), enacts a joint resolution the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ôthat the proposed rescission of the determination under section 40(d) of the arms export control act pursuant to the reportsubmitted to the congress on xxxxxxxxx is hereby prohibited.õ, the blank to becompleted with the appropriate date.(b)a joint resolution described in subparagraph (a) and introduced within theappropriate 45day period shall be considered in the senate and the house ofrepresentatives in accordance with paragraphs (3) through (7) of section 8066(c)of the department of defense appropriations act (as contained in public law 98473), except that references in such paragraphs to the committees on appropriations of the house of representatives and the senate shall be deemed to be references to the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives andthe committee on foreign relations of the senate, respectively.(g)waiver. the president may waive the prohibitions contained in thissection with respect to a specific transaction ifñ(1)the president determines that the transaction is essential to the nationalsecurity interests of the united states; and(2)not less than 15 days prior to the proposed transaction, the presidentñ(a)consults with the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives and the committee on foreign relations of the senate; and(b)submits to the speaker of the house of representatives and the chairman ofthe committee on foreign relations of the senate a report containingñ(i)the name of any country involved in the proposed transaction, the identityof any recipient of the items to be provided pursuant to the proposed transaction,and the anticipated use of those items;(ii)a description of the munitions items involved in the proposed transaction(including their market value) and the actual sale price at each step in the transaction (or if the items are transferred by other than sale, the manner in which theywill be provided);(iii)the reasons why the proposed transaction is essential to the national security interests of the united states and the justification for such proposed transaction;(iv)the date on which the proposed transaction is expected to occur; and(v)the name of every united states government department, agency, or otherentity involved in the proposed transaction, every foreign government involvedin the proposed transaction, and every private party with significant participationin the proposed transaction.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations571to the extent possible, the information specified in subparagraph (b) of paragraph(2) shall be provided in unclassified form, with any classified information provided in an addendum to the report.(h)exemption for transactions subject to national security act reportingrequirements. the prohibitions contained in this section do not apply with respectto any transaction subject to reporting requirements under title v of the nationalsecurity act of 1947 (50 u.s.c. 413 et seq.; relating to congressional oversight ofintelligence activities).(i)relation to other laws.(1)in general. with regard to munitions items controlled pursuant to this chapter, the provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding any other provisionof law, other than section 614(a) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 (22 u.s.c.2364(a)).(2)section 614(a) waiver authority. if the authority of section 614(a) of theforeign assistance act of 1961 (22 u.s.c. 2364(a)) is used to permit a transactionunder that act (22 u.s.c. 2151 et seq.) or this chapter which is otherwise prohibited by this section, the written policy justification required by that section shallinclude the information specified in subsection (g)(2)(b) of this section.(j)criminal penalty. any person who willfully violates this section shallbe fined for each violation not more than $1,000,000, imprisoned not more than 10years, or both.(k)civil penalties; enforcement. in the enforcement of this section, thepresident is authorized to exercise the same powers concerning violations andenforcement which are conferred upon departments, agencies, and officials bysections 11(c), 11(e), 11(g), and 12(a) of the export administration act of 1979 (50app. u.s.c. 2410(c), (e), (g), 2411(a)) (subject to the same terms and conditions asare applicable to such powers under that act (50 app. u.s.c. 2401 et seq.)), exceptthat, notwithstanding section 11(c) of that act, the civil penalty for each violationof this section may not exceed $500,000.(l)definitions. as used in this sectionñ(1)the term ômunitions itemõ means any item enumerated on the united statesmunitions list (without regard to whether the item is imported into or exportedfrom the united states);(2)the term ôunited statesõ, when used geographically, means the several states,the district of columbia, the commonwealth of puerto rico, the commonwealthof the northern mariana islands, and any territory or possession of the unitedstates; and(3)the term ôunited states personõ meansñ(a)any citizen or permanent resident alien of the united states;(b)any sole proprietorship, partnership, company, association, or corporationhaving its principal place of business within the united states or organized underthe laws of the united states, any state, the district of columbia, the commoncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.572appendix nwealth of puerto rico, the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands, orany territory or possession of the united states;(c)any other person with respect to that personõs actions while in the unitedstates; and(d)to the extent provided in regulations issued by the secretary of state, anyperson that is not described in subparagraph (a), (b), or (c) butñ(i)is a foreign subsidiary or affiliate of a united states person described insubparagraph (b) and is controlled in fact by that united states person (as determined in accordance with those regulations), or(ii)is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the united states, with respect tothat personõs actions while outside the united states. . . .sec. 2794.definitions.for purposes of this chapter, the termñ(1)ôõexcess defense articleõõ has the meaning provided by section 2403(g) ofthis title;(2)ôõvalueõõ means, in the case of an excess defense article, except as otherwise provided in section 2761(a) of this title, not less than the greater ofñ(a)the gross cost incurred by the united states government in repairing, rehabilitating, or modifying such article, plus the scrap value; or(b)the market value, if ascertainable;(3)ôõdefense articleõõ, except as provided in paragraph (7) of this section,includesñ(a)any weapon, weapons system, munition, aircraft, vessel, boat, or otherimplement of war,(b)any property, installation, commodity, material, equipment, supply, orgoods used for the purposes of making military sales,(c)any machinery, facility, tool, material, supply, or other item necessary forthe manufacture, production, processing, repair, servicing, storage, construction,transportation, operation, or use of any article listed in this paragraph, and(d)any component or part of any article listed in this paragraph,but does not include merchant vessels or (as defined by the atomic energy act of1954 (42 u.s.c. 2011 et seq.)) source material (except uranium depleted in theisotope 235 which is incorporated in defense articles solely to take advantage ofhigh density or pyrophoric characteristics unrelated to radioactivity), byproductmaterial, special nuclear material, production facilities, utilization facilities, oratomic weapons or articles involving restricted data;(4)ôõdefense serviceõõ, except as provided in paragraph (7) of this section,includes any service, test, inspection, repair, training, publication, technical orother assistance, or defense information (as defined in section 2403(e) of this title),cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations573used for the purposes of making military sales, but does not include design andconstruction services under section 2769 of this title;(5)ôõtrainingõõ includes formal or informal instruction of foreign studentsin the united states or overseas by officers or employees of the united states,contract technicians, or contractors (including instruction at civilian institutions),or by correspondence courses, technical, educational, or information publicationsand media of all kinds, training aid, orientation, training exercise, and militaryadvice to foreign military units and forces;(6)ôõmajor defense equipmentõõ means any item of significant militaryequipment on the united states munitions list having a nonrecurring researchand development cost of more than $50,000,000 or a total production cost of morethan $200,000,000;(7)ôõdefense articles and defense servicesõõ means, with respect to commercial exports subject to the provisions of section 2778 of this title, those itemsdesignated by the president pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of such section; and(8)ôõdesign and construction servicesõõ means, with respect to sales undersection 2769 of this title, the design and construction of real property facilities,including necessary construction equipment and materials, engineering services,construction contract management services relating thereto, and technical advisory assistance in the operation and maintenance of real property facilities provided or performed by any department or agency of the department of defense orby a contractor pursuant to a contract with such department or agency.n.2executive ordersn.2.1executive order 12333 (u.s. intelligence activities)timely and accurate information about the activities, capabilities, plans, andintentions of foreign powers, organizations, and persons and their agents, is essential to the national security of the united states. all reasonable and lawfulmeans must be used to ensure that the united states will receive the best intelligence available. for that purpose, by virtue of the authority vested in me by theconstitution and statutes of the united states of america, including the nationalsecurity act of 1947, as amended, and as president of the united states of america,in order to provide for the effective conduct of united states intelligence activitiesand the protection of constitutional rights, it is hereby ordered as follows:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.574appendix npart 1goals, direction, duties and responsibilities with respect to thenational intelligence effort1.1goals.the united states intelligence effort shall provide the presidentand the national security council with the necessary information on which tobase decisions concerning the conduct and development of foreign, defense andeconomic policy, and the protection of united states national interests from foreign security threats. all departments and agencies shall cooperate fully to fulfillthis goal.(a)maximum emphasis should be given to fostering analytical competition among appropriate elements of the intelligence community.(b)all means, consistent with applicable united states law and this order, and with full consideration of the rights of united states persons, shall beused to develop intelligence information for the president and the national security council. a balanced approach between technical collection efforts and othermeans should be maintained and encouraged.(c)special emphasis should be given to detecting and countering espionage and other threats and activities directed by foreign intelligence servicesagainst the united states government, or united states corporations, establishments, or persons.(d)to the greatest extent possible consistent with applicable united stateslaw and this order, and with full consideration of the rights of united statespersons, all agencies and departments should seek to ensure full and free exchange of information in order to derive maximum benefit from the united statesintelligence effort.1.2the national security council.(a)purpose. the national security council (nsc) was established by thenational security act of 1947 to advise the president with respect to the integration of domestic, foreign and military policies relating to the national security. thensc shall act as the highest executive branch entity that provides review of,guidance for and direction to the conduct of all national foreign intelligence,counterintelligence, and special activities, and attendant policies and programs.(b)committees. the nsc shall establish such committees as may be necessary to carry out its functions and responsibilities under this order. the nsc, ora committee established by it, shall consider and submit to the president a policyrecommendation, including all dissents, on each special activity and shall reviewproposals for other sensitive intelligence operations.1.3national foreign intelligence advisory groups.(a)establishment and duties. the director of central intelligence shallestablish such boards, councils, or groups as required for the purpose of obtainingadvice from within the intelligence community concerning:(1)production, review and coordination of national foreign intelligence;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations575(2)priorities for the national foreign intelligence program budget;(3)interagency exchanges of foreign intelligence information;(4)arrangements with foreign governments on intelligence matters;(5)protection of intelligence sources and methods;(6)activities of common concern; and(7)such other matters as may be referred by the director of centralintelligence.(b)membership. advisory groups established pursuant to this sectionshall be chaired by the director of central intelligence or his designated representative and shall consist of senior representatives from organizations within theintelligence community and from departments or agencies containing such organizations, as designated by the director of central intelligence. groups for consideration of substantive intelligence matters will include representatives of organizations involved in the collection, processing and analysis of intelligence. a seniorrepresentative of the secretary of commerce, the attorney general, the assistantto the president for national security affairs, and the office of the secretary ofdefense shall be invited to participate in any group which deals with other thansubstantive intelligence matters.1.4the intelligence community. the agencies within the intelligence community shall, in accordance with applicable united states law and with the otherprovisions of this order, conduct intelligence activities necessary for the conductof foreign relations and the protection of the national security of the united states,including:(a)collection of information needed by the president, the national security council, the secretaries of state and defense, and other executive branchofficials for the performance of their duties and responsibilities;(b)production and dissemination of intelligence;(c)collection of information concerning, and the conduct of activities toprotect against, intelligence activities directed against the united states, international terrorist and international narcotics activities, and other hostile activitiesdirected against the united states by foreign powers, organizations, persons, andtheir agents;(d)special activities;(e)administrative and support activities within the united states andabroad necessary for the performance of authorized activities; and(f)such other intelligence activities as the president may direct from timeto time.1.5director of central intelligence. in order to discharge the duties and responsibilities prescribed by law, the director of central intelligence shall be responsible directly to the president and the nsc and shall:(a)act as the primary adviser to the president and the nsc on nationalforeign intelligence and provide the president and other officials in the executivebranch with national foreign intelligence;(b)develop such objectives and guidance for the intelligence communitycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.576appendix nas will enhance capabilities for responding to expected future needs for nationalforeign intelligence;(c)promote the development and maintenance of services of commonconcern by designated intelligence organizations on behalf of the intelligencecommunity;(d)ensure implementation of special activities;(e)formulate policies concerning foreign intelligence and counterintelligence arrangements with foreign governments, coordinate foreign intelligenceand counterintelligence relationships between agencies of the intelligence community and the intelligence or internal security services of foreign governments,and establish procedures governing the conduct of liaison by any department oragency with such services on narcotics activities;(f)participate in the development of procedures approved by the attorney general governing criminal narcotics intelligence activities abroad to ensurethat these activities are consistent with foreign intelligence programs;(g)ensure the establishment by the intelligence community of commonsecurity and access standards for managing and handling foreign intelligencesystems, information, and products;(h)ensure that programs are developed which protect intelligencesources, methods, and analytical procedures;(i)establish uniform criteria for the determination of relative prioritiesfor the transmission of critical national foreign intelligence, and advise the secretary of defense concerning the communications requirements of the intelligencecommunity for the transmission of such intelligence;(j)establish appropriate staffs, committees, or other advisory groups toassist in the execution of the directorõs responsibilities;(k)have full responsibility for production and dissemination of nationalforeign intelligence, and authority to levy analytic tasks on departmental intelligence production organizations, in consultation with those organizations, ensuring that appropriate mechanisms for competitive analysis are developed so thatdiverse points of view are considered fully and differences of judgment within theintelligence community are brought to the attention of national policymakers;(l)ensure the timely exploitation and dissemination of data gathered bynational foreign intelligence collection means, and ensure that the resulting intelligence is disseminated immediately to appropriate government entities and military commands;(m)establish mechanisms which translate national foreign intelligenceobjectives and priorities approved by the nsc into specific guidance for the intelligence community, resolve conflicts in tasking priority, provide to departmentsand agencies having information collection capabilities that are not part of thenational foreign intelligence program advisory tasking concerning collection ofnational foreign intelligence, and provide for the development of plans and arrangements for transfer of required collection tasking authority to the secretary ofdefense when directed by the president;(n)develop, with the advice of the program managers and departmentsand agencies concerned, the consolidated national foreign intelligence programbudget, and present it to the president and the congress;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations577(o)review and approve all requests for reprogramming national foreignintelligence program funds, in accordance with guidelines established by the office of management and budget;(p)monitor national foreign intelligence program implementation, and,as necessary, conduct program and performance audits and evaluations;(q)together with the secretary of defense, ensure that there is no unnecessary overlap between national foreign intelligence programs and department ofdefense intelligence programs consistent with the requirement to develop competitive analysis, and provide to and obtain from the secretary of defense allinformation necessary for this purpose;(r)in accordance with law and relevant procedures approved by the attorney general under this order, give the heads of the departments and agenciesaccess to all intelligence, developed by the cia or the staff elements of the director of central intelligence, relevant to the national intelligence needs of the departments and agencies; and(s)facilitate the use of national foreign intelligence products by congressin a secure manner.1.6duties and responsibilities of the heads of executive branch departmentsand agencies.(a)the heads of all executive branch departments and agencies shall, inaccordance with law and relevant procedures approved by the attorney generalunder this order, give the director of central intelligence access to all informationrelevant to the national intelligence needs of the united states, and shall give dueconsideration to the requests from the director of central intelligence for appropriate support for intelligence community activities.(b)the heads of departments and agencies involved in the national foreign intelligence program shall ensure timely development and submission to thedirector of central intelligence by the program managers and heads of component activities of proposed national programs and budgets in the format designated by the director of central intelligence, and shall also ensure that the director of central intelligence is provided, in a timely and responsive manner, allinformation necessary to perform the directorõs program and budget responsibilities.(c)the heads of departments and agencies involved in the national foreign intelligence program may appeal to the president decisions by the director ofcentral intelligence on budget or reprogramming matters of the national foreignintelligence program.1.7senior officials of the intelligence community. the heads of departmentsand agencies with organizations in the intelligence community or the heads ofsuch organizations, as appropriate, shall:(a)report to the attorney general possible violations of federal criminallaws by employees and of specified federal criminal laws by any other person asprovided in procedures agreed upon by the attorney general and the head of thedepartment or agency concerned, in a manner consistent with the protection ofintelligence sources and methods, as specified in those procedures;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.578appendix n(b)in any case involving serious or continuing breaches of security, recommend to the attorney general that the case be referred to the fbi for furtherinvestigation;(c)furnish the director of central intelligence and the nsc, in accordance with applicable law and procedures approved by the attorney generalunder this order, the information required for the performance of their respectiveduties;(d)report to the intelligence oversight board, and keep the director ofcentral intelligence appropriately informed, concerning any intelligence activities of their organizations that they have reason to believe may be unlawful orcontrary to executive order or presidential directive;(e)protect intelligence and intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure consistent with guidance from the director of central intelligence;(f)disseminate intelligence to cooperating foreign governments underarrangements established or agreed to by the director of central intelligence;(g)participate in the development of procedures approved by the attorney general governing production and dissemination of intelligence resultingfrom criminal narcotics intelligence activities abroad if their departments, agencies, or organizations have intelligence responsibilities for foreign or domesticnarcotics production and trafficking;(h)instruct their employees to cooperate fully with the intelligence oversight board; and(i)ensure that the inspectors general and general counsels for theirorganizations have access to any information necessary to perform their dutiesassigned by this order.1.8the central intelligence agency. all duties and responsibilities of the ciashall be related to the intelligence functions set out below. as authorized by thisorder; the national security act of 1947, as amended; the cia act of 1949, asamended; appropriate directives or other applicable law, the cia shall:(a)collect, produce and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence, including information not otherwise obtainable. the collection of foreign intelligence or counterintelligence within the united states shall be coordinated with the fbi as required by procedures agreed upon by the director ofcentral intelligence and the attorney general;(b)collect, produce and disseminate intelligence on foreign aspects ofnarcotics production and trafficking;(c)conduct counterintelligence activities outside the united states and,without assuming or performing any internal security functions, conduct counterintelligence activities within the united states in coordination with the fbi asrequired by procedures agreed upon by the director of central intelligence andthe attorney general;(d)coordinate counterintelligence activities and the collection of information not otherwise obtainable when conducted outside the united states byother departments and agencies;(e)conduct special activities approved by the president. no agency excryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations579cept the cia (or the armed forces of the united states in time of war declared bycongress or during any period covered by a report from the president to thecongress under the war powers resolution (87 stat. 855))* may conduct anyspecial activity unless the president determines that another agency is more likelyto achieve a particular objective;(f)conduct services of common concern for the intelligence communityas directed by the nsc;(g)carry out or contract for research, development and procurement oftechnical systems and devices relating to authorized functions;(h)protect the security of its installations, activities, information, property, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigations of applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associations withthe cia as are necessary; and(i)conduct such administrative and technical support activities withinand outside the united states as are necessary to perform the functions describedin sections (a) through (h) above, including procurement and essential cover andproprietary arrangements.1.9the department of state. the secretary of state shall:(a)overtly collect information relevant to united states foreign policyconcerns;(b)produce and disseminate foreign intelligence relating to united statesforeign policy as required for the execution of the secretaryõs responsibilities;(c)disseminate, as appropriate, reports received from united states diplomatic and consular posts;(d)transmit reporting requirements of the intelligence community to thechiefs of united states missions abroad; and(e)support chiefs of missions in discharging their statutory responsibilities for direction and coordination of mission activities.1.10the department of the treasury. the secretary of the treasury shall:(a)overtly collect foreign financial and monetary information;(b)participate with the department of state in the overt collection ofgeneral foreign economic information;(c)produce and disseminate foreign intelligence relating to united stateseconomic policy as required for the execution of the secretaryõs responsibilities;and(d)conduct, through the united states secret service, activities to determine the existence and capability of surveillance equipment being used againstthe president of the united states, the executive office of the president, and, asauthorized by the secretary of the treasury or the president, other secret serviceprotectees and united states officials.no information shall be acquired intentionally through such activities except toprotect against such surveillance, and those activities shall be conducted pursuantto procedures agreed upon by the secretary of the treasury and the attorneygeneral.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.580appendix n1.11the department of defense. the secretary of defense shall:(a)collect national foreign intelligence and be responsive to collectiontasking by the director of central intelligence;(b)collect, produce and disseminate military and militaryrelated foreign intelligence and counterintelligence as required for execution of thesecretaryõs responsibilities;(c)conduct programs and missions necessary to fulfill national, departmental and tactical foreign intelligence requirements;(d)conduct counterintelligence activities in support of department ofdefense components outside the united states in coordination with the cia, andwithin the united states in coordination with the fbi pursuant to proceduresagreed upon by the secretary of defense and the attorney general;(e)conduct, as the executive agent of the united states government,signals intelligence and communications security activities, except as otherwisedirected by the nsc;(f)for the timely transmission of critical intelligence, as defined by thedirector of central intelligence, within the united states government;(g)carry out or contract for research, development and procurement oftechnical systems and devices relating to authorized intelligence functions;(h)protect the security of department of defense installations, activities,property, information, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigations of applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similarassociations with the department of defense as are necessary;(i)establish and maintain military intelligence relationships and militaryintelligence exchange programs with selected cooperative foreign defense establishments and international organizations, and ensure that such relationships andprograms are in accordance with policies formulated by the director of centralintelligence;(j)direct, operate, control and provide fiscal management for the national security agency and for defense and military intelligence and nationalreconnaissance entities; and(k)conduct such administrative and technical support activities withinand outside the united states as are necessary to perform the functions describedin sections (a) through (j) above.1.12intelligence components utilized by the secretary of defense. in carryingout the responsibilities assigned in section 1.11, the secretary of defense is authorized to utilize the following:(a)defense intelligence agency, whose responsibilities shall include;(1)collection, production, or, through tasking and coordination,provision of military and militaryrelated intelligence for the secretary of defense, the joint chiefs of staff, other defense components, and, as appropriate,nondefense agencies;(2)collection and provision of military intelligence for national foreign intelligence and counterintelligence products;(3)coordination of all department of defense intelligence collection requirements;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations581(4)management of the defense attache system; and(5)provision of foreign intelligence and counterintelligence staffsupport as directed by the joint chiefs of staff.(b)national security agency, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)establishment and operation of an effective unified organizationfor signals intelligence activities, except for the delegation of operational controlover certain operations that are conducted through other elements of the intelligence community. no other department or agency may engage in signals intelligence activities except pursuant to a delegation by the secretary of defense;(2)control of signals intelligence collection and processing activities, including assignment of resources to an appropriate agent for such periodsand tasks as required for the direct support of military commanders;(3)collection of signals intelligence information for national foreign intelligence purposes in accordance with guidance from the director of central intelligence;(4)processing of signals intelligence data for national foreign intelligence purposes in accordance with guidance from the director of central intelligence;(5)dissemination of signals intelligence information for nationalforeign intelligence purposes to authorized elements of the government, including the military services, in accordance with guidance from the director of centralintelligence;(6)collection, processing and dissemination of signals intelligenceinformation for counterintelligence purposes;(7)provision of signals intelligence support for the conduct of military operations in accordance with tasking, priorities, and standards of timelinessassigned by the secretary of defense. if provision of such support requires use ofnational collection systems, these systems will be tasked within existing guidancefrom the director of central intelligence;(8)executing the responsibilities of the secretary of defense as executive agent for the communications security of the united states government;(9)conduct of research and development to meet the needs of theunited states for signals intelligence and communications security;(10)protection of the security of its installations, activities, property,information, and employees by appropriate means, including such investigationsof applicants, employees, contractors, and other persons with similar associationswith the nsa as are necessary;(11)prescribing, within its field of authorized operations, securityregulations covering operating practices, including the transmission, handlingand distribution of signals intelligence and communications security materialwithin and among the elements under control of the director of the nsa, andexercising the necessary supervisory control to ensure compliance with the regulations;(12)conduct of foreign cryptologic liaison relationships, with liaisonfor intelligence purposes conducted in accordance with policies formulated by thedirector of central intelligence; and(13)conduct of such administrative and technical support activitiescryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.582appendix nwithin and outside the united states as are necessary to perform the functionsdescribed in sections (1) through (12) above, including procurement.(c)offices for the collection of specialized intelligence through reconnaissance programs, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)carrying out consolidated reconnaissance programs for specialized intelligence;(2)responding to tasking in accordance with procedures established by the director of central intelligence; and(3)delegating authority to the various departments and agenciesfor research, development, procurement, and operation of designated means ofcollection.(d)the foreign intelligence and counterintelligence elements of the army,navy, air force, and marine corps, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)collection, production and dissemination of military and militaryrelated foreign intelligence and counterintelligence, and information on theforeign aspects of narcotics production and trafficking. when collection is conducted in response to national foreign intelligence requirements, it will be conducted in accordance with guidance from the director of central intelligence.collection of national foreign intelligence, not otherwise obtainable, outside theunited states shall be coordinated with the cia, and such collection within theunited states shall be coordinated with the fbi;(2)conduct of counterintelligence activities outside the unitedstates in coordination with the cia, and within the united states in coordinationwith the fbi; and(3)monitoring of the development, procurement and managementof tactical intelligence systems and equipment and conducting related research,development, and test and evaluation activities.(e)other offices within the department of defense appropriate for conduct of the intelligence missions and responsibilities assigned to the secretary ofdefense. if such other offices are used for intelligence purposes, the provisions ofpart 2 of this order shall apply to those offices when used for those purposes.1.13the department of energy. the secretary of energy shall:(a)participate with the department of state in overtly collecting information with respect to foreign energy matters;(b)produce and disseminate foreign intelligence necessary for thesecretaryõs responsibilities;(c)participate in formulating intelligence collection and analysis requirements where the special expert capability of the department can contribute; and(d)provide expert technical, analytical and research capability to otheragencies within the intelligence community.1.14the federal bureau of investigation. under the supervision of the attorneygeneral and pursuant to such regulations as the attorney general may establish,the director of the fbi shall:(a)within the united states conduct counterintelligence and coordinatecounterintelligence activities of other agencies within the intelligence commucryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations583nity. when a counterintelligence activity of the fbi involves military or civilianpersonnel of the department of defense, the fbi shall coordinate with the department of defense;(b)conduct counterintelligence activities outside the united states in coordination with the cia as required by procedures agreed upon by the director ofcentral intelligence and the attorney general;(c)conduct within the united states, when requested by officials of theintelligence community designated by the president, activities undertaken tocollect foreign intelligence or support foreign intelligence collection requirementsof other agencies within the intelligence community, or, when requested by thedirector of the national security agency, to support the communications securityactivities of the united states government;(d)produce and disseminate foreign intelligence and counterintelligence;and(e)carry out or contract for research, development and procurement oftechnical systems and devices relating to the functions authorized above.part 2conduct of intelligence activities2.1need.accurate and timely information about the capabilities, intentionsand activities of foreign powers, organizations, or persons and their agents isessential to informed decisionmaking in the areas of national defense and foreignrelations. collection of such information is a priority objective and will be pursued in a vigorous, innovative and responsible manner that is consistent with theconstitution and applicable law and respectful of the principles upon which theunited states was founded.2.2purpose.this order is intended to enhance human and technical collection techniques, especially those undertaken abroad, and the acquisition of significant foreign intelligence, as well as the detection and countering of international terrorist activities and espionage conducted by foreign powers. set forthbelow are certain general principles that, in addition to and consistent with applicable laws, are intended to achieve the proper balance between the acquisition ofessential information and protection of individual interests. nothing in this ordershall be construed to apply to or interfere with any authorized civil or criminallaw enforcement responsibility of any department or agency.2.3collection of information.agencies within the intelligence communityare authorized to collect, retain or disseminate information concerning unitedstates persons only in accordance with procedures established by the head of theagency concerned and approved by the attorney general, consistent with theauthorities provided by part 1 of this order. those procedures shall permit collection, retention and dissemination of the following types of information:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.584appendix n(a)information that is publicly available or collected with the consent ofthe person concerned;(b)information constituting foreign intelligence or counterintelligence,including such information concerning corporations or other commercial organizations. collection within the united states of foreign intelligence not otherwiseobtainable shall be undertaken by the fbi or, when significant foreign intelligenceis sought, by other authorized agencies of the intelligence community, providedthat no foreign intelligence collection by such agencies may be undertaken for thepurpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activities of unitedstates persons;(c)information obtained in the course of a lawful foreign intelligence,counterintelligence, international narcotics or international terrorism investigation;(d)information needed to protect the safety of any persons or organizations, including those who are targets, victims or hostages of international terrorist organizations;(e)information needed to protect foreign intelligence or counterintelligence sources or methods from unauthorized disclosure. collection within theunited states shall be undertaken by the fbi except that other agencies of theintelligence community may also collect such information concerning present orformer employees, present or former intelligence agency contractors or theirpresent or former employees, or applicants for any such employment or contracting;(f)information concerning persons who are reasonably believed to bepotential sources or contacts for the purpose of determining their suitability orcredibility;(g)information arising out of a lawful personnel, physical or communications security investigation;(h)information acquired by overhead reconnaissance not directed at specific united states persons;(i)incidentally obtained information that may indicate involvement inactivities that may violate federal, state, local or foreign laws; and(j)information necessary for administrative purposes. in addition, agencies within the intelligence community may disseminate information, other thaninformation derived from signals intelligence, to each appropriate agency withinthe intelligence community for purposes of allowing the recipient agency to determine whether the information is relevant to its responsibilities and can beretained by it.2.4collection techniques.agencies within the intelligence community shalluse the least intrusive collection techniques feasible within the united states ordirected against united states persons abroad. agencies are not authorized to usesuch techniques as electronic surveillance, unconsented physical search, mail surveillance, physical surveillance, or monitoring devices unless they are in accordance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned andapproved by the attorney general. such procedures shall protect constitutionalcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations585and other legal rights and limit use of such information to lawful governmentalpurposes. these procedures shall not authorize:(a)the cia to engage in electronic surveillance within the united statesexcept for the purpose of training, testing, or conducting countermeasures tohostile electronic surveillance;(b)unconsented physical searches in the united states by agencies otherthan the fbi, except for:(1)searches by counterintelligence elements of the military servicesdirected against military personnel within the united states or abroad for intelligence purposes, when authorized by a military commander empowered to approve physical searches for law enforcement purposes, based upon a finding ofprobable cause to believe that such persons are acting as agents of foreign powers;and(2)searches by cia of personal property of nonunited states persons lawfully in its possession.(c)physical surveillance of a united states person in the united states byagencies other than the fbi, except for:(1)physical surveillance of present or former employees, present orformer intelligence agency contractors or their present of former employees, orapplicants for any such employment or contracting; and(2)physical surveillance of a military person employed by anonintelligence element of a military service.(d)physical surveillance of a united states person abroad to collect foreign intelligence, except to obtain significant information that cannot reasonablybe acquired by other means.2.5attorney general approval.the attorney general hereby is delegatedthe power to approve the use for intelligence purposes, within the united statesor against a united states person abroad, of any technique for which a warrantwould be required if undertaken for law enforcement purposes, provided thatsuch techniques shall not be undertaken unless the attorney general has determined in each case that there is probable cause to believe that the technique isdirected against a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power. electronic surveillance, as defined in the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978, shall beconducted in accordance with that act, as well as this order.2.6assistance to law enforcement authorities.agencies within the intelligence community are authorized to:(a)cooperate with appropriate law enforcement agencies for the purposeof protecting the employees, information, property and facilities of any agencywithin the intelligence community;(b)unless otherwise precluded by law or this order, participate in lawenforcement activities to investigate or prevent clandestine intelligence activitiesby foreign powers, or international terrorist or narcotics activities;(c)provide specialized equipment, technical knowledge, or assistance ofexpert personnel for use by any department or agency, or, when lives are endangered, to support local law enforcement agencies. provision of assistance by excryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.586appendix npert personnel shall be approved in each case by the general counsel of theproviding agency; and(d)render any other assistance and cooperation to law enforcement authorities not precluded by applicable law.2.7contracting.agencies within the intelligence community are authorizedto enter into contracts or arrangements for the provision of goods or services withprivate companies or institutions in the united states and need not reveal thesponsorship of such contracts or arrangements for authorized intelligence purposes. contracts or arrangements with academic institutions may be undertakenonly with the contract of appropriate officials of the institution.2.8consistency with other laws.nothing in this order shall be construed toauthorize any activity in violation of the constitution or statutes of the unitedstates.2.9undisclosed participation in organizations within the united states.noone acting on behalf of agencies within the intelligence community may join orotherwise participate in any organization in the united states on behalf of anyagency within the intelligence community without disclosing his intelligenceaffiliation to appropriate officials of the organization, except in accordance withprocedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by theattorney general. such participation shall be authorized only if it is essential toachieving lawful purposes as determined by the agency head or designee. nosuch participation may be undertaken for the purpose of influencing the activityof the organization or its members except in cases where:(a)the participation is undertaken on behalf of the fbi in the course of alawful investigation; or(b)the organization concerned is composed primarily of individuals whoare not united states persons and is reasonably believed to be acting on behalf ofa foreign power.2.10human experimentation.no agency within the intelligence communityshall sponsor, contract for or conduct research on human subjects except in accordance with guidelines issued by the department of health and human services.the subjectõs informed consent shall be documented as required by those guidelines.2.11prohibition on assassination.no person employed by or acting on behalfof the united states government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assassination.2.12indirect participation.no agency of the intelligence community shall participate in or request any person to undertake activities forbidden by this order.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations587part 3general provisions3.1congressional oversight.the duties and responsibilities of the directorof central intelligence and the heads of other departments, agencies, and entitiesengaged in intelligence activities to cooperate with the congress in the conduct ofits responsibilities for oversight of intelligence activities shall be as provided intitle 50, united states code, section 413. the requirements of section 662 of theforeign assistance act of 1961, as amended (22 u.s.c. 2422), and section 501 ofthe national security act of 1947, as amended (50 u.s.c. 413), shall apply to allspecial activities as defined in this order.3.2implementation.the nsc, the secretary of defense, the attorney general, and the director of central intelligence shall issue such appropriate directives and procedures as are necessary to implement this order. heads of agencieswithin the intelligence community shall issue appropriate supplementary directives and procedures consistent with this order. the attorney general shall provide a statement of reasons for not approving any procedures established by thehead of an agency in the intelligence community other than the fbi. the nationalsecurity council may establish procedures in instances where the agency headand the attorney general are unable to reach agreement on other than constitutional or other legal grounds.3.3procedures.until the procedures required by this order have been established, the activities herein authorized which require procedures shall be conducted in accordance with existing procedures or requirements established underexecutive order no. 12036. procedures required by this order shall be established as expeditiously as possible. all procedures promulgated pursuant to thisorder shall be made available to the congressional intelligence committees.3.4definitions.for the purposes of this order, the following terms shall havethese meanings:(a)counterintelligence means information gathered and activities conducted to protect against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or assassinations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations or persons, or international terrorist activities, but not including personnel, physical,document or communications security programs.(b)electronic surveillance means acquisitions of a nonpublic communication by electronic means without the consent of a person who is a party to anelectronic communication or, in the case of a nonelectronic communication, without the consent of a person who is visably present at the place of communication,but not including the use of radio directionfinding equipment solely to determine the location of a transmitter.(c)employee means a person employed by, assigned to or acting for anagency within the intelligence community.(d)foreign intelligence means information relating to the capabilities, incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.588appendix ntentions and activities of foreign powers, organizations or persons, but not including counterintelligence except for information on international terrorist activities.(e)intelligence activities means all activities that agencies within the intelligence community are authorized to conduct pursuant to this order.(f)intelligence community and agencies within the intelligence community refer to the following agencies or organizations:(1)the central intelligence agency (cia);(2)the national security agency (nsa);(3)the defense intelligence agency (dia);(4)the offices within the department of defense for the collectionof specialized national foreign intelligence through reconnaissance programs;(5)the bureau of intelligence and research of the department ofstate;(6)the intelligence elements of the army, navy, air force, andmarine corps, the federal bureau of investigation (fbi), the department of thetreasury, and the department of energy; and(7)the staff elements of the director of central intelligence.(g)the national foreign intelligence program includes the programslisted below, but its composition shall be subject to review by the national security council and modification by the president:(1)the programs of the cia;(2)the consolidated cryptologic program, the general defense intelligence program, and the programs of the offices within the department ofdefense for the collection of specialized national foreign intelligence through reconnaissance, except such elements as the director of central intelligence and thesecretary of defense agree should be excluded;(3)other programs of agencies within the intelligence communitydesignated jointly by the director of central intelligence and the head of thedepartment or by the president as national foreign intelligence or counterintelligence activities;(4)activities of the staff elements of the director of central intelligence;(5)activities to acquire the intelligence required for the planningand conduct of tactical operations by the united states military forces are notincluded in the national foreign intelligence program.(h)special activities means activities conducted in support of nationalforeign policy objectives abroad which are planned and executed so that the roleof the united states government is not apparent or acknowledged publicly, andfunctions in support of such activities, but which are not intended to influenceunited states political processes, public opinion, policies, or media and do notinclude diplomatic activities or the collection and production of intelligence orrelated support functions.(i)united states person means a united states citizen, an alien known bythe intelligence agency concerned to be a permanent resident alien, an unincorporated association substantially composed of united states citizens or permanentresident aliens, or a corporation incorporated in the united states, except for acorporation directed and controlled by a foreign government or governments.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations5893.5purpose and effect.this order is intended to control and provide direction and guidance to the intelligence community. nothing contained herein or inany procedures promulgated hereunder is intended to confer any substantive orprocedural right or privilege on any person or organization.3.6revocation.executive order no. 12036 of january 24, 1978, as amended,entitled ôunited states intelligence activities,õ is revoked.ronald reagan, the white house, december 4, 1981.n.2.2executive order 12958 (classified nationalsecurity information)this order prescribes a uniform system for classifying, safeguarding, anddeclassifying national security information. our democratic principles requirethat the american people be informed of the activities of their government. also,our nationõs progress depends on the free flow of information. nevertheless,throughout our history, the national interest has required that certain informationbe maintained in confidence in order to protect our citizens, our democratic institutions, and our participation within the community of nations. protecting information critical to our nationõs security remains a priority. in recent years, however, dramatic changes have altered, although not eliminated, the national securitythreats that we confront. these changes provide a greater opportunity to emphasize our commitment to open government.now, therefore, by the authority vested in me as president by theconstitution and the laws of the united states of america, it is hereby ordered asfollows:part 1original classificationsection 1.1. definitions. for purposes of this order:(a)ònational securityó means the national defense or foreign relations ofthe united states.(b)òinformationó means any knowledge that can be communicated ordocumentary material, regardless of its physical form or characteristics, that isowned by, produced by or for, or is under the control of the united states government. òcontroló means the authority of the agency that originates information, orits successor in function, to regulate access to the information.(c)òclassified national security informationó (hereafter òclassified informationó) means information that has been determined pursuant to this order orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.590appendix nany predecessor order to require protection against unauthorized disclosure andis marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form.(d)òforeign government informationó means:(1)information provided to the united states government by a foreign government or governments, an international organization of governments,or any element thereof, with the expectation that the information, the source of theinformation, or both, are to be held in confidence;(2)information produced by the united states pursuant to or as aresult of a joint arrangement with a foreign government or governments, or aninternational organization of governments, or any element thereof, requiring thatthe information, the arrangement, or both, are to be held in confidence; or(3)information received and treated as òforeign government informationó under the terms of a predecessor order.(e)òclassificationó means the act or process by which information is determined to be classified information.(f)òoriginal classificationó means an initial determination that information requires, in the interest of national security, protection against unauthorizeddisclosure.(g)òoriginal classification authorityó means an individual authorized inwriting, either by the president, or by agency heads or other officials designatedby the president, to classify information in the first instance.(h)òunauthorized disclosureó means a communication or physical transfer of classified information to an unauthorized recipient.(i)òagencyó means any òexecutive agency,ó as defined in 5 u.s.c. 105,and any other entity within the executive branch that comes into the possession ofclassified information.(j)òsenior agency officialó means the official designated by the agencyhead under section 5.6(c) of this order to direct and administer the agencyõs program under which information is classified, safeguarded, and declassified.(k)òconfidential sourceó means any individual or organization that hasprovided, or that may reasonably be expected to provide, information to theunited states on matters pertaining to the national security with the expectationthat the information or relationship, or both, are to be held in confidence.(l)òdamage to the national securityó means harm to the national defenseor foreign relations of the united states from the unauthorized disclosure of information, to include the sensitivity, value, and utility of that information.sec. 1.2. classification standards.(a)information may be originally classified under the terms of this orderonly if all of the following conditions are met:(1)an original classification authority is classifying the information;(2)the information is owned by, produced by or for, or is under thecontrol of the united states government;(3)the information falls within one or more of the categories ofinformation listed in section 1.5 of this order; and(4)the original classification authority determines that the unauthorized disclosure of the information reasonably could be expected to result incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations591damage to the national security and the original classification authority is able toidentify or describe the damage.(b)if there is significant doubt about the need to classify information, itshall not be classified. this provision does not:(1)amplify or modify the substantive criteria or procedures for classification; or(2)create any substantive or procedural rights subject to judicialreview.(c)classified information shall not be declassified automatically as a result of any unauthorized disclosure of identical or similar information.sec. 1.3. classification levels.(a)information may be classified at one of the following three levels:(1)òtop secretó shall be applied to information, the unauthorizeddisclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally gravedamage to the national security that the original classification authority is able toidentify or describe.(2)òsecretó shall be applied to information, the unauthorized disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage to thenational security that the original classification authority is able to identify ordescribe.(3)òconfidentialó shall be applied to information, the unauthorizeddisclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the nationalsecurity that the original classification authority is able to identify or describe.(b)except as otherwise provided by statute, no other terms shall be usedto identify united states classified information.(c)if there is significant doubt about the appropriate level of classification, it shall be classified at the lower level.sec. 1.4. classification authority.(a)the authority to classify information originally may be exercised onlyby:(1)the president;(2)agency heads and officials designated by the president in thefederal register; or(3)united states government officials delegated this authority pursuant to paragraph (c), below.(b)officials authorized to classify information at a specified level are alsoauthorized to classify information at a lower level.(c)delegation of original classification authority.(1)delegations of original classification authority shall be limited tothe minimum required to administer this order. agency heads are responsible forensuring that designated subordinate officials have a demonstrable and continuing need to exercise this authority.(2)òtop secretó original classification authority may be delegatedonly by the president or by an agency head or official designated pursuant toparagraph (a)(2), above.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.592appendix n(3)òsecretó or òconfidentialó original classification authority maybe delegated only by the president; an agency head or official designated pursuant to paragraph (a)(2), above; or the senior agency official, provided that officialhas been delegated òtop secretó original classification authority by the agencyhead.(4)each delegation of original classification authority shall be inwriting and the authority shall not be redelegated except as provided in thisorder. each delegation shall identify the official by name or position title.(d)original classification authorities must receive training in original classification as provided in this order and its implementing directives.(e)exceptional cases. when an employee, contractor, licensee, certificateholder, or grantee of an agency that does not have original classification authorityoriginates information believed by that person to require classification, the information shall be protected in a manner consistent with this order and its implementing directives. the information shall be transmitted promptly as providedunder this order or its implementing directives to the agency that has appropriatesubject matter interest and classification authority with respect to this information. that agency shall decide within 30 days whether to classify this information.if it is not clear which agency has classification responsibility for this information,it shall be sent to the director of the information security oversight office. thedirector shall determine the agency having primary subject matter interest andforward the information, with appropriate recommendations, to that agency for aclassification determination.sec. 1.5. classification categories. information may not be considered for classification unless it concerns:(a)military plans, weapons systems, or operations;(b)foreign government information;(c)intelligence activities (including special activities), intelligence sourcesor methods, or cryptology;(d)foreign relations or foreign activities of the united states, includingconfidential sources;(e)scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to the nationalsecurity;(f)united states government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities; or(g)vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects or plansrelating to the national security.sec. 1.6. duration of classification.(a)at the time of original classification, the original classification authority shall attempt to establish a specific date or event for declassification basedupon the duration of the national security sensitivity of the information. the dateor event shall not exceed the time frame in paragraph (b), below.(b)if the original classification authority cannot determine an earlier specific date or event for declassification, information shall be marked for declassicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations593fication 10 years from the date of the original decision, except as provided inparagraph (d), below.(c)an original classification authority may extend the duration of classification or reclassify specific information for successive periods not to exceed 10years at a time if such action is consistent with the standards and proceduresestablished under this order. this provision does not apply to information contained in records that are more than 25 years old and have been determined tohave permanent historical value under title 44, united states code.(d)at the time of original classification, the original classification authority may exempt from declassification within 10 years specific information, theunauthorized disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to cause damageto the national security for a period greater than that provided in paragraph (b),above, and the release of which could reasonably be expected to:(1)reveal an intelligence source, method, or activity, or a cryptologicsystem or activity;(2)reveal information that would assist in the development or useof weapons of mass destruction;(3)reveal information that would impair the development or use oftechnology within a united states weapons system;(4)reveal united states military plans, or national security emergency preparedness plans;(5)reveal foreign government information;(6)damage relations between the united states and a foreign government, reveal a confidential source, or seriously undermine diplomatic activities that are reasonably expected to be ongoing for a period greater than thatprovided in paragraph (b), above;(7)impair the ability of responsible united states government officials to protect the president, the vice president, and other individuals for whomprotection services, in the interest of national security, are authorized; or(8)violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.(e)information marked for an indefinite duration of classification underpredecessor orders, for example, òoriginating agencyõs determination required,óor information classified under predecessor orders that contains nodeclassification instructions shall be declassified in accordance with part 3 of thisorder.sec. 1.7. identification and markings.(a)at the time of original classification, the following shall appear on theface of each classified document, or shall be applied to other classified media in anappropriate manner:(1)one of the three classification levels defined in section 1.3 of thisorder;(2)the identity, by name or personal identifier and position, of theoriginal classification authority;(3)the agency and office of origin, if not otherwise evident;(4)declassification instructions, which shall indicate one of the following:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.594appendix n(a)the date or event for declassification, as prescribed in section 1.6(a) or section 1.6(c); or(b)the date that is 10 years from the date of original classification, as prescribed in section 1.6(b); or(c)the exemption category from classification, as prescribedin section 1.6(d); and(5)a concise reason for classification which, at a minimum, cites theapplicable classification categories in section 1.5 of this order.(b)specific information contained in paragraph (a), above, may be excluded if it would reveal additional classified information.(c)each classified document shall, by marking or other means, indicatewhich portions are classified, with the applicable classification level, which portions are exempt from declassification under section 1.6(d) of this order, andwhich portions are unclassified. in accordance with standards prescribed in directives issued under this order, the director of the information security oversightoffice may grant waivers of this requirement for specified classes of documents orinformation. the director shall revoke any waiver upon a finding of abuse.(d)markings implementing the provisions of this order, including abbreviations and requirements to safeguard classified working papers, shall conformto the standards prescribed in implementing directives issued pursuant to thisorder.(e)foreign government information shall retain its original classificationmarkings or shall be assigned a u.s. classification that provides a degree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the entity that furnished the information.(f)information assigned a level of classification under this or predecessororders shall be considered as classified at that level of classification despite theomission of other required markings. whenever such information is used in thederivative classification process or is reviewed for possible declassification, holders of such information shall coordinate with an appropriate classification authority for the application of omitted markings.(g)the classification authority shall, whenever practicable, use a classified addendum whenever classified information constitutes a small portion of anotherwise unclassified document.sec. 1.8. classification prohibitions and limitations.(a)in no case shall information be classified in order to:(1)conceal violations of law, inefficiency, or administrative error;(2)prevent embarrassment to a person, organization, or agency;(3)restrain competition; or(4)prevent or delay the release of information that does not requireprotection in the interest of national security.(b)basic scientific research information not clearly related to the nationalsecurity may not be classified.(c)information may not be reclassified after it has been declassified andreleased to the public under proper authority.(d)information that has not previously been disclosed to the public undercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations595proper authority may be classified or reclassified after an agency has received arequest for it under the freedom of information act (5 u.s.c. 552) or the privacyact of 1974 (5 u.s.c. 552a), or the mandatory review provisions of section 3.6 ofthis order only if such classification meets the requirements of this order and isaccomplished on a documentbydocument basis with the personal participationor under the direction of the agency head, the deputy agency head, or the senioragency official designated under section 5.6 of this order. this provision does notapply to classified information contained in records that are more than 25 yearsold and have been determined to have permanent historical value under title 44,united states code.(e)compilations of items of information which are individually unclassified may be classified if the compiled information reveals an additional association or relationship that:(1)meets the standards for classification under this order; and(2) is not otherwise revealed in the individual items of information.as used in this order, òcompilationó means an aggregation of preexistingunclassified items of information.sec. 1.9. classification challenges.(a)authorized holders of information who, in good faith, believe that itsclassification status is improper are encouraged and expected to challenge theclassification status of the information in accordance with agency proceduresestablished under paragraph (b), below.(b)in accordance with implementing directives issued pursuant to thisorder, an agency head or senior agency official shall establish procedures underwhich authorized holders of information are encouraged and expected to challenge the classification of information that they believe is improperly classified orunclassified. these procedures shall assure that:(1)individuals are not subject to retribution for bringing such actions;(2)an opportunity is provided for review by an impartial official orpanel; and(3)individuals are advised of their right to appeal agency decisionsto the interagency security classification appeals panel established by section 5.4of this order.part 2derivative classificationsec. 2.1. definitions. for purposes of this order:(a)òderivative classificationó means the incorporating, paraphrasing, restating or generating in new form information that is already classified, and marking the newly developed material consistent with the classification markings thatapply to the source information. derivative classification includes the classification of information based on classification guidance. the duplication or reproduction of existing classified information is not derivative classification.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.596appendix n(b)òclassification guidanceó means any instruction or source that prescribes the classification of specific information.(c)òclassification guideó means a documentary form of classificationguidance issued by an original classification authority that identifies the elementsof information regarding a specific subject that must be classified and establishesthe level and duration of classification for each such element.(d)òsource documentó means an existing document that contains classified information that is incorporated, paraphrased, restated, or generated in newform into a new document.(e)òmultiple sourcesó means two or more source documents, classification guides, or a combination of both.sec. 2.2. use of derivative classification.(a)persons who only reproduce, extract, or summarize classified information, or who only apply classification markings derived from source materialor as directed by a classification guide, need not possess original classificationauthority.(b)persons who apply derivative classification markings shall:(1)observe and respect original classification decisions; and(2)carry forward to any newly created documents the pertinentclassification markings.for information derivatively classified based on multiple sources, the derivativeclassifier shall carry forward:(a)the date or event for declassification that corresponds tothe longest period of classification among the sources; and(b)a listing of these sources on or attached to the official fileor record copy.sec. 2.3. classification guides.(a)agencies with original classification authority shall prepare classification guides to facilitate the proper and uniform derivative classification of information. these guides shall conform to standards contained in directives issuedunder this order.(b)each guide shall be approved personally and in writing by an officialwho:(1)has program or supervisory responsibility over the informationor is the senior agency official; and(2)is authorized to classify information originally at the highestlevel of classification prescribed in the guide.(c)agencies shall establish procedures to assure that classification guidesare reviewed and updated as provided in directives issued under this order.part 3declassification and downgradingsec. 3.1. definitions. for purposes of this order:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations597(a)òdeclassificationó means the authorized change in the status of information from classified information to unclassified information.(b)òautomatic declassificationó means the declassification of information based solely upon:(1)the occurrence of a specific date or event as determined by theoriginal classification authority; or(2)the expiration of a maximum time frame for duration of classification established under this order.(c)òdeclassification authorityó means:(1)the official who authorized the original classification, if that official is still serving in the same position;(2)the originatorõs current successor in function;(3)a supervisory official of either; or(4)officials delegated declassification authority in writing by theagency head or the senior agency official.(d) òmandatory declassification reviewó means the review for declassification of classified information in response to a request for declassification thatmeets the requirements under section 3.6 of this order.(e)òsystematic declassification reviewó means the review for declassification of classified information contained in records that have been determinedby the archivist of the united states (òarchivistó) to have permanent historicalvalue in accordance with chapter 33 of title 44, united states code.(f)òdeclassification guideó means written instructions issued by a declassification authority that describes the elements of information regarding a specificsubject that may be declassified and the elements that must remain classified.(g) òdowngradingó means a determination by a declassification authority that information classified and safeguarded at a specified level shall be classified and safeguarded at a lower level.(h)òfile seriesó means documentary material, regardless of its physicalform or characteristics, that is arranged in accordance with a filing system ormaintained as a unit because it pertains to the same function or activity.sec. 3.2. authority for declassification.(a)information shall be declassified as soon as it no longer meets thestandards for classification under this order.(b)it is presumed that information that continues to meet the classification requirements under this order requires continued protection. in some exceptional cases, however, the need to protect such information may be outweighedby the public interest in disclosure of the information, and in these cases theinformation should be declassified. when such questions arise, they shall be referred to the agency head or the senior agency official. that official will determine, as an exercise of discretion, whether the public interest in disclosure outweighs the damage to national security that might reasonably be expected fromdisclosure. this provision does not:(1)amplify or modify the substantive criteria or procedures for classification; orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.598appendix n(2)create any substantive or procedural rights subject to judicialreview.(c)if the director of the information security oversight office determinesthat information is classified in violation of this order, the director may requirethe information to be declassified by the agency that originated the classification.any such decision by the director may be appealed to the president through theassistant to the president for national security affairs. the information shallremain classified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.(d)the provisions of this section shall also apply to agencies that, underthe terms of this order, do not have original classification authority, but had suchauthority under predecessor orders.sec. 3.3. transferred information.(a)in the case of classified information transferred in conjunction with atransfer of functions, and not merely for storage purposes, the receiving agencyshall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of this order.(b)in the case of classified information that is not officially transferred asdescribed in paragraph (a), above, but that originated in an agency that has ceasedto exist and for which there is no successor agency, each agency in possession ofsuch information shall be deemed to be the originating agency for purposes of thisorder. such information may be declassified or downgraded by the agency inpossession after consultation with any other agency that has an interest in thesubject matter of the information.(c)classified information accessioned into the national archives andrecords administration (ònational archivesó) as of the effective date of this order shall be declassified or downgraded by the archivist in accordance with thisorder, the directives issued pursuant to this order, agency declassification guides,and any existing procedural agreement between the archivist and the relevantagency head.(d)the originating agency shall take all reasonable steps to declassifyclassified information contained in records determined to have permanent historical value before they are accessioned into the national archives. however, thearchivist may require that records containing classified information beaccessioned into the national archives when necessary to comply with the provisions of the federal records act. this provision does not apply to informationbeing transferred to the archivist pursuant to section 2203 of title 44, unitedstates code, or information for which the national archives and records administration serves as the custodian of the records of an agency or organization thatgoes out of existence.(e)to the extent practicable, agencies shall adopt a system of recordsmanagement that will facilitate the public release of documents at the time suchdocuments are declassified pursuant to the provisions for automatic declassification in sections 1.6 and 3.4 of this order.sec. 3.4. automatic declassification.(a)subject to paragraph (b), below, within 5 years from the date of thisorder, all classified information contained in records that (1) are more than 25years old, and (2) have been determined to have permanent historical value undercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations599title 44, united states code, shall be automatically declassified whether or not therecords have been reviewed. subsequently, all classified information in suchrecords shall be automatically declassified no longer than 25 years from the dateof its original classification, except as provided in paragraph (b), below.(b)an agency head may exempt from automatic declassification underparagraph (a), above, specific information, the release of which should be expected to:(1)reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or revealinformation about the application of an intelligence source or method, or revealthe identity of a human intelligence source when the unauthorized disclosure ofthat source would clearly and demonstrably damage the national security interests of the united states;(2)reveal information that would assist in the development or useof weapons of mass destruction;(3)reveal information that would impair u.s. cryptologic systemsor activities;(4)reveal information that would impair the application of state ofthe art technology within a u.s. weapon system;(5)reveal actual u.s. military war plans that remain in effect;(6)reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair relations between the united states and a foreign government, or seriouslyand demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the united states;(7)reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impairthe current ability of united states government officials to protect the president,vice president, and other officials for whom protection services, in the interest ofnational security, are authorized;(8)reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair current national security emergency preparedness plans; or(9)violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.(c)no later than the effective date of this order, an agency head shallnotify the president through the assistant to the president for national securityaffairs of any specific file series of records for which a review or assessment hasdetermined that the information within those file series almost invariably fallswithin one or more of the exemption categories listed in paragraph (b), above, andwhich the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. the notification shall include:(1)a description of the file series;(2)an explanation of why the information within the file series isalmost invariably exempt from automatic declassification and why the information must remain classified for a longer period of time; and(3)except for the identity of a confidential human source or a human intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b), above, a specific date orevent for declassification of the information.the president may direct the agency head not to exempt the file series or todeclassify the information within that series at an earlier date than recommended.(d)at least 180 days before information is automatically declassified under this section, an agency head or senior agency official shall notify the directorcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.600appendix nof the information security oversight office, serving as executive secretary of theinteragency security classification appeals panel, of any specific informationbeyond that included in a notification to the president under paragraph (c), above,that the agency proposes to exempt from automatic declassification. the notification shall include:(1)a description of the information;(2)an explanation of why the information is exempt from automaticdeclassification and must remain classified for a longer period of time; and(3)except for the identity of a confidential human source or a human intelligence source, as provided in paragraph (b), above, a specific date orevent for declassification of the information. the panel may direct the agency notto exempt the information or to declassify it at an earlier date than recommended.the agency head may appeal such a decision to the president through the assistant to the president for national security affairs. the information will remainclassified while such an appeal is pending.(e)no later than the effective date of this order, the agency head or senioragency official shall provide the director of the information security oversightoffice with a plan for compliance with the requirements of this section, includingthe establishment of interim target dates. each such plan shall include the requirement that the agency declassify at least 15 percent of the records affected by thissection no later than 1 year from the effective date of this order, and similarcommitments for subsequent years until the effective date for automaticdeclassification.(f)information exempted from automatic declassification under this section shall remain subject to the mandatory and systematic declassification reviewprovisions of this order.(g)the secretary of state shall determine when the united states shouldcommence negotiations with the appropriate officials of a foreign government orinternational organization of governments to modify any treaty or internationalagreement that requires the classification of information contained in recordsaffected by this section for a period longer than 25 years from the date of itscreation, unless the treaty or international agreement pertains to information thatmay otherwise remain classified beyond 25 years under this section.sec. 3.5. systematic declassification review.(a)each agency that has originated classified information under this order or its predecessors shall establish and conduct a program for systematicdeclassification review. this program shall apply to historically valuable recordsexempted from automatic declassification under section 3.4 of this order. agencies shall prioritize the systematic review of records based upon:(1)recommendations of the information security policy advisorycouncil, established in section 5.5 of this order, on specific subject areas for systematic review concentration; or(2)the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood ofdeclassification upon review.(b)the archivist shall conduct a systematic declassification review program for classified information:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations601(1)accessioned into the national archives as of the effective date ofthis order;(2)information transferred to the archivist pursuant to section 2203of title 44, united states code; and(3)information for which the national archives and records administration serves as the custodian of the records of an agency or organizationthat has gone out of existence.this program shall apply to pertinent records no later than 25 years from the dateof their creation. the archivist shall establish priorities for the systematic reviewof these records based upon the recommendations of the information securitypolicy advisory council; or the degree of researcher interest and the likelihood ofdeclassification upon review. these records shall be reviewed in accordance withthe standards of this order, its implementing directives, and declassification guidesprovided to the archivist by each agency that originated the records. the directorof the information security oversight office shall assure that agencies provide thearchivist with adequate and current declassification guides.(c)after consultation with affected agencies, the secretary of defensemay establish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of classified cryptologic information, and the director of central intelligence may establish special procedures for systematic review for declassification of classified information pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), orintelligence sources or methods.sec. 3.6. mandatory declassification review.(a)except as provided in paragraph (b), below, all information classifiedunder this order or predecessor orders shall be subject to a review fordeclassification by the originating agency if:(1)the request for a review describes the document or material containing the information with sufficient specificity to enable the agency to locate itwith a reasonable amount of effort;(2)the information is not exempted from search and review underthe central intelligence agency information act; and(3)the information has not been reviewed for declassification withinthe past 2 years.if the agency has reviewed the information within the past 2 years, or the information is the subject of pending litigation, the agency shall inform the requester ofthis fact and of the requesterõs appeal rights.(b)information originated by:(1)the incumbent president;(2)the incumbent presidentõs white house staff;(3)committees, commissions, or boards appointed by the incumbent president; or(4)other entities within the executive office of the president thatsolely advise and assist the incumbent president is exempted from the provisionsof paragraph (a), above. however, the archivist shall have the authority to review, downgrade, and declassify information of former presidents under the control of the archivist pursuant to sections 2107, 2111, 2111 note, or 2203 of title 44,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.602appendix nunited states code. review procedures developed by the archivist shall providefor consultation with agencies having primary subject matter interest and shall beconsistent with the provisions of applicable laws or lawful agreements that pertain to the respective presidential papers or records. agencies with primary subject matter interest shall be notified promptly of the archivistõs decision. any finaldecision by the archivist may be appealed by the requester or an agency to theinteragency security classification appeals panel. the information shall remainclassified pending a prompt decision on the appeal.(c)agencies conducting a mandatory review for declassification shalldeclassify information that no longer meets the standards for classification underthis order. they shall release this information unless withholding is otherwiseauthorized and warranted under applicable law.(d)in accordance with directives issued pursuant to this order, agencyheads shall develop procedures to process requests for the mandatory review ofclassified information. these procedures shall apply to information classified under this or predecessor orders. they also shall provide a means for administratively appealing a denial of a mandatory review request, and for notifying therequester of the right to appeal a final agency decision to the interagency securityclassification appeals panel.(e)after consultation with affected agencies, the secretary of defenseshall develop special procedures for the review of cryptologic information, thedirector of central intelligence shall develop special procedures for the review ofinformation pertaining to intelligence activities (including special activities), orintelligence sources or methods, and the archivist shall develop special procedures for the review of information accessioned into the national archives.sec. 3.7. processing requests and reviews. in response to a request for information under the freedom of information act, the privacy act of 1974, or the mandatory review provisions of this order, or pursuant to the automatic declassificationor systematic review provisions of this order:(a)an agency may refuse to confirm or deny the existence or nonexistence of requested information whenever the fact of its existence or nonexistence isitself classified under this order.(b)when an agency receives any request for documents in its custodythat contain information that was originally classified by another agency, or comesacross such documents in the process of the automatic declassification or systematic review provisions of this order, it shall refer copies of any request and thepertinent documents to the originating agency for processing, and may, afterconsultation with the originating agency, inform any requester of the referralunless such association is itself classified under this order. in cases in which theoriginating agency determines in writing that a response under paragraph (a),above, is required, the referring agency shall respond to the requester in accordance with that paragraph.sec. 3.8. declassification database.(a)the archivist in conjunction with the director of the information security oversight office and those agencies that originate classified information,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations603shall establish a governmentwide database of information that has been declassified. the archivist shall also explore other possible uses of technology to facilitatethe declassification process.(b)agency heads shall fully cooperate with the archivist in these efforts.(c)except as otherwise authorized and warranted by law, all declassifiedinformation contained within the database established under paragraph (a), above,shall be available to the public.part 4safeguardingsec. 4.1. definitions. for purposes of this order:(a)òsafeguardingó means measures and controls that are prescribed toprotect classified information.(b)òaccessó means the ability or opportunity to gain knowledge of classified information.(c)òneedtoknowó means a determination made by an authorizedholder of classified information that a prospective recipient requires access tospecific classified information in order to perform or assist in a lawful and authorized governmental function.(d)òautomated information systemó means an assembly of computerhardware, software, or firmware configured to collect, create, communicate, compute, disseminate, process, store, or control data or information.(e)òintegrityó means the state that exists when information is unchangedfrom its source and has not been accidentally or intentionally modified, altered, ordestroyed.(f)ònetworkó means a system of two or more computers that can exchange data or information.(g)òtelecommunicationsó means the preparation, transmission, or communication of information by electronic means.(h)òspecial access programó means a program established for a specificclass of classified information that imposes safeguarding and access requirementsthat exceed those normally required for information at the same classificationlevel.sec. 4.2. general restrictions on access.(a)a person may have access to classified information provided that:(1)a favorable determination of eligibility for access has been madeby an agency head or the agency headõs designee;(2)the person has signed an approved nondisclosure agreement;and(3)the person has a needtoknow the information.(b)classified information shall remain under the control of the originating agency or its successor in function. an agency shall not disclose informationoriginally classified by another agency without its authorization. an official orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.604appendix nemployee leaving agency service may not remove classified information from theagencyõs control.(c)classified information may not be removed from official premiseswithout proper authorization.(d)persons authorized to disseminate classified information outside theexecutive branch shall assure the protection of the information in a manner equivalent to that provided within the executive branch.(e)consistent with law, directives, and regulation, an agency head orsenior agency official shall establish uniform procedures to ensure that automatedinformation systems, including networks and telecommunications systems, thatcollect, create, communicate, compute, disseminate, process, or store classifiedinformation have controls that:(1)prevent access by unauthorized persons; and(2)ensure the integrity of the information.(f)consistent with law, directives, and regulation, each agency head orsenior agency official shall establish controls to ensure that classified informationis used, processed, stored, reproduced, transmitted, and destroyed under conditions that provide adequate protection and prevent access by unauthorized persons.(g)consistent with directives issued pursuant to this order, an agencyshall safeguard foreign government information under standards that provide adegree of protection at least equivalent to that required by the government orinternational organization of governments that furnished the information. whenadequate to achieve equivalency, these standards may be less restrictive than thesafeguarding standards that ordinarily apply to united states òconfidentialó information, including allowing access to individuals with a needtoknow whohave not otherwise been cleared for access to classified information or executedan approved nondisclosure agreement.(h)except as provided by statute or directives issued pursuant to thisorder, classified information originating in one agency may not be disseminatedoutside any other agency to which it has been made available without the consentof the originating agency. an agency head or senior agency official may waivethis requirement for specific information originated within that agency. for purposes of this section, the department of defense shall be considered one agency.sec. 4.3. distribution controls.(a)each agency shall establish controls over the distribution of classifiedinformation to assure that it is distributed only to organizations or individualseligible for access who also have a needtoknow the information.(b)each agency shall update, at least annually, the automatic, routine, orrecurring distribution of classified information that they distribute. recipientsshall cooperate fully with distributors who are updating distribution lists andshall notify distributors whenever a relevant change in status occurs.sec. 4.4. special access programs.(a)establishment of special access programs. unless otherwise authorized by the president, only the secretaries of state, defense and energy, and thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations605director of central intelligence, or the principal deputy of each, may create aspecial access program. for special access programs pertaining to intelligenceactivities (including special activities, but not including military operational, strategic and tactical programs), or intelligence sources or methods, this function willbe exercised by the director of central intelligence. these officials shall keep thenumber of these programs at an absolute minimum, and shall establish them onlyupon a specific finding that:(1)the vulnerability of, or threat to, specific information is exceptional; and(2)the normal criteria for determining eligibility for access applicable to information classified at the same level are not deemed sufficient toprotect the information from unauthorized disclosure; or(3)the program is required by statute.(b)requirements and limitations.(1)special access programs shall be limited to programs in whichthe number of persons who will have access ordinarily will be reasonably smalland commensurate with the objective of providing enhanced protection for theinformation involved.(2)each agency head shall establish and maintain a system of accounting for special access programs consistent with directives issued pursuant tothis order.(3)special access programs shall be subject to the oversight program established under section 5.6(c) of this order. in addition, the director of theinformation security oversight office shall be afforded access to these programs,in accordance with the security requirements of each program, in order to perform the functions assigned to the information security oversight office underthis order. an agency head may limit access to a special access program to thedirector and no more than one other employee of the information security oversight office; or, for special access programs that are extraordinarily sensitive andvulnerable, to the director only.(4)the agency head or principal deputy shall review annually eachspecial access program to determine whether it continues to meet the requirements of this order.(5)upon request, an agency shall brief the assistant to the president for national security affairs, or his or her designee, on any or all of theagencyõs special access programs.(c)within 180 days after the effective date of this order, each agency heador principal deputy shall review all existing special access programs under theagencyõs jurisdiction. these officials shall terminate any special access programsthat do not clearly meet the provisions of this order. each existing special accessprogram that an agency head or principal deputy validates shall be treated as if itwere established on the effective date of this order.(d)nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by orunder 10 u.s.c. 119.sec. 4.5. access by historical researchers and former presidential appointees.(a)the requirement in section 4.2(a)(3) of this order that access to classicryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.606appendix nfied information may be granted only to individuals who have a needtoknowthe information may be waived for persons who:(1)are engaged in historical research projects; or(2)previously have occupied policymaking positions to which theywere appointed by the president.(b)waivers under this section may be granted only if the agency head orsenior agency official of the originating agency:(1)determines in writing that access is consistent with the interestof national security;(2)takes appropriate steps to protect classified information fromunauthorized disclosure or compromise, and ensures that the information is safeguarded in a manner consistent with this order; and(3)limits the access granted to former presidential appointees toitems that the person originated, reviewed, signed, or received while serving as apresidential appointee.part 5implementation and reviewsec. 5.1. definitions. for purposes of this order:(a)òselfinspectionó means the internal review and evaluation of individual agency activities and the agency as a whole with respect to the implementation of the program established under this order and its implementing directives.(b)òviolationó means:(1)any knowing, willful, or negligent action that could reasonablybe expected to result in an unauthorized disclosure of classified information;(2)any knowing, willful, or negligent action to classify or continuethe classification of information contrary to the requirements of this order or itsimplementing directives; or(3)any knowing, willful, or negligent action to create or continue aspecial access program contrary to the requirements of this order.(c)òinfractionó means any knowing, willful, or negligent action contraryto the requirements of this order or its implementing directives that does notcomprise a òviolation,óas defined above.sec. 5.2. program direction.(a)the director of the office of management and budget, in consultationwith the assistant to the president for national security affairs and the cochairsof the security policy board, shall issue such directives as are necessary to implement this order. these directives shall be binding upon the agencies. directivesissued by the director of the office of management and budget shall establishstandards for:(1)classification and marking principles;(2)agency security education and training programs;(3)agency selfinspection programs; and(4)classification and declassification guides.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations607(b)the director of the office of management and budget shall delegatethe implementation and monitorship functions of this program to the director ofthe information security oversight office.(c)the security policy board, established by a presidential decision directive, shall make a recommendation to the president through the assistant tothe president for national security affairs with respect to the issuance of a presidential directive on safeguarding classified information. the presidential directive shall pertain to the handling, storage, distribution, transmittal, and destruction of and accounting for classified information.sec. 5.3. information security oversight office.(a)there is established within the office of management and budget aninformation security oversight office. the director of the office of managementand budget shall appoint the director of the information security oversight office, subject to the approval of the president.(b)under the direction of the director of the office of management andbudget acting in consultation with the assistant to the president for nationalsecurity affairs, the director of the information security oversight office shall:(1)develop directives for the implementation of this order;(2)oversee agency actions to ensure compliance with this order andits implementing directives;(3)review and approve agency implementing regulations andagency guides for systematic declassification review prior to their issuance by theagency;(4)have the authority to conduct onsite reviews of each agencyõsprogram established under this order, and to require of each agency those reports,information, and other cooperation that may be necessary to fulfill its responsibilities. if granting access to specific categories of classified information wouldpose an exceptional national security risk, the affected agency head or the senioragency official shall submit a written justification recommending the denial ofaccess to the director of the office of management and budget within 60 days ofthe request for access. access shall be denied pending a prompt decision by thedirector of the office of management and budget, who shall consult on thisdecision with the assistant to the president for national security affairs;(5)review requests for original classification authority from agencies or officials not granted original classification authority and, if deemed appropriate, recommend presidential approval through the director of the office ofmanagement and budget;(6)consider and take action on complaints and suggestions frompersons within or outside the government with respect to the administration ofthe program established under this order;(7)have the authority to prescribe, after consultation with affectedagencies, standardization of forms or procedures that will promote the implementation of the program established under this order;(8)report at least annually to the president on the implementationof this order; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.608appendix n(9)convene and chair interagency meetings to discuss matters pertaining to the program established by this order.sec. 5.4. interagency security classification appeals panel.(a)establishment and administration.(1)there is established an interagency security classification appeals panel (òpaneló). the secretaries of state and defense, the attorney general,the director of central intelligence, the archivist of the united states, and theassistant to the president for national security affairs shall each appoint a seniorlevel representative to serve as a member of the panel. the president shall selectthe chair of the panel from among the panel members.(2)a vacancy on the panel shall be filled as quickly as possible asprovided in paragraph (1), above.(3)the director of the information security oversight office shallserve as the executive secretary. the staff of the information security oversightoffice shall provide program and administrative support for the panel.(4)the members and staff of the panel shall be required to meeteligibility for access standards in order to fulfill the panelõs functions.(5)the panel shall meet at the call of the chair. the chair shallschedule meetings as may be necessary for the panel to fulfill its functions in atimely manner.(6)the information security oversight office shall include in itsreports to the president a summary of the panelõs activities.(b)functions. the panel shall:(1)decide on appeals by persons who have filed classification challenges under section 1.9 of this order;(2)approve, deny, or amend agency exemptions from automaticdeclassification as provided in section 3.4 of this order; and(3)decide on appeals by persons or entities who have filed requestsfor mandatory declassification review under section 3.6 of this order.(c)rules and procedures. the panel shall issue bylaws, which shall bepublished in the federal register no later than 120 days from the effective date ofthis order. the bylaws shall establish the rules and procedures that the panel willfollow in accepting, considering, and issuing decisions on appeals. the rules andprocedures of the panel shall provide that the panel will consider appeals only onactions in which:(1)the appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedieswithin th responsible agency;(2)there is no current action pending on the issue within the federalcourts; and(3)the information has not been the subject of review by the federalcourts or the panel within the past 2 years.(d)agency heads will cooperate fully with the panel so that it can fulfillits functions in a timely and fully informed manner. an agency head may appeala decision of the panel to the president through the assistant to the president fornational security affairs. the panel will report to the president through the ascryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations609sistant to the president for national security affairs any instance in which itbelieves that an agency head is not cooperating fully with the panel.(e)the appeals panel is established for the sole purpose of advising andassisting the president in the discharge of his constitutional and discretionaryauthority to protect the national security of the united states. panel decisions arecommitted to the discretion of the panel, unless reversed by the president.sec. 5.5. information security policy advisory council.(a)establishment. there is established an information security policyadvisory council (òcounciló). the council shall be composed of seven membersappointed by the president for staggered terms not to exceed 4 years, from amongpersons who have demonstrated interest and expertise in an area related to thesubject matter of this order and are not otherwise employees of the federal government. the president shall appoint the council chair from among the members. the council shall comply with the federal advisory committee act, asamended, 5 u.s.c. app. 2.(b)functions. the council shall:(1)advise the president, the assistant to the president for nationalsecurity affairs, the director of the office of management and budget, or suchother executive branch officials as it deems appropriate, on policies establishedunder this order or its implementing directives, including recommended changesto those policies;(2)provide recommendations to agency heads for specific subjectareas for systematic declassification review; and(3)serve as a forum to discuss policy issues in dispute.(c)meetings. the council shall meet at least twice each calendar year,and as determined by the assistant to the president for national security affairsor the director of the office of management and budget.(d)administration.(1)each council member may be compensated at a rate of pay notto exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for gradegs18 of the general schedule under section 5376 of title 5, united states code, foreach day during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of theduties of the council.(2)while away from their homes or regular place of business in theactual performance of the duties of the council, members may be allowed travelexpenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law forpersons serving intermittently in the government service (5 u.s.c. 5703(b)).(3)to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability offunds, the information security oversight office shall provide the council withadministrative services, facilities, staff, and other support services necessary forthe performance of its functions.(4)notwithstanding any other executive order, the functions of thepresident under the federal advisory committee act, as amended, that are applicable to the council, except that of reporting to the congress, shall be performedby the director of the information security oversight office in accordance withcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.610appendix nthe guidelines and procedures established by the general services administration.sec. 5.6. general responsibilities. heads of agencies that originate or handle classified information shall:(a)demonstrate personal commitment and commit senior managementto the successful implementation of the program established under this order;(b)commit necessary resources to the effective implementation of theprogram established under this order; and(c)designate a senior agency official to direct and administer the program, whose responsibilities shall include:(1)overseeing the agencyõs program established under this order,provided, an agency head may designate a separate official to oversee specialaccess programs authorized under this order. this official shall provide a fullaccounting of the agencyõs special access programs at least annually;(2)promulgating implementing regulations, which shall be published in the federal register to the extent that they affect members of the public;(3)establishing and maintaining security education and trainingprograms;(4)establishing and maintaining an ongoing selfinspection program, which shall include the periodic review and assessment of the agencyõsclassified product;(5)establishing procedures to prevent unnecessary access to classified information, including procedures that: (i) require that a need for access toclassified information is established before initiating administrative clearance procedures; and (ii) ensure that the number of persons granted access to classifiedinformation is limited to the minimum consistent with operational and securityrequirements and needs;(6)developing special contingency plans for the safeguarding ofclassified information used in or near hostile or potentially hostile areas;(7)assuring that the performance contract or other system used torate civilian or military personnel performance includes the management of classified information as a critical element or item to be evaluated in the rating of: (i)original classification authorities; (ii) security managers or security specialists;and (iii) all other personnel whose duties significantly involve the creation orhandling of classified information;(8)accounting for the costs associated with the implementation ofthis order, which shall be reported to the director of the information securityoversight office for publication; and(9)assigning in a prompt manner agency personnel to respond toany request, appeal, challenge, complaint, or suggestion arising out of this orderthat pertains to classified information that originated in a component of the agencythat no longer exists and for which there is no clear successor in function.sec. 5.7. sanctions.(a)if the director of the information security oversight office finds that aviolation of this order or its implementing directives may have occurred, thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations611director shall make a report to the head of the agency or to the senior agencyofficial so that corrective steps, if appropriate, may be taken.(b)officers and employees of the united states government, and its contractors, licensees, certificate holders, and grantees shall be subject to appropriatesanctions if they knowingly, willfully, or negligently:(1)disclose to unauthorized persons information properly classified under this order or predecessor orders;(2)classify or continue the classification of information in violationof this order or any implementing directive;(3)create or continue a special access program contrary to the requirements of this order; or(4)contravene any other provision of this order or its implementingdirectives.(c)sanctions may include reprimand, suspension without pay, removal,termination of classification authority, loss or denial of access to classified information, or other sanctions in accordance with applicable law and agency regulation.(d)the agency head, senior agency official, or other supervisory officialshall, at a minimum, promptly remove the classification authority of any individual who demonstrates reckless disregard or a pattern of error in applying theclassification standards of this order.(e)the agency head or senior agency official shall:(1)take appropriate and prompt corrective action when a violationor infraction under paragraph (b), above, occurs; and(2) notify the director of the information security oversight officewhen a violation under paragraph (b)(1), (2) or (3), above, occurs.part 6general provisionssec. 6.1. general provisions.(a)nothing in this order shall supersede any requirement made by orunder the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended, or the national security act of1947, as amended. òrestricted dataó and òformerly restricted dataó shall behandled, protected, classified, downgraded, and declassified in conformity withthe provisions of the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended, and regulationsissued under that act.(b)the attorney general, upon request by the head of an agency or thedirector of the information security oversight office, shall render an interpretation of this order with respect to any question arising in the course of its administration.(c)nothing in this order limits the protection afforded any informationby other provisions of law, including the exemptions to the freedom of information act, the privacy act, and the national security act of 1947, as amended. thisorder is not intended, and should not be construed, to create any right or benefit,substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the united states,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.612appendix nits agencies, its officers, or its employees. the foregoing is in addition to thespecific provisos set forth in sections 1.2(b), 3.2(b) and 5.4(e) of this order.(d)executive order no. 12356 of april 6, 1982, is revoked as of the effective date of this order.sec. 6.2. effective date. this order shall become effective 180 days from the date ofthis order.william j. clinton, the white house, april 17, 1995.n.2.3executive order 12472 (assignment of national security andemergency preparedness telecommunications functions)by the authority vested in me as president by the constitution and laws of theunited states of america, including the communications act of 1934, as amended(47 u.s.c. 151), the national security act of 1947, as amended, the defense production act of 1950, as amended (50 u.s.c. app. 2061), the federal civil defenseact of 1950, as amended (50 u.s.c. app. 2251), the disaster relief act of 1974 (42u.s.c. 5121), section 5 of reorganization plan no. 1 of 1977 (3 c.f.r. 197, 1978comp.), and section 203 of reorganization plan no. 3 of 1978 (3 c.f.r. 389, 1978comp.), and in order to provide for the consolidation of assignment and responsibility for improved execution of national security and emergency preparednesstelecommunications functions, it is hereby ordered as follows:sec. 1. the national communications system.(a)there is hereby established the national communications system(ncs). the ncs shall consist of the telecommunications assets of the entitiesrepresented on the ncs committee of principals and an administrative structureconsisting of the executive agent, the ncs committee of principals and the manager. the ncs committee of principals shall consist of representatives from thosefederal departments, agencies or entities, designated by the president, whichlease or own telecommunications facilities or services of significance to nationalsecurity or emergency preparedness, and, to the extent permitted by law, otherexecutive entities which bear policy, regulatory or enforcement responsibilities ofimportance to national security or emergency preparedness telecommunicationscapabilities.(b)the mission of the ncs shall be to assist the president, the nationalsecurity council, the director of the office of science and technology policy andthe director of the office of management and budget in:(1)the exercise of the telecommunications functions and responsibilities set forth in section 2 of this order; and(2)the coordination of the planning for and provision of nationalsecurity and emergency preparedness communications for the federal governcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations613ment under all circumstances, including crisis or emergency, attack, recovery andreconstitution.(c)the ncs shall seek to ensure that a national telecommunications infrastructure is developed which:(1)is responsive to the national security and emergency preparedness needs of the president and the federal departments, agencies and otherentities, including telecommunications in support of national security leadershipand continuity of government;(2)is capable of satisfying priority telecommunications requirements under all circumstances through use of commercial, government and privately owned telecommunications resources;(3)incorporates the necessary combination of hardness, redundancy, mobility, connectivity, interoperability, restorability and security to obtain, to the maximum extent practicable, the survivability of national security andemergency preparedness telecommunications in all circumstances, including conditions of crisis or emergency; and(4)is consistent, to the maximum extent practicable, with other national telecommunications policies.(d)to assist in accomplishing its mission, the ncs shall:(1)serve as a focal point for joint industrygovernment nationalsecurity and emergency preparedness telecommunications planning; and(2)establish a joint industrygovernment national coordinatingcenter which is capable of assisting in the initiation, coordination, restoration andreconstitution of national security or emergency preparedness telecommunications services or facilities under all conditions of crisis or emergency.(e)the secretary of defense is designated as the executive agent for thencs. the executive agent shall:(1)designate the manager of the ncs;(2)ensure that the ncs conducts unified planning and operations,in order to coordinate the development and maintenance of an effective and responsive capability for meeting the domestic and international national securityand emergency preparedness telecommunications needs of the federal government;(3)ensure that the activities of the ncs are conducted in conjunction with the emergency management activities of the federal emergency management agency;(4)recommend, in consultation with the ncs committee of principals, to the national security council, the director of the office of science andtechnology policy, or the director of the office of management and budget, asappropriate:a.the assignment of implementation or other responsibilities toncs member entities;b.new initiatives to assist in the exercise of the functions specified in section 2; andc.changes in the composition or structure of the ncs;(5)oversee the activities of and provide personnel and administrative support to the manager of the ncs;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.614appendix n(6)provide staff support and technical assistance to the nationalsecurity telecommunications advisory committee established by executive order no. 12382, as amended; and(7)perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned bythe president or his authorized designee.(f)the ncs committee of principals shall:(1)serve as the forum in which each member of the committee mayreview, evaluate, and present views, information and recommendations concerning ongoing or prospective national security or emergency preparedness telecommunications programs or activities of the ncs and the entities represented on thecommittee;(2)serve as the forum in which each member of the committeeshall report on and explain ongoing or prospective telecommunications plans andprograms developed or designed to achieve national security or emergency preparedness telecommunications objectives;(3)provide comments or recommendations, as appropriate, to thenational security council, the director of the office of science and technologypolicy, the director of the office of management and budget, the executive agent,or the manager of the ncs, regarding ongoing or prospective activities of thencs; and(4)perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned bythe president or his authorized designee.(g)the manager of the ncs shall:(1)develop for consideration by the ncs committee of principalsand the executive agent:a.a recommended evolutionary telecommunications architecture designed to meet current and future federal government national securityand emergency preparedness telecommunications requirements;b.plans and procedures for the management, allocation anduse, including the establishment of priorities or preferences, of federally ownedor leased telecommunications assets under all conditions of crisis or emergency;c.plans, procedures and standards for minimizing or removing technical impediments to the interoperability of governmentowned and/orcommerciallyprovided telecommunications systems;d.test and exercise programs and procedures for the evaluation of the capability of the nationõs telecommunications resources to meet national security or emergency preparedness telecommunications requirements; ande.alternative mechanisms for funding, through the budgetreview process, national security or emergency preparedness telecommunicationsinitiatives which benefit multiple federal departments, agencies, or entities. thosemechanisms recommended by the ncs committee of principals and the executive agent shall be submittted to the director of the office of management andbudget.(2)implement and administer any approved plans or programs asassigned, including any system of priorities and preferences for the provision ofcommunications service, in consultation with the ncs committee of principalscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations615and the federal communications commission, to the extent practicable or otherwise required by law or regulation;(3)chair the ncs committee of principals and provide staff support and technical assistance thereto;(4)serve as a focal point for joint industrygovernment planning,including the dissemination of technical information, concerning the national security or emergency perparedness telecommunications requirements of the federal government;(5)conduct technical studies or analyses, and examine research anddevelopment programs, for the purpose of identifying, for consideration by thencs committee of principals and the executive agent, improved approacheswhich may assist federal entities in fulfilling national security or emergency preparedness telecommunications objectives;(6)pursuant to the federal standardization program of the generalservices administration, and in consultation with other appropriate entities of thefederal government including the ncs committee of principals, manage the federal telecommunications standards program, ensuring wherever feasible thatexisting or evolving industry, national, and international standards are used asthe basis for federal telecommunications standards; and(7)provide such reports and perform such other duties as are fromtime to time assigned by the president or his authorized designee, the executiveagent, or the ncs committee of principals. any such assignments of responsibility to, or reports made by, the manager shall be transmitted through the executiveagent.sec. 2. executive office responsibilities.(a)wartime emergency functions.(1)the national security council shall provide policy direction forthe exercise of the war power functions of the president under section 606 of thecommunications act of 1934, as amended (47 u.s.c. 606), should the presidentissue implementing instructions in accordance with the national emergencies act(50 u.s.c. 1601).(2)the director of the office of science and technology policy shalldirect the exercise of the war power functions of the president under section 606(a), (c)(e), of the communications act of 1934, as amended (47 u.s.c. 606), shouldthe president issue implementing instructions in accordance with the nationalemergencies act (50 u.s.c. 1601).(b)nonwartime emergency functions.(1)the national security council shall:a.advise and assist the president in coordinating the development of policy, plans, programs and standards within the federal government forthe identification, allocation, and use of the nationõs telecommunications resources by the federal government, and by state and local governments, privateindustry and volunteer organizations upon request, to the extent practicable andotherwise consistent with law, during those crises or emergencies in which theexercise of the presidentõs war power functions is not required or permitted bylaw; andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.616appendix nb.provide policy direction for the exercise of the presidentõsnonwartime emergency telecommunications functions, should the president soinstruct.(2)the director of the office of science and technology policy shallprovide information, advice, guidance and assistance, as appropriate, to the president and to those federal departments and agencies with responsibilities for theprovision, management, or allocation of telecommunications resources, duringthose crises or emergencies in which the exercise of the presidentõs war powerfunctions is not required or permitted by law;(3)the director of the office of science and technology policy shallestablish a joint telecommunications resources board (jtrb) to assist him in theexercise of the functions specified in this subsection. the director of the office ofscience and technology policy shall serve as chairman of the jtrb; select thosefederal departments, agencies, or entities which shall be members of the jtrb;and specify the functions it shall perform.(c)planning and oversight responsibilities.(1)the national security council shall advise and assist the president in:a.coordinating the development of policy, plans, programsand standards for the mobilization and use of the nationõs commercial, government, and privately owned telecommunications resources, in order to meet national security or emergency preparedness requirements;b.providing policy oversight and direction of the activities ofthe ncs; andc.providing policy oversight and guidance for the executionof the responsibilities assigned to the federal departments and agencies by thisorder.(2)the director of the office of science and technology policy shallmake recommendations to the president with respect to the test, exercise andevaluation of the capability of existing and planned communications systems,networks or facilities to meet national security or emergency preparedness requirements and report the results of any such tests or evaluations and any recommended remedial actions to the president and to the national security council;(3)the director of the office of science and technology policy orhis designee shall advise and assist the president in the administration of a systemof radio spectrum priorities for those spectrum dependent telecommunicationsresources of the federal government which support national security or emergency preparedness functions. the director also shall certify or approve prioritiesfor radio spectrum use by the federal government, including the resolution of anyconflicts in or among priorities, under all conditions of crisis or emergency; and(4)the national security council, the director of the office of science and technology policy and the director of the office of management andbudget shall, in consultation with the executive agent for the ncs and the ncscommittee of principals, determine what constitutes national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications requirements.(d)consultation with federal departments and agencies. in performingthe functions assigned under this order, the national security council and thecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations617director of the office of science and technology policy, in consultation with eachother, shall:(1)consult, as appropriate, with the director of the office of management and budget; the director of the federal emergency management agencywith respect to the emergency management responsibilities assigned pursuant toexecutive order no. 12148, as amended; the secretary of commerce, with respectto responsibilities assigned pursuant to executive order no. 12046; the secretaryof defense, with respect to communications security responsibilities assigned pursuant to executive order no. 12333; and the chairman of the federal communications commission or his authorized designee; and(2)establish arrangements for consultation among all interestedfederal departments, agencies or entities to ensure that the national security andemergency preparedness communications needs of all federal government entities are identified; that mechanisms to address such needs are incorporated intopertinent plans and procedures; and that such needs are met in a manner consistent, to the maximum extent practicable, with other national telecommunicationspolicies.(e)budgetary guidelines. the director of the office of management andbudget, in consultation with the national security council and the ncs, willprescribe general guidelines and procedures for reviewing the financing of thencs within the budgetary process and for preparation of budget estimates byparticipating agencies. these guidelines and procedures may provide for mechanisms for funding, through the budget review process, national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications initiatives which benefit multiple federal departments, agencies, or entities.sec. 3. assignment of responsibilities to other departments and agencies. inorder to support and enhance the capability to satisfy the national security andemergency preparedness telecommunications needs of the federal government,state and local governments, private industry and volunteer organizations, underall circumstances including those of crisis or emergency, the federal departmentsand agencies shall perform the following functions:(a)department of commerce. the secretary of commerce shall, for allconditions of crisis or emergency:(1)develop plans and procedures concerning radio spectrum assignments, priorities and allocations for use by federal departments, agencies andentities; and(2)develop, maintain and publish policy, plans, and procedures forthe control and allocation of frequency assignments, including the authority toamend, modify or revoke such assignments, in those parts of the electromagneticspectrum assigned to the federal government.(b)federal emergency management agency. the director of the federalemergency management agency shall:(1)plan for and provide, operate and maintain telecommunicationsservices and facilities, as part of its national emergency management system,adequate to support its assigned emergency management responsibilities;(2)advise and assist state and local governments and volunteercryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.618appendix norganizations, upon request and to the extent consistent with law, in developingplans and procedures for identifying and satisfying their national security oremergency preparedness telecommunications requirements;(3)ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications planning by state and local governments and volunteer organizations is mutually supportive and consistent with the planning of the federal government; and(4)develop, upon request and to the extent consistent with law andin consonance with regulations promulgated by and agreements with the federalcommunications commission, plans and capabilities for, and provide policy andmanagement oversight of, the emergency broadcast system, and advise and assist private radio licensees of the commission in developing emergency communications plans, procedures and capabilities.(c)department of state. the secretary of state, in accordance with assigned responsibilities within the diplomatic telecommunications system, shallplan for and provide, operate and maintain rapid, reliable and secure telecommunications services to those federal entities represented at united states diplomaticmissions and consular offices overseas. this responsibility shall include the provision and operation of domestic telecommunications in support of assigned national security or emergency preparedness responsibilities.(d)department of defense. in addition to the other responsibilities assigned by this order, the secretary of defense shall:(1)plan for and provide, operate and maintain telecommunicationsservices and facilities adequate to support the national command authoritiesand to execute the responsibilities assigned by executive order no. 12333; and(2)ensure that the director of the national security agency provides the technical support necessary to develop and maintain plans adequate toprovide for the security and protection of national security and emergencypreparedness telecommunications.(e)department of justice. the attorney general shall, as necessary, review for legal sufficiency, including consistency with the antitrust laws, all policies, plans or procedures developed pursuant to responsibilities assigned by thisorder.(f)central intelligence agency. the director of central intelligence shallplan for and provide, operate, and maintain telecommunications services adequate to support its assigned responsibilities, including the dissemination ofintelligence within the federal government.(g)general services administration. except as otherwise assigned by thisorder, the administrator of general services, consistent with policy guidanceprovided by the director of the office of management and budget, shall ensurethat federally owned or managed domestic communications facilities and services meet the national security and emergency preparedness requirements of thefederal civilian departments, agencies and entities.(h)federal communications commission. the federal communicationscommission shall, consistent with section 4(c) of this order:(1)review the policies, plans and procedures of all entities licensedor regulated by the commission that are developed to provide national securitycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations619or emergency preparedness communications services, in order to ensure that suchpolicies, plans and procedures are consistent with the public interest, convenienceand necessity;(2)perform such functions as required by law with respect to allentities licensed or regulated by the commission, including (but not limited to)the extension, discontinuance or reduction of common carrier facilities or services; the control of common carrier rates, charges, practices and classifications;the construction, authorization, activation, deactivation or closing of radio stations, services and facilities; the assignment of radio frequencies to commissionlicensees; the investigation of violations of pertinent law and regulation; and theinitiation of apppropriate enforcement actions;(3)develop policy, plans and procedures adequate to execute theresponsibilities assigned in this order under all conditions of crisis or emergency;and(4)consult as appropriate with the executive agent for the ncsand the ncs committee of principals to ensure continued coordination of theirrespective national security and emergency preparedness activities.(i)all federal departments and agencies, to the extent consistent withlaw (including those authorities and responsibilities set forth in section 4(c) of thisorder), shall:(1)determine their national security and emergency preparednesstelecommunications requirements, and provide information regarding such requirements to the manager of the ncs;(2)prepare policies, plans and procedures concerning telecommunications facilities, services or equipment under their management or operationalcontrol to maximize their capability of responding to the national security oremergency preparedness needs of the federal government;(3)provide, after consultation with the director of the office of management and budget, resources to support their respective requirements for national security and emergency preparedness telecommunications; and providepersonnel and staff support to the manager of the ncs as required by the president;(4)make information available to, and consult with, the manager ofthe ncs regarding agency telecommunications activities in support of nationalsecurity or emergency preparedness;(5)consult, consistent with the provisions of executive order no.12046, as amended, and in conjunction with the manager of the ncs, with thefederal communications commission regarding execution of responsibilities assigned by this order;(6)submit reports annually, or as otherwise requested, to the manager of the ncs, regarding agency national security or emergency preparednesstelecommunications activities; and(7)cooperate with and assist the executive agent for the ncs, thencs committee of principals, the manager of the ncs, and other departmentsand agencies in the execution of the functions set forth in this order, furnishingthem such information, support and assistance as may be required.(j)each federal department or agency shall execute the responsibilitiesassigned by this order in conjunction with the emergency management activitiescryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.620appendix nof the federal emergency management agency, and in regular consultation withthe executive agent for the ncs and the ncs committee of principals to ensurecontinued coordination of ncs and individual agency telecommunications activities.sec. 4. general provisions.(a)all executive departments and agencies may issue such rules andregulations as may be necessary to carry out the functions assigned under thisorder.(b)in order to reflect the assignments of responsibility provided by thisorder,(1)sections 2414, 4102, 4103, 4202, 4302, 53, and 6101 of executive order no. 12046, as amended, are revoked;(2)the presidential memorandum of august 21, 1963, as amended,entitled òestablishment of the national communications systemó, is hereby superseded; and(3)section 2411 of executive order no. 12046, as amended, is further amended by deleting the period and inserting ò, except as otherwise provided by executive order no. ò and inserting the number assigned to this order.(c)nothing in this order shall be deemed to affect the authorities orresponsibilities of the director of the office of management and budget, or anyoffice or official thereof; or reassign any function assigned any agency under thefederal property and administrative services act of 1949, as amended; or underany other law; or any function vested by law in the federal communicationscommission.sec. 5. this order shall be effective upon publication in the federal register.ronald reagan, the white house, april 3, 1984.n.2.4national security directive 425(national policy for the security of national securitytelecommunications and information systems)continuing advances in microelectronics technology have stimulated an unprecedented growth in the demand for and supply of telecommunications andinformation processing services within the government and throughout the private sector. as new technologies have been applied, traditional distinctions between telecommunications and information systems have begun to disappear.5the text presented was released to marc rotenberg, electronic privacy information center, under the freedom of information act and is available online at http://snyside.sunnyside.com/cpsr/privacy/computersecurity/nsd42.txt.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations621although this trend promises greatly improved efficiency and effectiveness, italso poses significant security challenges.telecommunications and information processing systems are highly susceptible to interception, unauthorized electronic access, and related forms of technical exploitation, as well as other dimensions of the foreign intelligence threat. thetechnology to exploit these electronic systems is widespread and is used extensively by foreign nations and can be employed, as well, by terrorist groups andcriminal elements. a comprehensive and coordinated approach must be taken toprotect the governmentõs national security telecommunications and informationsystems (national security systems) against current and projected threats. thisapproach must include mechanisms for formulating policy, overseeing systemssecurity resources programs, and coordinating and executing technical activities.this directive establishes initial objectives of policies, and an organizationalstructure to guide the conduct of activities to secure national security systemsfrom exploitation; establishes a mechanism for policy development and dissemination; and assigns responsibilities for implementation. it is intended to ensurefull participation and cooperation among the various existing centers of technicalexpertise throughout the executive branch, and to promote a coherent and coordinated defense against the foreign intelligence threat to these systems. this directive recognizes the special requirements for protection of intelligence sources andmethods.1. objectives. ensuring the security of national security systems is vitally important to the operational effectiveness of the national security activities of the government and to military combat readiness. i therefore, direct that the governmentõs capabilities for securing national security systems against technicalexploitation threats be maintained or, if inadequate, improved to provide for:a.reliable and continuing assessment of threats and vulnerabilities, andimplementation of appropriate effective countermeasures;b.a technical base within the u.s. government to achieve this security,and initiatives with the private sector to maintain, complement, or enhance thatgovernment technical base and to ensure information systems security productsare available to secure national security systems; and;c.effective and efficient application of u.s. government resources.2. policies. in support of these objectives the following policies are established:a.u.s. government national security systems shall be secured by suchmeans as are necessary to prevent compromises denials or exploitation;b.federal agencies shall require that national security systems operatedand maintained by u.s. government contractors likewise be secured.3. implementation. this directive establishes an nsc policy coordinating committee for national security telecommunications and information systems, aninteragency group at the operating level, an executive agent and a national manager to implement these objectives and policies.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.622appendix n4. national security council/policy coordinating committee for national security telecommunications and information systems.the national security council/policy coordinating committee (pcc) for national security telecommunications, chaired by the department of defense, under the authority of national security directives i and 10f assumed the responsibility for the national security telecommunications nsdd 97 steering group. byauthority of this directive, the pcc for national security telecommunications isrenamed the pcc for national security telecommunications and informationsystems, and shall expand its authority to include the responsibilities to protectthe governmentõs national security telecommunications and information systems.when addressing issues concerning the security of national security telecommunications and information systems, the membership of the pcc shall be expandedto include representatives of the secretary of state, the secretary of the treasury,the attorney general, the secretary of energy, the secretary of commerce, andthe director of central intelligence. the national manager for national securitytelecommunications and information systems security shall be invited as an observer. the policy coordinating committee shall:a.oversee the implementation of this directive;b.develop policy recommendations and provide guidance to the operating level national security telecommunications and information systems security committee (nstissc);c.review and resolve matters referred to it by the nstissc in fulfillingthe responsibilities outlined in paragraph 5, below; d.be subject to the policies of the director of central intelligence onmatters pertaining to the protection of intelligence sources and methods; and,e.recommend for presidential approval additions or revisions to thisdirective as national interests may require.5. the national security telecommunications and information systems security committee.a.the nstissc is established to consider technical matters and developoperating policies, procedures, guidelines, instructions, and standards as necessary to implement provisions of this directive. the committee shall be chaired bythe assistant secretary of defense (command, control, communications andintelligence) and shall be composed of a voting representative of each of thefollowing:the secretary of statethe secretary of the treasurythe secretary of defensethe attorney generalthe secretary of commercethe secretary of transportationthe secretary of energydirector, office of management and budgetassistant to the president for national security affairscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations623director of central intelligencechairman of the joint chiefs of staffdirector, federal bureau of investigationdirector, federal emergency management agencyadministrator, general services administrationthe chief of staff, united states armythe chief of naval operationsthe chief of staff, united states air forcecommandant, united states marine corpsdirector, national security agencymanager, national communications systemdirector, defense intelligence agency b.the nstissc shall: (1)develop such specific operating policies, procedures, guidelines,instructions, standards, objectives, and priorities as may be required to implement this directive; (2)provide systems security guidance for national security systemsto executive departments and agencies; (3)submit annually to the executive agent an evaluation of thesecurity status of national security systems with respect to established objectivesand priorities; (4)approve the release of cryptologic national security systemstechnical security material, information, and techniques to foreign governmentsor international organizations. the concurrence of the director of central intelligence shall be obtained with respect to those activities which he manages; (5)establish and maintain a national system for promulgating theoperating policies, instructions, directives, and guidancet which may be issuedpursuant to this directive; (6)establish permanent and temporary subcommittees as necessary to discharge its responsibilities; (7)make recommendations to the pcc for nstissc membershipand establish criteria and procedures for permanent observers from other departments or agencies affected by specific matters under deliberation, who may attend meetings upon invitation of the chairman; and, (8)interact, as necessary, with the national communications system committee of principals established by executive order 12472 to ensure thecoordinated execution of assigned responsibilities. c.the committee shall have two subcommittees, one focusing on telecommunications security and one focusing an information systems security. thetwo subcommittees shall coordinate their actions and recommendations concerning implementation of protective measures, which shall combine and coordinateboth areas where appropriate. d.the committee shall have a permanent secretariat composed of personnel of the national security agency and such other personnel from executivedepartments and agencies represented on the committee as are requested by thechairman. the national security agency shall provide facilities and support ascryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.624appendix nrequired. other executive departments and agencies shall provide facilities andsupport as requested by the chairman.6. the executive agent of the government for national security telecommunicationsand information systems security.a.consistent with the authority for communications security given thesecretary of defense in executive order 12333, the secretary of defense shallserve as executive agent of the government for national security telecommunications and information systems security and shall be responsible for implementing, under his signature, policies and procedures to: (1)ensure the development, in conjunction with committee member departments and agencies of plans and programs to fulfill the objectives ofthis directive, including the development of necessary security architectures; (2)procure for and provide to executive departments and agenciesand, where appropriate, to government contractors and foreign governments,consistent with the laws of the united states such technical security material,other technical assistance, and other related services of common concern as required to accomplish the objectives of this directive; (3)approve and provide minimum security standards and doctrine for systems subject to this directive; (u) (4)conduct, approve, or endorse research and development of techniques and equipment to secure national security systems; and, (5)operate, or coordinate the efforts, of u.s. government technicalcenters related to national security telecommunications and information systemssecurity.b.the executive agent shall review and assess the national managerõsrecommendations on the proposed national security telecommunications and information systems security programs and budgets for the executive departmentsand agencies. where appropriate, alternative systems security recommendationswill be provided to agency heads, to national security council committees andto the omb. in addition, the executive agent shall submit, annually, the securitystatus of national security systems with respect to established objectives and priorities through the national security council to the president.7. the national manager for national security telecommunications and informationsystems security.the director, national security agency, is designated the national manager fornational security telecommunications and information systems security and isresponsible to the secretary of defense as executive agent for carrying out theforegoing responsibilities. in fulfilling these responsibilities the national manager shall:a.examine u.s. government national security systems and evaluate theirvulnerability to foreign interception and exploitation. any such activities, including those involving monitoring of official telecommunications, shall be conductedin strict compliance with law, executive order and implementing procedures,cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations625and applicable presidential directive. no monitoring shall be performed withoutadvising the heads of the agencies, departments, or services concerned;b.act as the u.s. government focal point for cryptography, telecommunications systems security, and information systems security for national securitysystems;c.conduct, approve, or endorse research and development of techniquesand equipment to secure national security systems;d.review and approve all standards, techniques, systems, and equipment related to the security of national security systems;e.conduct foreign computer security and communications security liaison, including entering into agreements with foreign governments and with international and private organizations regarding national security systems, except forthose foreign intelligence relationships conducted for intelligence purposes by thedirector of central intelligence. any such agreements shall be coordinated withaffected departments and agencies;f.operate such printing and fabrication facilities as may be required toperform critical functions related to the provisions of cryptographic and othertechnical security material or services;g.assess the overall security posture of and disseminate information onthreats to and vulnerabilities of national security systems;h.operate a central technical center to evaluate and certify the securityof national security telecommunications and information systems;i.prescribe the minimum standards, methods and procedures for protecting cryptographic and other technical security material, techniques, and information related to national security systems;j.review and assess annually the national security telecommunicationssystems security programs and budgets of executive departments and agencies ofthe u.s. government, and recommend alternatives, where appropriate, for theexecutive agent;k.review annually the aggregated national security information systems security program and budget recommendations of the executive departments and agencies of the u.s. government for the executive agent;l.request from the heads of executive departments and agencies suchinformation and technical support as may be needed to discharge the responsibilities assigned herein;m.coordinate with the national institute for standards and technologyin accordance with the provisions of the computer security act of 1987 (p.l. 100235); andn.enter into agreements for the procurement of technicalsecurity material and other equipment, and their provision to executive departments and agencies, where appropriate, to government contractors, and foreign governments.8. the heads of executive departments and agencies shall:a.be responsible for achieving and maintaining secure national securitysystems within their departments or agencies;b.ensure that policies, procedures, guidelines, instructions, and stancryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.626appendix ndards issued pursuant to this directive are implemented within their departments or agencies; andc.provide to the nstissc, the executive agent, and the national manager, as appropriate, such information as may be required to discharge responsibilities assigned herein, consistent with relevant law, executive order, and presidential directive.9. additional responsibilities. the director, office of management and budget,shall:a.specify data to be provided during the annual budget review by executive departments and agencies on program and budgets relating to security oftheir national security systems;b.consolidate and provide such data to the national manager via theexecutive agent; andc.review for consistency with this directive, and amend as appropriate,omb policies and regulations which may pertain to the subject matter herein.10. nothing in this directive shall:a.alter or supersede the existing authorities of the director of centralintelligence;b.authorize the committee, the executive agent, or the national manager authority to examine the facilities of other executive departments and agencies without approval of the head of such department or agency, nor to request orcollect information concerning their operation for any purpose not provided forherein;c.amend or contravene the provisions of existing law, executive order,or presidential directive which pertain to the protection of sensitive information,to the protection of national security information, to the privacy aspects or financial management of information systems or to the administrative requirements forsafeguarding such resources against fraud, waste, and abuse;d.provide authority to issue policies, procedure, guidelines, instructions,standards, or priorities or operate programs concerning security of systems otherthan national security systems;e.be intended to establish additional review processes for the procurement of information processing systems;f.alter or rescind policies or programs begun under pd24 or nsdd145 that may be pertinent to national security systems. policies or programsretained pursuant to this provision shall not be construed to apply to systemswithin the purview of the computer security act of 1987 (pl100235); or[note: in documents received, approximately two paragraphs of materialdeleted by redaction of text in this place.]11. for the purposes of this directive the following terms shall have the meaningsindicated:a.telecommunications means the preparation transmission, communicacryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations627tions or related processing of information (writing, images, sounds or other data)by electrical, electromagnetic, electromechanical, electrooptical, or electronicmeans;b.information systems means any equipment or interconnected system orsubsystems of equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition storage manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching interchange,transmission, or reception of data and includes computer software, firmware, andhardware;c.telecommunications and information systems security means protectionafforded to telecommunications and information systems in order to prevent exploitation through interception, unauthorized electronic access, or related technical intelligence threats, and to ensure authenticity. such protection results fromthe application of security measures (including cryptosecurity, transmission security, emission security, and computer security) to systems which generate, storeprocess transfer, or communicate information of use to an adversary, and alsoincludes the physical protection of technical security material and technical security information;d.technical security material means equipment components, devices, andassociated documentation or other media which pertain to cryptographic or to thesecuring of telecommunications and information systems;e.national security systems are those telecommunications and information systems operated by the u.s. government, its contractors, or agents thatcontain classified information or, as set forth in 10 u.s.c. section 2315, that involves intelligence activities involves cryptologic activities related to national security, involves command and control of military forces, involves equipment thatis an integral part of a weapon or weapon system, or involves equipment that iscritical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions.12. except for ongoing telecommunications protection activities mandated by and pursuant to pd24 and nsdd145, nsdd145 is hereby rescinded.july 5, 1990n.3memorandums of understanding (mou)and agreement (moa)n.3.1national security agency/national institute of standardsand technology moumemorandum of understanding between the director of the national institute ofstandards and technology and the director of the national security agency concerning the implementation of public law 100235cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.628appendix nrecognizing that:a.under section 2 of the computer security act of 1987 (public law 100235), (the act), the national institute of standards and technology (nist) has theresponsibility within the federal government for:1.developing technical, management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the costeffective security and privacy of sensitive information in federal computer systems as defined in the act; and,2.drawing on the computer system technical security guidelinesof the national security agency (nsa) in this regard where appropriate.b.under section 3 of the act, the nist is to coordinate closely with otheragencies and offices, including the nsa, to assure:1.maximum use of all existing and planned programs, materials,studies, and reports relating to computer systems security and privacy, in order toavoid unnecessary and costly duplication of effort; and,2.to the maximum extent feasible, that standards developed bythe nist under the act are consistent and compatible with standards and procedures developed for the protection of classified information in federal computersystems.c.under the act, the secretary of commerce has the responsibility,which he has delegated to the director of nist, for appointing the members of thecomputer system security and privacy advisory board, at least one of whomshall be from the nsa.therefore, in furtherance of the purposes of this mou, the director of the nistand the director of the nsa hereby agree as follows:i.the nist will:1.appoint to the computer security and privacy advisory boardat least one representative nominated by the director of the nsa.2.draw upon computer system technical security guidelines developed by the nsa to the extent that the nist determines that such guidelinesare consistent with the requirements for protecting sensitive information in federal computer systems.3.recognize the nsacertified rating of evaluated trusted systemsunder the trusted computer security evaluation criteria program without requiring additional evaluation.4.develop telecommunications security standards for protectingsensitive unclassified computer data, drawing upon the expertise and products ofthe national security agency, to the greatest extent possible, in meeting theseresponsibilities in a timely and cost effective manner.5.avoid duplication where possible in entering into mutuallyagreeable arrangements with the nsa for the nsa support.6.request the nsaõs assistance on all matters related to cryptographic algorithms and cryptographic techniques including but not limited toresearch, development, evaluation, or endorsement.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations629ii.the nsa will:1.provide the nist with technical guidelines in trusted technology, telecommunications security, and personal identification that may be used incosteffective systems for protecting sensitive computer data.2.conduct or initiate research and development programs intrusted technology, telecommunications security, cryptographic techniques andpersonal identification methods.3.be responsive to the nistõs requests for assistance in respect toall matters related to cryptographic algorithms and cryptographic techniques including but not limited to research, development, evaluation, or endorsement.4.establish the standards and endorse products for application tosecure systems covered in 10 usc section 2315 (the warner amendment).5.upon request by federal agencies, their contractors, and othergovernmentsponsored entities, conduct assessments of the hostile intelligencethreat to federal information systems, and provide technical assistance and recommend endorsed products for application to secure systems against that threat.iii.the nist and the nsa shall:1.jointly review agency plans for the security and privacy of computer systems submitted to nist and nsa pursuant to section 6(b) of the act.2.exchange technical standards and guidelines as necessary toachieve the purposes of the act.3.work together to achieve the purposes of this memorandumwith the greatest efficiency possible, avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort.4.maintain an ongoing, open dialogue to ensure that each organization remains abreast of emerging technologies and issues affecting automatedinformation system security in computerbased systems.5.establish a technical working group to review and analyze issues of mutual interest pertinent to protection of systems that process sensitive orother unclassified information. the group shall be composed of six federal employees, three each selected by nist and nsa and to be augmented as necessaryby representatives of other agencies. issues may be referred to the group by eitherthe nsa deputy director for information security or the nist deputy director ormay be generated and addressed by the group upon approval by the nsa ddi ornist deputy director. within days of the referral of an issue to the group byeither the nsa deputy director for information security or the nist deputydirector, the group will respond with a progress report and plan for furtheranalysis, if any.6.exchange work plans on an annual basis on all research anddevelopment projects pertinent to protection of systems that process sensitive orother unclassified information, including trusted technology, for protecting theintegrity and availability of data, telecommunications security and personal identification methods. project updates will be exchanged quarterly, and project reviews will be provided by either party upon request of the other party.7.ensure the technical working group reviews prior to publicdisclosure all matters regarding technical systems security techniques to be developed for use in protecting sensitive information in federal computer systems toensure they are consistent with the national security of the united states. if nistcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.630appendix nand nsa are unable to resolve such an issue within 60 days, either agency mayelect to raise the issue to the secretary of defense and the secretary of commerce.it is recognized that such an issue may be referred to the president through thensc for resolution. no action shall be taken on such an issue until it is resolved.8.specify additional operational agreements in annexes to thismou as they are agreed to by nsa and nist.iv.either party may elect to terminate this mou upon six months writtennotice. this mou is effective upon approval of both signatories.raymond g. kammer, acting director, national institute of standards andtechnology, 24 march 1989w.o. studeman, vice admiral, u.s. navy; director, national security agency,23 march 1989n.3.2national security agency/federal bureau of investigation moumemorandum of understanding between federal bureau of investigation andnational security agency(u) 1. purpose. this memorandum of understanding (mou) implements thoseportions of the department of defense e.o. 12036 replaced by 12333 (see 12333para. 3.6) procedures that regulate the provision by nsa of specialized equipment, technical knowledge, and expert personnel to the fbi. (the applicable procedures are attached.)(u) 2. background. the national security agency possesses unique skills and equipment developed to support its cryptologic mission. in the past, the federal bureauof investigation has requested, and nsa has provided, assistance related to theseskills and equipment for both the bureauõs intelligence and law enforcement functions. section 2309(c) of e.o. 12036 permits nsa to continue providing suchassistance.(u) 3. agreement. the undersigned parties, representing their respective agencies,hereby agree to the following procedures for requesting and providing such assistance in the future:a.when the fbi determines that the assistance of nsa is needed toaccomplish its lawful functions, the fbi shall:(1)determine whether the requested assistance involves thebureauõs intelligence of law enforcement missions. since a counterintelligence orcounterterrorism intelligence investigation can develop into a law enforcementinvestigation, the following guidelines will be used to determine which type ofinvestigation the fbi is conducting. a counterintelligence or counterterrorisminvestigation which is undertaken to protect against espionage and other clandestine intelligence activities, sabotage, international terrorist activities or assascryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations631inations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers does not have a law enforcement purpose until such time as the focus of the investigation shifts from intelligence gathering to prosecution.(2)coordinate with the appropriate nsa element to determinewhether nsa is capable of providing the assistance;(3)notify the office of general counsel, nsa, that a request forassistance is being considered; and(4)if nsa is able to provide the assistance, provide a certification tothe general counsel, nsa, that the assistance is necessary to accomplish one ormore of the fbiõs lawful functions. in normal circumstances, this certification shallbe in writing and signed by an assistant director or more senior official. if theassistance involves provision of expert personnel and is for a law enforcementpurpose, the certification must be signed by the director, fbi, and shall includeaffirmation of the facts necessary to establish the provisions of section 4.a., procedure 16, dod regulation 5240.1r. in an emergency, the certification may be oral,but it shall be subsequently confirmed in writing. if the assistance requested is forthe support of an activitiy that may only be conducted pursuant to court order orattorney general authorization, the certification shall include a copy of the orderor authorization. if the requested assistance is to support an intelligence investigation which subsequently develops into a law enforcement investigation, the fbishall provide the additional supporting data required by procedure 16.b.when the fbi requests assistance from nsa, nsa shall:(1)determine whether it is capable of providing the requested assistance;(2)determine whether the assistance is consistent with nsa policy,including protection of sources and methods;(3)agree to provide assistance within its capabilities and when consistent with nsa policy after receipt of the certification discussed in a.(4) above;and(4)if the assistance requires the detailing of expert personnel, observe the administrative requirements of procedures 16 and 17, dod regulation5240.1r.(u) 4. effective date. this mou is effective upon signature by the parties below. itremains in effect until superseded by a new mou or until section 2309(c) of e.o.12036 is revised. changes to this mou may be made by joint agreement of theundersigned or their successors.william h. webster, director, federal bureau of investigationb.r. inman, vice admiral, u.s. navy, director, nsa/chief, csscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.632appendix nn.3.3national security agency/advanced research projectsagency/defense information systems agency moainformation systems security research joint technology office memorandum ofagreement between the advanced research projects agency, the defense information systems agency, and the national security agency concerning the information systems security research joint technology officepurposethe advanced research projects agency (arpa), the defense information systems agency (disa), and the national security agency (nsa) agree tothe establishment of the information system security research joint technologyoffice (issrjto) as a joint activity. the issrjto is being established to coordinate the information systems security research programs of arpa and nsa. theissrjto will work to optimize use of the limited research funds available, andstrengthen the responsiveness of the programs to disa, expediting delivery oftechnologies that meet disaõs requirements to safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, and availability of data in department of defense information systems, provide a robust first line of defense for defensive information warfare, and permit electronic commerce between the department of defense and itscontractors.backgroundin recent years, exponential growth in government and private sectoruse of networked systems to produce and communicate information has givenrise to a shared interest by nsa and arpa in focusing government r&d oninformation systems security technologies. nsa and its primary network securitycustomer, disa, have become increasingly reliant upon commercial informationtechnologies and services to build the defense information infrastructure, and theinherent security of these technologies and services has become a vital concern.from arpaõs perspective, it has become increasingly apparent that security iscritical to the success of key arpa information technology initiatives. arpaõsrole in fostering the development of advanced information technologies now requires close attention to the security of these technologies.nsaõs security technology plan envisions maximum use of commercialtechnology for sensitive but unclassified applications, and, to the extent possible,for classified applications as well. a key element of this plan is the transfer ofhighly reliable governmentdeveloped technology and techniques to industry forintegration into commercial offtheshelf products, making qualitytested securitycomponents available not only to dod but to the full spectrum of government andprivate sector users as well. arpa is working with its contractor community tofully integrate security into next generation computing technologies being developed in all its programs, and working with the research community to developstrategic relationships with industry so that industry will develop modular security technologies with the capability of exchanging appropriate elements to meetvarious levels of required security.nsa and arpa now share a strong interest in promoting the developcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations633ment and integration of security technology for advanced information systemsapplications. the challenge at hand is to guide the efforts of the two agencies in away that optimizes use of the limited research funds available and maximizessupport to disa in building the defense information infrastructure.nsa acts as the u.s. governmentõs focal point for cryptography, telecommunications security, and information systems security for national securitysystems. it conducts, approves, or endorses research and development of techniques and equipment to secure national security systems. nsa reviews andapproves all standards, techniques, systems, and equipment related to the security of national security systems. nsaõs primary focus is to provide informationsystems security products, services, and standards in the near term to help itscustomers protect classified and national securityrelated sensitive but unclassified information. it develops and assesses new security technology in the areas ofcryptography, technical security, and authentication technology; endorses cryptographic systems protecting national security information; develops infrastructuresupport technologies; evaluates and rates trusted computer and network products; and provides information security standards for dod. much of the work inthese areas is conducted in a classified environment, and the balancing of nationalsecurity and law enforcement equities has been a significant constraint.arpaõs mission is to perform research and development that helps thedepartment of defense to maintain u.s. technological superiority over potentialadversaries. at the core of the arpa mission is the goal to develop and demonstrate revolutionary technologies that will fundamentally enhance the capabilityof the military. arpaõs role in fostering the development of advanced computingand communications technologies for use by the dod requires that long termsolutions to increasing the security of these systems be developed. arpa is interested in commercial or dualuse technology, and usually technology that providesrevolutionary rather than evolutionary enhancements to capabilities. arpa isworking with industry and academia to develop technologies that will enableindustry to provide system design methodologies and secure computer, operating system, and networking technologies. nsa and arpa research interests havebeen converging in these areas, particularly with regard to protocol developmentinvolving key, token, and certificate exchanges and processes.one of the key differences between arpaõs work and nsaõs is thatarpaõs is performed in unclassified environments, often in university settings.this enables arpa to access talent and pursue research strategies normally closedto nsa due to security considerations. another difference is that while nsaõsresearch is generally built around developing and using specific cryptographicalgorithms, arpaõs approach is to pursue solutions that are independent of thealgorithm used and allow for modularly replaceable cryptography. arpa will, tothe greatest extent possible, allow its contractor community to use cryptographydeveloped at nsa, and needs solutions from nsa on an expedited basis so as notto hold up its research program.disa functions as the department of defenseõs information utility. itsrequirements for information systems security extend beyond confidentiality toinclude protection of data from tampering or destruction and assurance that dataexchanges are originated and received by valid participants. disa is the first linecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.634appendix nof defense for information warfare, and needs quality technology for detectingand responding to network penetrations. the growing vulnerability of the defense information infrastructure to unauthorized access and use, demonstrated inthe penetration of hundreds of dod computer systems during 1994, makes delivery of enabling security technologies to disa a matter of urgency.the information systems security research joint technology officethis moa authorizes the issrjto as a joint undertaking of arpa,disa, and nsa. it will perform those functions jointly agreed to by these agencies. each agency shall delegate to the issojto such authority and responsibilityas is necessary to carry out its agreed functions. participation in the joint programdoes not relieve arpa, disa, or nsa of their respective individual charter responsibilities, or diminish their respective authorities.a joint management plan will be developed to provide a detailed definition of the focus, objectives, operation, and costs of the joint technology office.the issrjto will be jointly staffed by arpa, disa, and nsa, with respectivestaffing levels to be agreed upon by the three parties. employees assigned to thejto will remain on the billets of their respective agency. personnel support foremployees assigned to the jto will be provided by their home organization. theissrjto will be housed within both arpa and nsa, except as agreed otherwiseby the three parties. to the greatest extent possible, it will function as a virtualoffice, using electronic connectivity to minimize the need for constant physical colocation. physical security support will be provided by the party responsible forthe specific facilities occupied. assignment of the issrjto director, deputy director, and management of other office elements will be made by mutual agreement among the directors of arpa, disa, and nsa upon recommendation oftheir staffs.functionsby mutual agreement of arpa, disa, and nsa, the issrjto willperform the following joint functions:¥review and coordinate all information system security research programsat arpa and nsa to ensure that there is no unnecessary duplication, that theprograms are technically sound, that they are focused on customer requirementswhere available, and that long term research is aimed at revolutionary increasesin dod security capabilities.¥support arpa and nsa in evaluating proposals and managing projectsarising from their information systems security efforts, and maintain a channel forthe exchange of technical expertise to support their information systems securityresearch programs.¥provide long range strategic planning for information systems security research. provide concepts of future architectures which include security as an integral component and a road map for the products that need to be developed to fitthe architectures, taking into account anticipated dod information systems security research needs for command and control, intelligence, support functions, andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations635electronic commerce. the long range security program will explore technologieswhich extend security research boundaries.¥develop measures of the effectiveness of the information systems securityresearch programs in reducing vulnerabilities.¥work with disa, other defense organizations, academic, and industrial organizations to take new information systems security research concepts and apply them to selected prototype systems and testbed projects.¥encourage the u.s. industrial base to develop commercial products withbuiltin security to be used in dod systems. develop alliances with industry toraise the level of security in all u.s. systems. bring together private sector leadersin information systems security research to advise the jto and build consensusfor the resulting programs.¥identify areas for which standards need to be developed for informationsystems security.¥facilitate the availability and use of nsa certified cryptography within information systems security research programs.¥proactively provide a coherent, integrated joint vision of the program ininternal and public communications.program oversight and revisionsthe director, issrjto, has a joint reporting responsibility to the directors of arpa, disa, and nsa. the director, issrjto, will conduct a formalprogram status review for the directors of arpa, disa, and nsa on an annualbasis, and will submit midyear progress reports between formal reviews. specificreporting procedures and practices of the jto to arpa, disa, and nsa will bedetailed in the joint technology management plan. this moa will be reviewed atleast annually, and may be revised at any time, based on the mutual consent ofarpa, disa, and nsa, to assure the effective execution of the joint initiative.any of the parties may withdraw from participation in the moa upon six monthswritten notice. the moa is effective 2 april 1995.dr. gary l. denman, director, arpaltgen albert j. edmonds, director, disavadm john m. mcconnell, director, nsadr. anita k. jones, director, ddr&eemmett paige, jr., assistant secretary of defense for command, control,communications and intelligencecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.636appendix nn.4 regulationsn.4.1international traffic in arms regulations (22 cfr, excerptsfrom parts 120123, 125, and 126)part 120purpose and definitionssec. 120.1ñgeneral authorities and eligibility.(a)section 38 of the arms export control act (22 u.s.c. 2778) authorizesthe president to control the export and import of defense articles and defenseservices. the statutory authority of the president to promulgate regulations withrespect to exports of defense articles and defense services was delegated to thesecretary of state by executive order 11958, as amended (42 fr 4311). thissubchapter implements that authority. by virtue of delegations of authority by thesecretary of state, these regulations are primarily administered by the director ofthe office of defense trade controls, bureau of politicomilitary affairs, department of state.(b)authorized officials. all authorities conferred upon the director of theoffice of defense trade controls by this subchapter may be exercised at any timeby the under secretary of state for international security affairs, the assistantsecretary of state for politicomilitary affairs, or the deputy assistant secretaryof state for politicomilitary affairs responsible for supervising the office of defense trade controls unless the legal adviser or the assistant legal adviser forpoliticomilitary affairs of the department of state determines that any specificexercise of this authority under this subsection may be inappropriate.(c)eligibility. only u.s. persons (as defined in sec. 120.15) and foreigngovernmental entities in the united states may be granted licenses or other approvals (other than retransfer approvals sought pursuant to this subchapter).foreign persons (as defined in sec. 120.16) other than governments are not eligible. u.s. persons who have been convicted of violating the criminal statutesenumerated in sec. 120.27, who have been debarred pursuant to part 127 or 128 ofthis subchapter, who are the subject of an indictment involving the criminal statutes enumerated in sec. 120.27, who are ineligible to contract with, or to receive alicense or other form of authorization to import defense articles or defense services from any agency of the u.s. government, who are ineligible to receiveexport licenses (or other forms of authorization to export) from any agency of theu.s. government, who are subject to department of state suspension/revocationunder sec. 126.7 (a)(1)(a)(7) of this subchapter, or who are ineligible under sec.127.6(c) of this subchapter are generally ineligible. applications for licenses orother approvals will be considered only if the applicant has registered with theoffice of defense trade controls pursuant to part 122 of this subchapter. allcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations637applications and requests for approval must be signed by a u.s. person who hasbeen empowered by the registrant to sign such documents. . . .sec. 120.3ñpolicy on designating and determining defense articles and services.an article or service may be designated or determined in the future to be adefense article (see sec. 120.6) or defense service (see sec. 120.9) if it:(a)is specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modifiedfor a military application, and(i)does not have predominant civil applications, and(ii)does not have performance equivalent (defined by form, fit and function) tothose of an article or service used for civil applications; or(b)is specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or modifiedfor a military application, and has significant military or intelligence applicabilitysuch that control under this subchapter is necessary.the intended use of the article or service after its export (i.e., for a military orcivilian purpose) is not relevant in determining whether the article or service issubject to the controls of this subchapter. any item covered by the u.s. munitionslist must be within the categories of the u.s. munitions list. the scope of the u.s.munitions list shall be changed only by amendments made pursuant to section38 of the arms export control act (22 u.s.c. 2778).sec. 120.4ñcommodity jurisdiction.(a)the commodity jurisdiction procedure is used with the u.s. government if doubt exists as to whether an article or service is covered by the u.s.munitions list. it may also be used for consideration of a redesignation of anarticle or service currently covered by the u.s. munitions list. the departmentmust submit a report to congress at least 30 days before any item is removed fromthe u.s. munitions list. upon written request, the office of defense trade controls shall provide a determination of whether a particular article or service iscovered by the u.s. munitions list. the determination, consistent with secs. 120.2,120.3, and 120.4, entails consultation among the departments of state, defense,commerce and other u.s. government agencies and industry in appropriate cases.(b)registration with the office of defense trade controls as defined inpart 122 of this subchapter is not required prior to submission of a commodityjurisdiction request. if it is determined that the commodity is a defense article orservice covered by the u.s. munitions list, registration is required for exporters,manufacturers, and furnishers of defense articles and defense services (see part122 of this subchapter).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.638appendix n(c)requests shall identify the article or service, and include a history of theproductõs design, development and use. brochures, specifications and any otherdocumentation related to the article or service shall be submitted in seven collatedsets.(d)(1)a determination that an article or service does not have predominant civil applications shall be made by the department of state, in accordancewith this subchapter, on a casebycase basis, taking into account:(i)the number, variety and predominance of civil applications;(ii)the nature, function and capability of the civil applications; and(iii)the nature, function and capability of the military applications.(2)a determination that an article does not have the performance equivalent,defined by form, fit and function, to those used for civil applications shall be madeby the department of state, in accordance with this subchapter, on a casebycasebasis, taking into account:(i)the nature, function, and capability of the article;(ii)whether the components used in the defense article are identical to thosecomponents originally developed for civil use.note: the form of the item is its defined configuration, including the geometrically measured configuration, density, and weight or other visual parameters which uniquely characterize the item, component or assembly. for software,form denotes language, language level and media. the fit of the item is its abilityto physically interface or interconnect with or become an integral part of anotheritem. the function of the item is the action or actions it is designed to perform.(3)a determination that an article has significant military or intelligence applications such that it is necessary to control its export as a defense article shall bemade, in accordance with this subchapter, on a casebycase basis, taking intoaccount:(i)the nature, function, and capability of the article;(ii)the nature of controls imposed by other nations on such items (includingcocom and other multilateral controls), and(iii)that items described on the cocom industrial list shall not be designateddefense articles or defense services unless the failure to control such items on theu.s. munitions list would jeopardize significant national security or foreign policyinterests.(e)the office of defense trade controls will provide a preliminary response within 10 working days of receipt of a complete request for commodityjurisdiction. if after 45 days the office of defense trade controls has not provideda final commodity jurisdiction determination, the applicant may request in writing to the director, center for defense trade that this determination be givenexpedited processing.(f)state, defense and commerce will resolve commodity jurisdiction disputes in accordance with established procedures. state shall notify defense andcommerce of the initiation and conclusion of each case.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations639(g)a person may appeal a commodity jurisdiction determination by submitting a written request for reconsideration to the director of the center fordefense trade. the center for defense trade will provide a written response ofthe directorõs determination within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. if desired, anappeal of the directorõs decision can then be made directly to the assistant secretary for politicomilitary affairs. . . .sec. 120.6ñdefense article.defense article means any item or technical data designated in sec. 121.1 ofthis subchapter. the policy described in sec. 120.3 is applicable to designations ofadditional items. this term includes technical data recorded or stored in anyphysical form, models, mockups or other items that reveal technical data directlyrelating to items designated in sec. 121.1 of this subchapter. it does not includebasic marketing information on function or purpose or general system descriptions. . . .sec. 120.9ñdefense service.defense service means:(1)the furnishing of assistance (including training) to foreign persons,whether in the united states or abroad in the design, development, engineering,manufacture, production, assembly, testing, repair, maintenance, modification,operation, demilitarization, destruction, processing or use of defense articles; or(2)the furnishing to foreign persons of any technical data controlled under this subchapter (see sec. 120.10), whether in the united states or abroad.sec. 120.10ñtechnical data.technical data means, for purposes of this subchapter:(1)information, other than software as defined in sec. 120.10(d), which isrequired for the design, development, production, manufacture, assembly, operation, repair, testing, maintenance or modification of defense articles. this includesinformation in the form of blueprints, drawings, photographs, plans, instructionsand documentation.(2)classified information relating to defense articles and defense services;(3)information covered by an invention secrecy order;(4)software as defined in sec. 121.8(f) of this subchapter directly related todefense articles;(5)this definition does not include information concerning general scientific, mathematical or engineering principles commonly taught in schools, colleges and universities or information in the public domain as defined in sec.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.640appendix n120.11. it also does not include basic marketing information on function or purpose or general system descriptions of defense articles.sec. 120.11ñpublic domain.public domain means information which is published and which is generally accessible or available to the public:(1)through sales at newsstands and bookstores;(2)through subscriptions which are available without restriction to anyindividual who desires to obtain or purchase the published information;(3)through second class mailing privileges granted by the u.s. government;(4)at libraries open to the public or from which the public can obtaindocuments;(5)through patents available at any patent office;(6)through unlimited distribution at a conference, meeting, seminar, tradeshow or exhibition, generally accessible to the public, in the united states;(7)through public release (i.e., unlimited distribution) in any form (e.g.,not necessarily in published form) after approval by the cognizant u.s. government department or agency (see also sec. 125.4(b)(13) of this subchapter);(8)through fundamental research in science and engineering at accreditedinstitutions of higher learning in the u.s. where the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly in the scientific community. fundamentalresearch is defined to mean basic and applied research in science and engineeringwhere the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly withinthe scientific community, as distinguished from research the results of which arerestricted for proprietary reasons or specific u.s. government access and dissemination controls. university research will not be considered fundamental researchif:(i)the university or its researchers accept other restrictions on publication ofscientific and technical information resulting from the project or activity, or(ii)the research is funded by the u.s. government and specific access anddissemination controls protecting information resulting from the research are applicable. . . .sec. 120.14ñperson.person means a natural person as well as a corporation, business association, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity, organization or group, including governmental entities. if a provision in this subchapter does not refer exclusively to a foreign person ( sec. 120.16) or u.s. person (sec. 120.15), then it refers toboth.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations641sec. 120.15ñu.s. person. u.s. person means a person (as defined in sec. 120.14 of this part) who is aprotected individual as defined by 8 u.s.c. 1324b(a)(3). it also means any corporation, business association, partnership, society, trust or any other entity, organization or group that is incorporated to do business in the united states. it alsoincludes any governmental (federal, state or local) entity. it does not include anyforeign person as defined in sec. 120.16 of this part.sec. 120.16ñforeign person.foreign person means any natural person who is not a protected individualas defined by 8 u.s.c. 1324b(a)(3). it also means any foreign corporation, businessassociation, partnership, trust, society or any other entity or group that is notincorporated or organized to do business in the united states, as well as international organizations, foreign governments and any agency or subdivision of foreign governments (e.g., diplomatic missions).sec. 120.17ñexport.export means:(1)sending or taking a defense article out of the united states in anymanner, except by mere travel outside of the united states by a person whosepersonal knowledge includes technical data; or(2)transferring registration, control or ownership to a foreign person ofany aircraft, vessel, or satellite covered by the u.s. munitions list, whether in theunited states or abroad; or(3)disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or transferring in theunited states any defense article to an embassy, any agency or subdivision of aforeign government (e.g., diplomatic missions); or(4)disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or transferring technicaldata to a foreign person, whether in the united states or abroad; or(5)performing a defense service on behalf of, or for the benefit of, a foreignperson, whether in the united states or abroad. . . .sec. 120.18ñtemporary import.temporary import means bringing into the united states from a foreigncountry any defense article that is to be returned to the country from which it wasshipped or taken, or any defense article that is in transit to another foreign desticryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.642appendix nnation. temporary import includes withdrawal of a defense article from a customs bonded warehouse or foreign trade zone for the purpose of returning it tothe country of origin or country from which it was shipped or for shipment toanother foreign destination. permanent imports are regulated by the departmentof the treasury (see 27 cfr parts 47, 178 and 179).sec. 120.19ñreexport or retransfer.reexport or retransfer means the transfer of defense articles or defense services to an end use, end user or destination not previously authorized.sec. 120.20ñlicense.license means a document bearing the word license issued by the director,office of defense trade controls or his authorized designee which permits theexport or temporary import of a specific defense article or defense service controlled by this subchapter.sec. 120.21ñmanufacturing license agreement.an agreement (e.g., contract) whereby a u.s. person grants a foreign personan authorization to manufacture defense articles abroad and which involves orcontemplates:(a)the export of technical data (as defined in sec. 120.10) or defense articles or the performance of a defense service; or(b)the use by the foreign person of technical data or defense articles previously exported by the u.s. person. (see part 124 of this subchapter.)sec. 120.22ñtechnical assistance agreement.an agreement (e.g., contract) for the performance of a defense service(s) orthe disclosure of technical data, as opposed to an agreement granting a right orlicense to manufacture defense articles. assembly of defense articles is includedunder this section, provided production rights or manufacturing knowhow arenot conveyed. should such rights be transferred, sec. 120.21 is applicable. (seepart 124 of this subchapter.)sec. 120.23ñdistribution agreement.an agreement (e.g., a contract) to establish a warehouse or distributioncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations643point abroad for defense articles exported from the united states for subsequentdistribution to entities in an approved sales territory (see part 124 of thissubchapter). . . .part 121the united states munitions listsec. 121.1ñgeneral. the united states munitions list.(a)the following articles, services and related technical data are designated as defense articles and defense services pursuant to sections 38 and 47(7) ofthe arms export control act (22 u.s.c. 2778 and 2794(7)). changes in designations will be published in the federal register. information and clarifications onwhether specific items are defense articles and services under this subchaptermay appear periodically in the defense trade news published by the center fordefense trade. . . .category xiiiauxiliary military equipment. . . .(b)information security systems and equipment, cryptographic devices,software, and components specifically designed or modified therefor, including:(1)cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software with the capability ofmaintaining secrecy or confidentiality of information or information systems, except cryptographic equipment and software as follows:(i)restricted to decryption functions specifically designed to allow the execution of copy protected software, provided the decryption functions are not useraccessible.(ii)specially designed, developed or modified for use in machines for bankingor money transactions, and restricted to use only in such transactions. machinesfor banking or money transactions include automatic teller machines, selfservicestatement printers, point of sale terminals or equipment for the encryption ofinterbanking transactions.(iii)employing only analog techniques to provide the cryptographic processingthat ensures information security in the following applications:(a)fixed (defined below) band scrambling not exceeding 8 bands and in whichthe transpositions change not more frequently than once every second;(b)fixed (defined below) band scrambling exceeding 8 bands and in which thetranspositions change not more frequently than once every ten seconds;(c)fixed (defined below) frequency inversion and in which the transpositionschange not more frequently than once every second;(d)facsimile equipment;(e)restricted audience broadcast equipment;(f)civil television equipment.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.644appendix nnote: special definition. for purposes of this subparagraph, fixed meansthat the coding or compression algorithm cannot accept externally supplied parameters (e.g., cryptographic or key variables) and cannot be modified by theuser.(iv)personalized smart cards using cryptography restricted for use only inequipment or systems exempted from the controls of the usml.(v)limited to access control, such as automatic teller machines, selfservicestatement printers or point of sale terminals, which protects password or personalidentification numbers (pin) or similar data to prevent unauthorized access tofacilities but does not allow for encryption of files or text, except as directly relatedto the password of pin protection.(vi)limited to data authentication which calculates a message authenticationcode (mac) or similar result to ensure no alteration of text has taken place, or toauthenticate users, but does not allow for encryption of data, text or other mediaother than that needed for the authentication.(vii)restricted to fixed data compression or coding techniques.(viii)limited to receiving for radio broadcast, pay television or similar restrictedaudience television of the consumer type, without digital encryption and wheredigital decryption is limited to the video, audio or management functions.(ix)software designed or modified to protect against malicious computer damage (e.g., viruses).note: a procedure has been established to facilitate the expeditious transferto the commodity control list of mass market software products with encryptionthat meet specified criteria regarding encryption for the privacy of data and theassociated key management. requests to transfer commodity jurisdiction of massmarket software products designed to meet the specified criteria may be submitted in accordance with the commodity jurisdiction provisions of sec. 120.4. questions regarding the specified criteria or the commodity jurisdiction process shouldbe addressed to the office of defense trade controls. all mass market softwareproducts with cryptography that were previously granted transfers of commodityjurisdiction will remain under department of commerce control. mass marketsoftware governed by this note is software that is generally available to the publicby being sold from stock at retail selling points, without restriction, by means ofover the counter transactions, mail order transactions, or telephone call transactions; and designed for installation by the user without further substantial support by the supplier.(2)cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software which have the capability of generating spreading or hopping codes for spread spectrum systems orequipment.(3)cryptanalytic systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits,components or software.(4)systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, componentsor software providing certified or certifiable multilevel security or user isolationcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations645exceeding class b2 of the trusted computer system evaluation criteria (tcsec)and software to certify such systems, equipment or software.(5)ancillary equipment specifically designed or modified for paragraphs (b)(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this category; . . .category xximiscellaneous articles(a)any article not specifically enumerated in the other categories of theu.s. munitions list which has substantial military applicability and which hasbeen specifically designed or modified for military purposes. the decision onwhether any article may be included in this category shall be made by the directorof the office of defense trade controls.(b)technical data (as defined in sec. 120.21 of this subchapter) and defenseservices (as defined in sec. 120.8 of this subchapter) directly related to the defensearticles enumerated in paragraphs (a) of this category. . . .part 122registration of manufacturers and exporterssec. 122.1ñregistration requirements.(a)any person who engages in the united states in the business of eithermanufacturing or exporting defense articles or furnishing defense services is required to register with the office of defense trade controls. manufacturers whodo not engage in exporting must nevertheless register.(b) exemptions. registration is not required for:(1)officers and employees of the united states government acting in an official capacity.(2) persons whose pertinent business activity is confined to the production ofunclassified technical data only.(3)persons all of whose manufacturing and export activities are licensed underthe atomic energy act of 1954, as amended.(4)persons who engage only in the fabrication of articles for experimental orscientific purpose, including research and development.(c)purpose. registration is primarily a means to provide the u.s. government with necessary information on who is involved in certain manufacturingand exporting activities. registration does not confer any export rights or privileges. it is generally a precondition to the issuance of any license or other approvalunder this subchapter.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.646appendix nsec. 122.2ñsubmission of registration statement.(a)general. the department of state form dsp9 (registration statement)and the transmittal letter required by paragraph (b) of this section must be submitted by an intended registrant with a payment by check or money order payable to the department of state of one of the fees prescribed in sec. 122.3(a) of thissubchapter. the registration statement and transmittal letter must be signed by asenior officer who has been empowered by the intended registrant to sign suchdocuments. the intended registrant shall also submit documentation that demonstrates that it is incorporated or otherwise authorized to do business in the unitedstates. the office of defense trade controls will return to the sender any registration statement that is incomplete, or that is not accompanied by the requiredletter or payment of the proper registration fee.(b)transmittal letter. a letter of transmittal, signed by an authorized senior officer of the intended registrant, shall accompany each registration statement.(1)the letter shall state whether the intended registrant, chief executive officer,president, vicepresidents, other senior officers or officials (e.g. comptroller, treasurer, general counsel) or any member of the board of directors:(i)has ever been indicted for or convicted of violating any of the u.s. criminalstatutes enumerated in sec. 120.27 of this subchapter; or(ii)is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or other approval toimport defense articles or defense services from, or to receive an export license orother approval from, any agency of the u.s. government.(2)the letter shall also declare whether the intended registrant is owned orcontrolled by foreign persons (as defined in sec. 120.16 of this subchapter). if theintended registrant is owned or controlled by foreign persons, the letter shall alsostate whether the intended registrant is incorporated or otherwise authorized toengage in business in the united states.(c)definition. for purposes of this section, ownership means that morethan 50 percent of the outstanding voting securities of the firm are owned by oneor more foreign persons. control means that one or more foreign persons have theauthority or ability to establish or direct the general policies or daytoday operations of the firm. control is presumed to exist where foreign persons own 25percent or more of the outstanding voting securities if no u.s. persons control anequal or larger percentage. the standards for control specified in 22 cfr 60.2(c)also provide guidance in determining whether control in fact exists. . . .part 123licenses for the export of defense articlessec. 123.7ñexports to warehouses or distribution points outside the unitedstates.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations647unless the exemption under sec. 123.16(b)(1) is used, a license is required toexport defense articles to a warehouse or distribution point outside the unitedstates for subsequent resale and will normally be granted only if an agreementhas been approved pursuant to sec. 124.14 of this subchapter. . . .sec. 123.9ñcountry of ultimate destination and approval of reexports orretransfers.(a)the country designated as the country of ultimate destination on anapplication for an export license, or on a shipperõs export declaration where anexemption is claimed under this subchapter, must be the country of ultimate enduse. the written approval of the office of defense trade controls must be obtained before reselling, transferring, transshipping, or disposing of a defense article to any end user, end use or destination other than as stated on the exportlicense, or on the shipperõs export declaration in cases where an exemption isclaimed under this subchapter. exporters must ascertain the specific enduser andenduse prior to submitting an application to the office of defense trade controlsor claiming an exemption under this subchapter.(b)the exporter shall incorporate the following statement as an integralpart of the bill of lading, and the invoice whenever defense articles on the u.s.munitions list are to be exported:these commodities are authorized by the u.s. government for export onlyto country of ultimate destination for use by enduser. they may not be transferred, transshipped on a noncontinuous voyage, or otherwise be disposed of inany other country, either in their original form or after being incorporated intoother enditems, without the prior written approval of the u.s. department ofstate.ó(c)a u.s. person or a foreign person requesting approval for the reexportor retransfer, or change in enduse, of a defense article shall submit a writtenrequest which shall be subject to all the documentation required for a permanentexport license (see sec. 123.1) and shall contain the following:(1)the license number under which the defense article was previously authorized for export from the united states;(2)a precise description, quantity and value of the defense article;(3)a description of the new enduse; and(4)identification of the new enduser.(d)the written approval of the office of defense trade controls must beobtained before reselling, transferring, transshipping on a noncontinuous voyage, or disposing of a defense article in any country other than the country ofultimate destination, or anyone other than the authorized enduser, as stated onthe shipperõs export declaration in cases where an exemption is claimed underthis subchapter.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.648appendix n(e)reexports or retransfers of u.s.origin components incorporated into aforeign defense article to a government of a nato country, or the governments ofaustralia or japan, are authorized without the prior written approval of the officeof defense trade controls, provided:(1)the u.s.origin components were previously authorized for export from theunited states, either by a license or an exemption;(2)the u.s.origin components are not significant military equipment, the itemsare not major defense equipment sold under a contract in the amount of$14,000,000 ($14 million) or more; the articles are not defense articles or defenseservices sold under a contract in the amount of $50,000,000 ($50 million) or more;and are not identified in part 121 of this subchapter as missile technology controlregime (mtcr) items; and(3)the person reexporting the defense article must provide written notificationto the office of defense trade controls of the retransfer not later than 30 daysfollowing the reexport. the notification must state the articles being reexportedand the recipient government.(4)in certain cases, the director, office of defense trade controls, may placeretransfer restrictions on a license prohibiting use of this exemption.sec. 123.10ñnon transfer and use assurances.(a)a nontransfer and use certificate (form dsp83) is required for theexport of significant military equipment and classified articles including classifiedtechnical data. a license will not be issued until a completed form dsp83 hasbeen received by the office of defense trade controls. this form is to be executedby the foreign consignee, foreign enduser, and the applicant. the certificate stipulates that, except as specifically authorized by prior written approval of the department of state, the foreign consignee and foreign enduser will not reexport,resell or otherwise dispose of the significant military equipment enumerated inthe application outside the country named as the location of the foreign enduseor to any other person.(b)the office of defense trade controls may also require a dsp83 for theexport of any other defense articles or defense services.(c)when a dsp83 is required for an export of any defense article or defense service to a nongovernmental foreign enduser, the office of defense tradecontrols may require as a condition of issuing the license that the appropriateauthority of the government of the country of ultimate destination also executethe certificate. . . .cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations649part 125licenses for the export of technical data and classified defense articlessec. 125.1ñexports subject to this part.(a)the controls of this part apply to the export of technical data and theexport of classified defense articles. information which is in the public domain(see sec. 120.11 of this subchapter and sec. 125.4(b)(13)) is not subject to the controls of this subchapter.(b)a license for the export of technical data and the exemptions in sec.125.4 may not be used for foreign production purposes or for technical assistanceunless the approval of the office of defense trade controls has been obtained.such approval is generally provided only pursuant to the procedures specified inpart 124 of this subchapter.(c)technical data authorized for export may not be reexported, transferredor diverted from the country of ultimate enduse or from the authorized foreignenduser (as designated in the license or approval for export) or disclosed to anational of another country without the prior written approval of the office ofdefense trade controls.(d)the controls of this part apply to the exports referred to in paragraph(a) of this section regardless of whether the person who intends to export thetechnical data produces or manufactures defense articles if the technical data isdetermined by the office of defense trade controls to be subject to the controls ofthis subchapter.(e)the provisions of this subchapter do not apply to technical data relatedto articles in category vi(e) and category xvi. the export of such data is controlled by the department of energy and the nuclear regulatory commissionpursuant to the atomic energy act of 1954, as amended, and the nuclear nonproliferation act of 1978.sec. 125.2ñexports of unclassified technical data.(a)a license (dsp5) is required for the export of unclassified technicaldata unless the export is exempt from the licensing requirements of thissubchapter. in the case of a plant visit, details of the proposed discussions must betransmitted to the office of defense trade controls for an appraisal of the technical data. seven copies of the technical data or the details of the discussion must beprovided.(b)patents. a license issued by the office of defense trade controls isrequired for the export of technical data whenever the data exceeds that which iscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.650appendix nused to support a domestic filing of a patent application or to support a foreignfiling of a patent application whenever no domestic application has been filed.requests for the filing of patent applications in a foreign country, and requests forthe filing of amendments, modifications or supplements to such patents, shouldfollow the regulations of the u.s. patent and trademark office in accordance with37 cfr part 5. the export of technical data to support the filing and processing ofpatent applications in foreign countries is subject to regulations issued by the u.s.patent and trademark office pursuant to 35 u.s.c. 184.(c)disclosures. unless otherwise expressly exempted in this subchapter, alicense is required for the oral, visual or documentary disclosure of technical databy u.s. persons to foreign persons. a license is required regardless of the mannerin which the technical data is transmitted (e.g., in person, by telephone, correspondence, electronic means, etc.). a license is required for such disclosures byu.s. persons in connection with visits to foreign diplomatic missions and consularoffices. . . .sec. 125.4ñexemptions of general applicability.(a)the following exemptions apply to exports of unclassified technicaldata for which approval is not needed from the office of defense trade controls.these exemptions, except for paragraph (b)(13) of this section, do not apply toexports to proscribed destinations under sec. 126.1 of this subchapter or for persons considered generally ineligible under sec. 120.1(c) of this subchapter. theexemptions are also not applicable for purposes of establishing offshore procurement arrangements. if sec. 126.8 of this subchapter requirements are applicable,they must be met before an exemption under this section may be used. transmission of classified information must comply with the requirements of the department of defense industrial security manual and the exporter must certify to thetransmittal authority that the technical data does not exceed the technical limitation of the authorized export.(b)the following exports are exempt from the licensing requirements ofthis subchapter.(1)technical data, including classified information, to be disclosed pursuant toan official written request or directive from the u.s. department of defense;(2)technical data, including classified information, in furtherance of a manufacturing license or technical assistance agreement approved by the departmentof state under part 124 of this subchapter and which meet the requirements of sec.124.3 of this subchapter;(3)technical data, including classified information, in furtherance of a contractbetween the exporter and an agency of the u.s. government, if the contract provides for the export of the data and such data does not disclose the details ofdesign, development, production, or manufacture of any defense article;(4)copies of technical data, including classified information, previously authorized for export to the same recipient. revised copies of such technical data arecryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations651also exempt if they pertain to the identical defense article, and if the revisions aresolely editorial and do not add to the content of technology previously exportedor authorized for export to the same recipient;(5) technical data, including classified information, in the form of basic operations, maintenance, and training information relating to a defense article lawfullyexported or authorized for export to the same recipient. intermediate or depotlevel repair and maintenance information may be exported only under a license oragreement approved specifically for that purpose;(6)technical data, including classified information, related to firearms not inexcess of caliber .50 and ammunition for such weapons, except detailed design,development, production or manufacturing information;(7)technical data, including classified information, being returned to the original source of import;(8)technical data directly related to classified information which has been previously exported or authorized for export in accordance with this part to the samerecipient, and which does not disclose the details of the design, development,production, or manufacture of any defense article;(9)technical data, including classified information, sent by a u.s. corporationto a u.s. person employed by that corporation overseas or to a u.s. governmentagency. this exemption is subject to the limitations of sec. 125.1(b) and may beused only if:(i)the technical data is to be used overseas solely by u.s. persons;(ii)if the u.s. person overseas is an employee of the u.s. government or isdirectly employed by the u.s. corporation and not by a foreign subsidiary; and(iii)the classified information is sent overseas in accordance with the requirements of the department of defense industrial security manual.(10)disclosures of unclassified technical data in the u.s. by u.s. institutions ofhigher learning to foreign persons who are their bona fide and full time regularemployees. this exemption is available only if:(i)the employeeõs permanent abode throughout the period of employment isin the united states;(ii)the employee is not a national of a country to which exports are prohibitedpursuant to sec. 126.1 of this subchapter; and(iii)the institution informs the individual in writing that the technical data maynot be transferred to other foreign persons without the prior written approval ofthe office of defense trade controls;(11)technical data, including classified information, for which the exporter,pursuant to an arrangement with the department of defense, department ofenergy or nasa which requires such exports, has been granted an exemption inwriting from the licensing provisions of this part by the office of defense tradecontrols. such an exemption will normally be granted only if the arrangementdirectly implements an international agreement to which the united states is aparty and if multiple exports are contemplated. the office of defense trade controls, in consultation with the relevant u.s. government agencies, will determinewhether the interests of the united states government are best served by expediting exports under an arrangement through an exemption (see also paragraph(b)(3) of this section for a related exemption);cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.652appendix n(12)technical data which is specifically exempt under part 126 of this subchapter; or(13)technical data approved for public release (i.e., unlimited distribution) bythe cognizant u.s. government department or agency or directorate for freedomof information and security review. this exemption is applicable to informationapproved by the cognizant u.s. government department or agency for publicrelease in any form. it does not require that the information be published in orderto qualify for the exemption. . . .sec. 125.8ñfiling of licenses for exports of unclassified technical data.(a)licenses for the export of unclassified technical data must be presentedto the appropriate district director of customs or postmaster at the time of shipment or mailing. the district director of customs or postmaster will endorse andtransmit the licenses to the office of defense trade controls in accordance withthe instructions contained on the reverse side of the license.(b)if a license for the export of unclassified technical data is used but notendorsed by u.s. customs or a postmaster for whatever reason (e.g., electronictransmission, unavailability of customs officer or postmaster, etc.), the personexporting the data must selfendorse the license, showing when and how theexport took place. every license must be returned to the office of defense tradecontrols when the total value authorized has been shipped or when the date ofexpiration has been reached, whichever occurs first. . . .part 126general policies and provisionssec. 126.1ñprohibited exports and sales to certain countries.(a)it is the policy of the united states to deny licenses, other approvals,exports and imports of defense articles and defense services, destined for or originating in certain countries. this policy applies to: albania, armenia, azerbaijan,bulgaria, byelarus, cambodia, cuba, estonia, georgia, iran, iraq, libya,kazakhstan, kyrgyzstan, latvia, lithuania, moldova, mongolia, north korea,romania, russia, south africa, syria, tajikistan, turkmenistan, ukraine,uzbekistan and vietnam. this policy also applies to countries with respect towhich the united states maintains an arms embargo (e.g., burma, china, liberia,somalia, the sudan, the former yugoslavia, and zaire) or for whenever an exportwould not otherwise be in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy of the united states. comprehensive arms embargoes are normallythe subject of a state department notice published in the federal register. theexemptions provided in the regulations in this subchapter, except secs. 123.17 andcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations653125.4(b)(13) of this subchapter, do not apply with respect to articles originating inor for export to any proscribed countries or areas.(b)shipments. a defense article licensed for export under this subchaptermay not be shipped on a vessel, aircraft or other means of conveyance which isowned or operated by, or leased to or from, any of the proscribed countries orareas.(c)south africa. south africa is subject to an arms embargo and thus to thepolicy specified in paragraph (a) of this section. exceptions may be made to thispolicy only if the assistant secretary for politicomilitary affairs determines that:(1)the item is not covered by united nations security council resolution 418of november 4, 1977; and(2)the item is to be exported solely for commercial purposes and not for use bythe armed forces, police, or other security forces of south africa or for any othersimilar purpose.(d)terrorism. exports to countries which the secretary of state has determined to have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism arecontrary to the foreign policy of the united states and are thus subject to thepolicy specified in paragraph (a) of this section and the requirements of section 40of the arms export control act (22 u.s.c. 2780) and the omnibus diplomaticsecurity and antiterrorism act of 1986 (22 u.s.c. 4801, note). the countries inthis category are: cuba, iran, iraq, libya, north korea and syria. the same countries are identified pursuant to section 6(j) of the export administration act, asamended (50u.s.c. app. 2405(j)).(e)proposed sales. no sale or transfer and no proposal to sell or transferany defense articles, defense services or technical data subject to this subchaptermay be made to any country referred to in this section (including the embassies orconsulates of such a country), or to any person acting on its behalf, whether in theunited states or abroad, without first obtaining a license or written approval ofthe office of defense trade controls. however, in accordance with paragraph (a)of this section, it is the policy of the department of state to deny licenses andapprovals in such cases. any person who knows or has reason to know of such aproposed or actual sale, or transfer, of such articles, services or data must immediately inform the office of defense trade controls. . . .sec. 126.5ñcanadian exemptions.(a)district directors of customs and postmasters shall permit the exportor temporary import without a license of any unclassified defense article or anyunclassified technical data to canada for enduse in canada by canadian citizensor return to the united states, or from canada for enduse in the united states orcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.654appendix nreturn to a canadian citizen in canada, with the exception of the articles or relatedtechnical data listed in paragraph (b) of this section.(b)exceptions. the exemptions of this section do not apply to the following articles and related technical data. . . .(7)technical data for use by a foreign national other than a canadian.(8)unclassified technical data directly related to a classified defense article. . . .sec. 126.7ñdenial, revocation, suspension, or amendment of licenses and otherapprovals.(a)policy. licenses or approvals shall be denied or revoked whenever required by any statute of the united states (see secs. 127.6 and 127.10 of thissubchapter). any application for an export license or other approval under thissubchapter may be disapproved, and any license or other approval or exemptiongranted under this subchapter may be revoked, suspended, or amended withoutprior notice whenever:(1)the department of state deems such action to be in furtherance of worldpeace, the national security or the foreign policy of the united states, or is otherwise advisable; or(2)the department of state believes that 22 u.s.c. 2778, any regulation contained in this subchapter, or the terms of any u.s. government export authorization (including the terms of a manufacturing license or technical assistance agreement, or export authorization granted pursuant to the export administration act,as amended) has been violated by any party to the export or other person havingsignificant interest in the transaction; or . . . .(b)notification. the office of defense trade controls will notify applicants or licensees or other appropriate united states persons of actions takenpursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. the reasons for the action will be statedas specifically as security and foreign policy considerations permit. . . .sec. 126.9ñadvisory opinions.any person desiring information as to whether the office of defense tradecontrols would be likely to grant a license or other approval for the export of aparticular defense article or defense service to a particular country may request anadvisory opinion from the office of defense trade controls. these opinions arenot binding on the department of state and are revocable. a request for an advisory opinion must be made in writing and must outline in detail the equipment,its usage, the security classification (if any) of the articles or related technical data,and the country or countries involved. an original and seven copies of the lettermust be provided along with seven copies of suitable descriptive informationconcerning the defense article or defense service. . . .cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations655n.4.2export administration regulationspart 779technical datasec. 779.1definitions.6(a)technology, technical data, technical assistance, and software.7 theseterms are defined in supplement no. 3 to sec. 799.1 of this subchapter. the terminology used in this part 779 will be changed in the future to conform to the termsand definitions used in supplement no. 3 to part sec. 799.1 of this subchapter andin other parts of this subchapter. in the interim, the term òtechnical dataó as usedin this part 779, is understood to include both òtechnologyó (i.e., technical dataand technical assistance) and òsoftwareó. if the term òsoftwareó is cited separately, the term refers only to software as defined in supplement no. 3 to sec.799.1 of this subchapter.(b)export of technical data8,9(1)export of technical data. òexport of technical dataó means(i)an actual shipment or transmission of technical data out of the unitedstates;10(ii)any release of technical data in the united states with the knowledge orintent that the data will be shipped or transmitted from the united states to aforeign country; or(iii)any release of technical data of u.s.origin in a foreign country.(2)release of technical data. technical data may be released for export through:(i)visual inspection by foreign nationals of u.s.origin equipment and facilities;6see sec. 770.2 for definitions of other terms used in this part.7the provisions of part 779 do not apply to òclassifiedó technical data, i.e., technical datathat have been officially assigned a security classification (e.g., òtop secretó, òsecretó, oròconfidentialó) by an officer or agency of the u.s. government. the export of classifiedtechnical data is controlled by the center for defense trade of the u.s. department of stateor the u.s. nuclear regulatory commission, washington, dc.8license applications for, or questions about, the export of technical data relating to commodities which are licensed by u.s. government agencies other than the u.s. departmentof commerce shall be referred to such other appropriate u.s. government agency for consideration (see sec. 770.10 of this subchapter).9patent attorneys and others are advised to consult the u.s. patent office, u.s. department of commerce, washington, dc 20231, regarding the u.s. patent office regulationsconcerning the filing of patent applications or amendments in foreign countries. in additionto the regulations issued by the u.s. patent office, technical data contained in or related toinventions made in foreign countries or in the united states, are also subject to the u.s.department of commerce regulations covering the export of technical data, in the samemanner as the export of other types of technical data.10as used in this part 779, the united states includes its possessions and territories.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.656appendix n(ii)oral exchanges of information in the united states or abroad; and(iii)the application to situations abroad of personal knowledge or technicalexperience acquired in the united states.(c)reexport of technical data. òreexport of technical dataó means an actual shipment or transmission from one foreign country to another, or any releaseof technical data of u.s. origin in a foreign country with the knowledge or intentthat the data will be shipped or transmitted to another foreign country. technicaldata may be released for reexport through:(1)visual inspection of u.s.origin equipment and facilities abroad;(2)oral exchanges of information abroad; and(3)the application to situations abroad of personal knowledge or technicalexperience acquired in the united states.(d)direct product. the term òdirect productó means the immediate product(including processes and services) produced directly by the use of technical data.sec. 779.2licenses to export.except as provided in sec. 770.3(a) of this subchapter, an export of technicaldata must be made under either a u.s. department of commerce general licenseor a validated export license. (see secs. 771.1 and 772.2 of this subchapter fordefinitions of ògeneraló and òvalidatedó licenses.) general licenses gtda andgtdr (see secs. 779.3 and 779.4) apply to specific types of exports of technicaldata. a validated license is required for any export of technical data where thesegeneral licenses do not apply, except in the case of certain exports to canada.11,12sec. 779.3general license gtda: technical data available to all destinations.note: in this sec. 779.3 the word information means òtechnical dataó as usedin this part (i.e., òtechnologyó and òsoftwareó as defined in supplement no. 3 tosec. 799.1 of this subchapter).11an export of technical data to canada may be made without either a validated orgeneral license, unless a validated license is required to canada by a specific subcategory dor e eccn on the ccl.12although the bureau of export administration may provide general information onlicensing policies regarding the prospects of approval of various types of export controlactions, including actions with respect to technical data, normally it will give a formaljudgement respecting a specific request for an action only upon the actual submission of aformal application or request setting forth all of the facts relevant to the export transactionand supported by all required documentation. advice is always available, however, regarding any questions as to the applicability of a general license. such questions should besubmitted by letter to the u.s. department of commerce, bureau of export administration,p.o. box 273, washington, dc 20044.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations657(a)establishment of general license. a general license gtda is herebyestablished authorizing:(1)unrestricted export to any destination of information that is already publicly available or will be made publicly available as described in paragraph (b) ofthis section;(2)unrestricted export to any destination of information arising during or resulting from fundamental research, as described in paragraph (c) of this section;note: paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section do not authorize the exportof data contained in a patent application for purposes of filing and/or publishingfor opposition abroad. such exports are controlled by the u.s. patent and trademark office and must be licensed by that office. see ear sec. 770.10(j).(3)release of educational information, as described in paragraph (d) of thissection; and(4)export of information in connection with certain patent applications, asdescribed in paragraph (e) of this section.note 1: see paragraph (f) regarding government sponsored research covered by contractual national security controls and the note following this sectionregarding consulting and training. use of general license gtda is subject to theprohibitions of sec. 771.2(c) (1), (4), and (9), but not to the other prohibitions ofsec. 771.2(c).note 2: supplement no. 5 to part 779 contains explanatory questions andanswers about the use of general license gtda. certain paragraphs of this sec.779.3 are followed by references to relevant questions and answers in supplementno. 5.(b)publicly available. information is made public and so becomes òpublicly availableó when it becomes generally accessible to the interested public inany form, including:(1)publication in periodicals, books, print, electronic, or any other media available for general distribution to any member of the public or to a community ofpersons, such as those in a scientific or engineering discipline, interested in thesubject matter either free or at a price that does not exceed the cost of reproductionand distribution (see questions a(1) through a(6));(2)ready availability at libraries open to the public or at university libraries(see question a(6));(3)patents available at any patent office; and(4)release at an open conference, meeting, seminar, trade show, or other opengathering.(i)a conference or other gathering is òopenó if all technically qualified members of the public are eligible to attend and attendees are permitted to take notesor otherwise make a personal record (not necessarily a recording) of the proceedings and presentations.(ii)all technically qualified members of the public may be considered eligibleto attend a conference or other gathering notwithstanding:cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.658appendix n(a)a registration fee reasonably related to costs and reflecting an intention thatall interested and technically qualified persons be able to attend, or(b)a limitation on actual attendance, as long as attendees either are the firstwho have applied or are selected on the basis of relevant scientific or technicalcompetence, experience, or responsibility (see questions b(1) through b(6)).this general license gtda authorizes submission of papers to domestic orforeign editors or reviewers of journals, or to organizers of open conferences orother open gatherings, with the understanding that the papers will be made publicly available if favorably received. (see questions a(1) and a(3).)(c)information resulting from fundamental researchñ(1)fundamental research. paragraphs (c)(2) through (c)(4) and paragraph (f) ofthis section provide specific operational rules that will be used to determinewhether research in particular institutional contexts qualifies as òfundamentalresearch.ó the intent behind those operational rules is to identify as òfundamentalresearchó basic and applied research in science and engineering, where the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly within the scientificcommunity. such research can be distinguished from proprietary research andfrom industrial development, design, production, and product utilization, theresults of which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary reasons or specific national security reasons as defined in sec. 779.3(f). (see question d(8).)(2)universitybased research.(i)research conducted by scientists, engineers, or students at a university normally will be considered fundamental research, as described below. (òuniversityómeans any accredited institution of higher education located in the united states.)(ii)prepublication review by a sponsor of university research solely to ensurethat publication would not inadvertently divulge proprietary information that thesponsor has furnished to the researchers does not change the rule described inparagraph (c)(2)(i) of this section. however, general license gtda does notauthorize the release of information from a corporate sponsor to university researchers where the research results are subject to prepublication review. seeother sections in this part 779 for provisions that may authorize such releaseswithout a validated license. (see questions d(7), d(9), and d(10).)(iii)prepublication review by a sponsor of university research solely to ensurethat publication would not compromise patent rights does not change the ruledescribed in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, so long as the review causes nomore than a temporary delay in publication of the research results.(iv)however, general license gtda does not authorize the initial transfer ofinformation from an industry sponsor to university researchers where the partieshave agreed that the sponsor may withhold from publication some or all of theinformation so provided. (see question d(2).)(v)university based research is not considered òfundamental researchó if theuniversity or its researchers accept (at the request, for example, of an industrialsponsor) other restrictions on publication of scientific and technical informationresulting from the project or activity. scientific and technical information resulting from the research will nonetheless become subject to general license gtdacryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations659once all such restrictions have expired or have been removed. (see questions d(7)and d(9).)(vi)the provisions of paragraph (f) of this section will apply if a university or itsresearchers accept specific national security controls (as defined in paragraph (f)of this section) on a research project or activity sponsored by the u.s. government. (see questions e(1) and e(2).)(3)research based at federal agencies or ffrdcs. research conducted by scientists or engineers working for a federal agency or a federally funded researchand development center (ffrdc) may be designated as òfundamental researchówithin any appropriate system controlling release of information by such scientists and engineers devised by the agency or the ffrdc. (see questions d(8) andd(11).)(4)corporate research.(i)research conducted by scientists or engineers working for a business entitywill be considered òfundamental researchó at such time and to the extent that theresearchers are free to make scientific and technical information resulting fromthe research publicly available without restriction or delay based on proprietaryconcerns or specific national security controls as defined in paragraph (f) of thissection.(ii)prepublication review by the company solely to ensure that the publicationwould compromise no proprietary information provided by the company to theresearchers is not considered to be a proprietary restriction under paragraph(c)(4)(i) of this section. however general license gtda does not authorize therelease of information to university researchers where the research results aresubject to prepublication review. see other sections in this part 779 for provisionsthat may authorize such releases without a validated license. (see questions d(8),d(9), and d(10).)(iii)prepublication review by the company solely to ensure that prepublicationwould compromise no patent rights will not be considered a proprietary restriction for this purpose, so long as the review causes no more than a temporary delayin publication of the research results.(iv)however, general license gtda does not authorize the initial transfer ofinformation from a business entity to researchers where the parties have agreedthat the business entity may withhold from publication some or all of the information so provided.(5)research based elsewhere. research conducted by scientists or engineerswho are not working for any of the institutions described in paragraphs (c)(2)through (c)(4) of this section will be treated as corporate research, as described inparagraph (c)(4) of this section. (see question d(8)).(d)educational information. the release of òeducational informationó referred to in paragraph (a)(3) of this section is release by instruction in catalogcourses and associated teaching laboratories of academic institutions. dissertation research is treated in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. (see question c(1)through c(6).)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.660appendix n(e)patent applications. the information referred to in paragraph (a)(4) ofthis section is:(1)information contained in a patent application prepared wholly from foreignorigin technical data where the application is being sent to the foreign inventor to be executed and returned to the united states for subsequent filing in theu.s. patent and trademark office;(2)information contained in a patent application, or an amendment, modification, supplement, or division of an application, and authorized for filing in aforeign country in accordance with the regulations of the patent and trademarkoffice, 37 cfr part 5 (see sec. 770.10(j)); or(3)information contained in a patent application when sent to a foreign country before or within six months after the filing of a united states patent application for the purpose of obtaining the signature of an inventor who was in theunited states when the invention was made or who is a coinventor with a personresiding in the united states.(f)governmentsponsored research covered by contract controls.(1)if research is funded by the u.s. government, and specific national securitycontrols are agreed on to protect information resulting from the research, paragraph (a)(2) of this section will not apply to any export of such information inviolation of such controls. general license gtda as described in paragraph (a)(2)of this section is nonetheless available for any export of information resultingfrom the research that is consistent with the specific controls.(2)examples of òspecific national security controlsó include requirements forprepublication review by the government, with right to withhold permission forpublication; restrictions on prepublication dissemination of information to nonu.s. citizens or other categories of persons; or restrictions on participation of nonu.s. citizens or other categories of persons in the research. a general reference toone or more export control laws or regulations or a general reminder that thegovernment retains the right to classify is not a òspecific national security controló. (see questions e(1) and e(2).)(g)advice concerning uncontrolled information. persons may be concerned that an export of uncontrolled information could adversely affect u.s.national security interests. exporters who wish advice before exporting such information can contact the appropriate government scientific or technical personnel by calling the bureau of export administration at (202) 3774811.note: consulting and training. technical data can be inadvertently exported in various ways. consulting and training are especially effective mechanisms of technology transfer. the exporter should be aware that the departmentof commerce maintains controls on exports of technical data that do not qualifyfor general license gtda as described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(3) of thissection, including application abroad of personal knowledge or technical experience acquired in the united states. (see also paragraph (g) of this section andquestion f(1).)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations661sec. 779.4general license gtdr: technical data under restriction.a general license designated gtdr is hereby established authorizing theexport of technical data that are not exportable under the provisions of generallicense gtda, subject to the provisions, restrictions, exclusions, and exceptionsset forth below and subject to the written assurance requirement set forth inparagraph (f) of this section.(a)country restrictions. general license gtdr with written assurancemay not be used for exports to country groups qwys and z, the peopleõs republic of china, iran, or syria. general license gtdr without written assurance(gtdu) may not be used for exports to country groups s and z, iran or syria ofsoftware available at retail outlets as described in the general software note.13general license gtdr without written assurance (gtdu) as described in anyentry on the commerce control list (supplement no. 1 to sec. 799.1 of thissubchapter) may not be used for exports to country groups s and z. this generallicense is subject to the prohibitions described in sec. 771.2(c) of this subchapter,including the prohibition on any export to the south african military or police.(b)general license gtdr without written assurance authorizes the following exportsñ(1)operation technical data.(i)for definitions and conditions for use of general license gtdr withoutwritten assurance for operation technical data, refer to the third paragraph of thegeneral technology note as listed in supplement no. 2 to sec. 799.1 of thissubchapter. as defined in that note, òoperation technical dataó is the minimum13the general software note (gsn) is contained in supplement no. 2 to sec. 799.1 ofsubchapter c, chapter vii, title 15, code of federal regulations. the text of the gsn is asfollows:general license gtdr, without written assurance, is available for release ofsoftware that is generally available to the public by being:a.sold from stock at retail selling points without restriction by means of:1.over the counter transactions;2.mail order transactions, or3.telephone call transactions; andb.designed for installation by the user without further substantial support bythe supplier.general license gtda is available for software that is publicly available.the general software note does not apply to exports of òsoftwareó controlled by otheragencies of the u.s. government.the phrase òwithout restrictionó clarifies that software is not ògenerally available to thepublicó if it is to be sold only with bundled hardware generally available to the public.software that is both bundled with hardware and ògenerally available to the publicó doesqualify for general license gtdr without a written assurance.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.662appendix nnecessary for the installation, operations,14 maintenance (checking), and repair ofthose products that are eligible for general licenses, or that are exported under avalidated export license. the òminimum necessaryó excludes from operation technical data development or production technical data and includes use technologyonly to the extent required to ensure safe and efficient use of the product. individual entries in the software and technology subcategories of the ccl may further restrict export of òminimum necessaryó technical data. (see supplement nos.2 and 3 to sec. 799.1 of this subchapter for further information and definitions ofthe terms òdevelopmentó, òproductionó, òuseó, and òrequiredó.)(ii)operation software may be exported under gtdr, without assurance, provided that:(a)the operation software is the minimum necessary to operate the equipmentauthorized for export; and(b)the operation software is in object code.(2)sales technical data.(i)òsales technical dataó is defined as data supporting a prospective or actualquotation, bid, or offer to sell, lease, or otherwise supply any item controlled bythe ear.(ii)sales technical data may be exported under gtdr, without written assurances, provided that:(a)the technical data is a type customarily transmitted with a prospective oractual quotation, bid, or offer in accordance with established business practice;and(b)the export will not disclose the detailed design, production, or manufacture, or the means of reconstruction, of either the quoted item or its product. thepurpose of this limitation is to prevent disclosure of technical data so detailed thatthe consignee could use the technical data in production.note: neither this authorization nor its use means that the u.s. governmentintends, or is committed, to approve an export license application for any commodity, plant, or technical data that may be the subject of the transaction to whichsuch quotation, bid, or offer relates. exporters are advised to include in any quotations, bids, or offers, and in any contracts entered into pursuant to such quotations, bids, or offers, a provision relieving themselves of liability in the event thatan export license (when required) is not approved by the bureau of export administration.(3)software updates. software updates that are intended for and are limited tocorrection of errors (òfixesó to òbugsó that have been identified) qualify for exportunder general license gtdr, without written assurance, provided the updatesare being exported to the same consignee and do not enhance the functionalcapacities of the initial software package.(4)technical data described in the commerce control list. certain other tech14exporters of digital computer equipment must describe on their license applicationsany software, including that shipped under general license gtdr, to be used with theequipment.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations663nical data may be exported under gtdr without written assurance. such technical data is identified in the òrequirementsó section of the eccn under the heading ògtduó. the designations ògtdu: yesó or ògtdu: yes except . . . .ó indicatethat general license gtdr without written assurance is available subject to anyapplicable exceptions. the designation ògtdu: noó indicates that general license gtdr without written assurance is not available. however, the designationògtdu: noó does not restrict exports under paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) ofthis section. exporters have the option of using the term ògtduó to describegeneral license gtdr without written assurance for all purposes, including information requirements on the shipperõs export declaration.(c)ð(d)[reserved](e)restrictions applicable to the republic of south africañ(1)general prohibition. except as provided in sec. 779.4 (b)(1), (b)(2), and (b)(3),no technical data may be exported or reexported to the republic of south africaunder this general license gtdr where the exporter or reexporter knows or hasreason to know that the data or the direct product of the data are for delivery,directly or indirectly, to or for use by or for military or police entities in southafrica or for use in servicing equipment owned, controlled, or used by or for suchentities. in addition, no technical data relating to the commodities listed in supplement no. 2 to this part 779 may be exported or reexported under general licensegtdr to any consignee in the republic of south africa.(2)written assurances. in addition to any written assurances that may or maynot be required by paragraph (f) of this section, no export or reexport of technicaldata may be made to the republic of south africa under general license gtdruntil the exporter has received written assurance from the importer that neitherthe technical data nor the direct product of the data will be made available to orfor use by or for military or police entities of the republic of south africa.(f)general license gtdr with written assurances. except as provided insec. 779.4(b) and (f)(5), no export of technical data described in this sec. 779.4(f)may be made under general license gtdr:(1)until the u.s. exporter has received a written assurance from the foreignimporter that, unless prior authorization is obtained from the office of exportlicensing, the importer will not knowingly:(i)reexport, directly or indirectly, to country group q, s, w,15 y, or z, or the15effective april 26, 1971, country group w no longer included romania. assurancesexecuted prior to april 26, 1971, that refer to country group w continue to apply to romania as well as poland. effective april 25, 1991, czechoslovakia was added to country groupw. assurances executed on or after april 25, 1991, that refer to country group w apply toczechoslovakia as well as poland. on may 8, 1992, hungary was removed from countrygroup w. assurances are no longer applicable to hungary. on january 1, 1993, czechoslovakia became two separate countries called the czech republic and the slovak republic.assurances executed prior to january 1, 1993, that refer to czechoslovakia continue toapply to the czech republic and the slovak republic.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.664appendix npeopleõs republic of china any technical data relating to commodities controlledto country group w as described in the paragraph titled òvalidated licenserequiredó of any entry of the commerce control list;(ii)export, directly or indirectly, to country group z any direct product of thetechnical data if such direct product is controlled to country group òwó in theparagraph of any entry on the commerce control list titled òvalidated licenserequiredó; or(iii)export, directly or indirectly, to any destination in country group q, s, w,y, or the peopleõs republic of china, any direct product of the technical data ifsuch direct product is identified by the code letter òaó following the exportcontrol classification number on the commerce control list.(2)if the direct product of any technical data is a complete plant or any majorcomponent of a plant that is capable of producing a commodity controlled tocountry group òwó in the paragraph of any entry on the commerce control listtitled òvalidated license requiredó or appears on the u.s. munitions list, a written assurance by the person who is or will be in control of the distribution of theproducts of the plant (whether or not such person is the importer) shall be obtained by the u.s. exporter (via the foreign importer), stating that, unless priorauthorization is obtained from the office of export licensing, such person willnot knowingly:(i)reexport, directly or indirectly, to country group q, s, w, y, or z, or thepeopleõs republic of china, the technical data relating to the plant or the majorcomponent of a plant;(ii)export, directly or indirectly, to country group z, the plant or the majorcomponent of a plant (depending upon which is the direct product of the technical data) or any product of such plant or of such major component, if such productis identified by the symbol òwó in the paragraph of any entry on the commercecontrol list titled òvalidated license requiredó or appears on the u.s. munitionslist; or(iii)export, directly or indirectly, to any destination in country group q, s, w,y, or the peopleõs republic of china, the plant or the major component of a plant(depending upon which is the direct product of the technical data) or any productof such plant or of such major component, if such product is identified by the codeletter òaó following the export control classification number on the commercecontrol list or appears on the u.s. munitions list.note: effective april 1, 1964, sec. 779.4(f)(2)(ii) and (f)(2)(iii) required certainwritten assurances relating to the disposition of the products of a complete plantor major component of a plant that is the direct product of unpublished technicaldata of u.s. origin exported under general license gtdr. except as to commodities identified by the code letter òaó following the export control classificationnumber on the commerce control list, and items on the u.s. munitions list, theeffective date of the written assurance requirements for plant products as a condition of using general license gtdr for export of this type of technical data ishereby deferred until further notice, subject to the following limitations:1.the exporter shall, at least two weeks before the initial export of thetechnical data, notify the office of export licensing, by letter, of the facts requiredcryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations665to be disclosed in an application for a validated export license covering suchtechnical data; and2.the exporter shall obtain from the person who is or will be in control ofthe distribution of the products of the plant (whether or not such person is theimporter) a written commitment that he will notify the u.s. government, directlyor through the exporter, whenever he enters into negotiations to export any product of the plant to any destination covered by sec. 779.4(f)(2)(ii), when such product is not identified by the code letter òaó following the export control classification number on the commerce control list and requires a validated license forexport to country group w by the information set forth in the applicable cclentry in the paragraph titled òvalidated license requiredó. the notificationshould state the product, quantity, country of destination, and the estimated dateof the shipment.moreover, during the period of deferment, the remaining written assurance requirements of sec. 779.4 (f)(2)(ii) and (f)(2)(iii) as to plant products thatare identified by the code letter òaó following the export control classificationnumber on the commerce control list, or are on the u.s. munitions list, will bewaived if the plant is located in one of the following cocom countries: australia,belgium, canada, denmark, the federal republic of germany, france, greece,italy, japan, luxembourg, the netherlands, norway, portugal, spain, turkey,and the united kingdom. this deferment applies to exports of technical datapursuant to any type of contract or arrangement, including licensing agreements,regardless of whether entered into before or after april 1, 1964.(3)the required assurance may be made in the form of a letter or other writtencommunication from the importer or, if applicable, the person in control of thedistribution of the products of a plant; or the assurance may be incorporated intoa licensing agreement that restricts disclosure of the technical data to be used onlyin authorized destinations, and prohibits shipment of the direct product thereofby the licensee to any unauthorized destination. an assurance included in a licensing agreement will be acceptable for all exports made during the life of theagreement, provided that the obligations of the importer set forth in the assurances survive any termination of the licensing agreement. if such assurance is notreceived, this general license is not applicable and a validated export license isrequired. an application for validated license shall include an explanatory statement setting forth the reasons why such assurance cannot be obtained.(4)in addition, this general license is not applicable to any export of technicaldata of the kind described in this sec. 779.4(f), if at the time of export of thetechnical data from the united states, the exporter knows or has reason to believethat the direct product to be manufactured abroad by use of the technical data isintended to be exported directly or indirectly to any unauthorized destination.(5)the limitations in this sec. 779.4(f) do not apply to the export of technicaldata included in an application for the foreign filing of a patent, provided suchfiling is in accordance with the regulations of the u.s. patent office.(g)additional restrictions applicable to chemical or biological weapons. incryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.666appendix naddition to any other restrictions in sec. 779.4, the use of general license gtdr isfurther restricted by sec. 778.8(a)(5) of this subchapter.sec. 779.5validated license applications.(a)general. no technical data, other than that exportable without licenseto canada or under general license to other destinations, may be exported fromthe united states without a validated export license. such validated export licenses are issued by the office of export licensing upon receipt of an appropriateexport application or reexport request. an application for a technical data licenseshall consist of:(1)form bxa622p, application for export license, accompanied by;(2)a letter of explanation described in sec. 779.5(d) for technology or description of the capabilities of the software; and(3)for shipments to the czech republic, hungary, poland, and the slovakrepublic, an import certificate issued by the appropriate national government.(see sec. 775.8 and supplement no. 1 to part 775 of this subchapter.)(b)application form. form ita622p shall be completed as provided insec. 772.4, except that items 9(a) and 11 shall be left blank. in item 9(b), òdescription of commodity or technical data,ó enter a general statement which specifiesthe technical data (e.g., blueprints, manuals, etc.). in purpose.ó(c)[reserved](d)letter of explanation. each application shall be supported by a comprehensive letter of explanation in duplicate. this letter shall set forth all the factsrequired to present to the office of export licensing a complete disclosure of thetransaction including, if applicable, the following:(1)the identification of all parties to the transaction;(2)the exact project location where the technical data will be used;(3)the type of technical data to be exported;(4)the form in which the export will be made;(5)the uses for which the data will be employed;(6)an explanation of the process, product, size, and output capacity of theplant or equipment, if applicable, or other description that delineates, defines, andlimits the data to be transmitted (the òtechnical scopeó);(7)the availability abroad of comparable foreign technical data.(e)special provisionsñ(1)maritime nuclear propulsion plants and related commodities.16 these special provisions are applicable to technical data relating to maritime (civil) nuclearpropulsion plants, their land prototypes, and special facilities for their construc16see sec. 779.8(a) which sets forth provisions prohibiting exports and reexports of certain technical data and products manufactured therefrom.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations667tion, support, or maintenance, including any machinery, device, component, orequipment specifically developed or designed for use in such plants or facilities.every application for license to export technical data relating to any of thesecommodities shall include the following:(i)a description of the foreign project for which the technical data will befurnished;(ii)a description of the scope of the proposed services to be offered by theapplicant, his consultant(s), and his subcontractor(s), including all the design datawhich will be disclosed;(iii)the names, addresses and titles of all personnel of the applicant, hisconsultant(s) and his subcontractor(s) who will discuss or disclose the technicaldata or be involved in the design or development of the technical data;(iv)the beginning and termination dates of the period of time during which thetechnical data will be discussed or disclosed and a proposed time schedule of thereports which the applicant will submit to the u.s. department of commerce,detailing the technical data discussed or disclosed during the period of the license;(v)the following certification:i (we) certify that if this application is approved, i (we) and any consultants,subcontractors, or other persons employed or retained by us in connection withthe project thereby licensed will not discuss with or disclose to others, directly orindirectly, any technical data relating to u.s. naval nuclear propulsion plants. i(we) further certify that i (we) will furnish to the u.s. department of commerceall reports and information which it may require concerning specific transmittalsor disclosures of technical data pursuant to any license granted as a result of thisapplication;(vi)a statement of the steps which the applicant will take to assure that personnelof the applicant, his consultant(s) and his subcontractor(s) will not discuss or disclose to others technical data relating to u.s. naval nuclear propulsion plants; and(vii)a written statement of assurance from the foreign importer that unless priorauthorization is obtained from the office of export licensing, the importer willnot knowingly export directly or indirectly to country group q, s, w, y, or z, orthe peopleõs republic of china, the direct product of the technical data. however,if the u.s. exporter is not able to obtain this statement from the foreign importer,the u.s. exporter shall attach an explanatory statement to his license applicationsetting forth the reasons why such an assurance cannot be obtained.(2)other license applications. for all other license applications to export technical data identified in an entry with an eccn ending in the code letter òaó toany destination, other than country group q, s, w, y, or z, or the peopleõsrepublic of china, an applicant shall attach to the license application a writtenstatement from his foreign importer assuring that, unless prior authorization isobtained from the office of export licensing, the importer will not knowinglyreexport the technical data to any destination, or export any national securitycontrolled direct product of the technical data, directly or indirectly, to countrygroup q, s, w, y, or z, or the peopleõs republic of china. however, if the u.s.exporter is not able to obtain the required statement from his importer, the excryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.668appendix nporter shall attach an explanatory statement to his license setting forth the reasonswhy such an assurance cannot be obtained.(f)validity period and extensionñ(1)initial validity. validated licenses covering exports of technical data willgenerally be issued for a validity period of 24 months. upon request, a validityperiod exceeding 24 months may be granted where the facts of the transactionwarrant it and the office of export licensing determines that such action wouldbe consistent with the objectives of the applicable u.s. export control program.justification for a validity period exceeding 24 months should be provided inaccordance with the procedures set forth in sec. 772.9(d)(2) for requesting anextended validity period with a license application. the office of export licensing will make the final decision on what validity beyond 24 months, if any, shouldbe authorized in each case.(2)extensions. a request to extend the validity period of a technical data license shall be made on form ita685p in accordance with the procedures setforth in sec. 772.12(a). the request shall include on form ita685p, in the spaceentitled òamend license to read as follows,ó whether the license has been previously extended and the date(s) and duration of such extension(s). the office ofexport licensing will make the final decision on what extension beyond 24months, if any, should be authorized in each case. (see sec. 779.8(c)(1) for validityperiod extensions for reexports of technical data.)sec. 779.6exports under a validated license.(a)use of validated licensesñ(1)retention of license. the validated technical data license need not be presented to the customs office or post office but shall be retained and made availablefor inspection in accordance with the provisions of sec. 787.13 of this subchapter.(2)return of revoked or suspended technical data licenses. if the office ofexport licensing revokes or suspends a technical data license, the licensee shallreturn the license immediately to the office of export licensing in accordancewith the instructions in sec. 786.2(d) of this subchapter.(b)records. any person to whom a validated technical data license hasbeen issued shall retain the license and maintain complete records in accordancewith sec. 786.2(d) of this subchapter, including any export licenses (whether usedor unused, valid or expired) and all supporting documents and shipping records.sec. 779.7amendments.requests for amendments shall be made in accordance with the provisionsof sec. 772.11. changes requiring amendment include any expansion or upgradeof the technical scope that was described in the letter of explanation, as approvedor modified on the export license.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations669sec. 779.8reexports of technical data and exports of the product manufactured abroad by use of united states technical data.(a)prohibited exports and reexports. unless specifically authorized by theoffice of export licensing, or otherwise authorized under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, no person in the united states or in a foreign countrymay:(1)reexport any technical data imported from the united states, directly orindirectly, in whole or in part, from the authorized country(ies) of ultimate destination;(2)export any technical data from the united states with the knowledge that itis to be reexported, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from the authorizedcountry(ies) of ultimate destination; or(3)export or reexport to country group q, s, w, y or z, the peopleõs republicof china or afghanistan any foreign produced direct product of u.s. technicaldata, or any commodity produced by any plant or major component thereof thatis a direct product of u.s. technical data, if such direct product or commodity iscovered by the provisions of sec. 779.4(f) or sec. 779.5(e)(1); or(b)permissive reexportsñ(1)exportable under general license gtda or gtdr. any technical datawhich have been exported from the united states may be reexported from anydestination to any other destination provided that, at the time of reexport, thetechnical data may be exported directly from the united states to the new countryof destination under general license gtda or gtdr and provided that all of therequirements and conditions for use of these general licenses have been met.(2)cocom authorization. separate specific authorization by the office of export licensing to reexport any u.s. origin technical data is not required if all of thefollowing conditions are met:(i)the data being exported are identified by the suffix òaó on the ccl;(ii)the export or reexport is from a cocom participating country, i.e., australia, belgium, canada, denmark, france, the federal republic of germany, greece,italy, japan, luxembourg, the netherlands, norway, portugal, spain, turkey, orthe united kingdom;(iii)the export or reexport is made in accordance with the conditions of the licensing authorization issued by the applicable cocom participating country; and(iv)the export or reexport is to a country in country group q, w, or y or thepeopleõs republic of china.(3)direct product. separate specific authorization by the office of export licensing to export or reexport the direct product of u.s. origin technical data is notrequired if the direct product, were it of u.s. origin, could be shipped under anyof the permissive reexport provisions of sec. 774.2 of this subchapter.(4)peopleõs republic of china. separate specific authorization by the office ofexport licensing is not required to reexport software from a cocom participating country, austria, finland, hong kong, ireland, new zealand, sweden, orswitzerland to the peopleõs republic of china that meets the requirements setforth in advisory notes for the peopleõs republic of china or for country groupscryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.670appendix nq, w, y in the commerce control list (supplement no. 1 to sec. 799.1 of thissubchapter) and are licensed for shipment by the country from which reexported.(c)specific authorization to reexportñ(1)submission of request for reexport authorization. requests for specific authorization to reexport technical data or to export any product thereof, as applicable, shall be submitted on form ita699p, request to dispose of commoditiesor technical data previously exported (omb approval no. 06250009), to: officeof export licensing, p.o. box 273, washington, dc 20044.(see supplement no. 1 to part 774 for instructions on completing the form.)if form ita699p is not readily available, a request for specific authorization toreexport technical data or to export any product thereof, as applicable, may besubmitted by letter. the letter shall bear the words òtechnical data reexportrequestó immediately below the heading or letterhead and contain all the information required by sec. 779.5(d). authorization to reexport technical data or toexport the product thereof, if granted, will generally be issued with a validityperiod of 24 months on form ita 699p, or by means of a letter from the office ofexport licensing. any request for extension of the validity period shall be requested in accordance with sec. 774.5(b), and shall specify the period for whichadditional validity is required. the office of export licensing will make the finaldecision on what validity beyond 24 months, if any, should be authorized in eachcase.(2)return of reexport authorization. if the office of export licensing revokesor suspends a reexport authorization, the licensee shall return the reexport authorization immediately to the office of export licensing.(3)records. any person to whom a reexport authorization has been issuedshall retain and make available for inspection records in accordance with theprovisions of sec. 787.13 of this subchapter, including any reexport authorizations(whether used or unused, valid or expired) and all supporting documents andshipping records.(d)effect of foreign laws. no authority granted by the u.s. office of exportlicensing, or under the provisions of the u.s. export administration regulations,to reexport technical data or export a product thereof shall in any way relieve anyperson from his responsibility to comply fully with the laws, rules, and regulations of the country from which the reexport or export is to be made or of anyother country having authority over any phase of the transaction. conversely, noforeign law, rule, regulation, or authorization in any way relieves any personfrom his responsibility to obtain such authorization from the u.s. office of exportlicensing as may be required by the u.s. export administration regulations.sec. 779.9commercial agreements with certain countries.pursuant to section 5(j) of the export administration amendments act of1979, as amended, any nongovernmental u.s. person or firm that enters into ancryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations671agreement with any agency of the government of a controlled country (countrygroups q, w, y, and the peopleõs republic of china), which agreement encourages technical cooperation and is intended to result in the export from the u.s. tothe other party of u.s.origin technical data (except under general license gtdaor general license gtdr as provided under the provisions of sec. 779.4(b)), shallsubmit those portions of the agreement that include the statement of work anddescribe the anticipated exports of data to the office of technology and policyanalysis, room 4054, p.o. box 273, washington, dc 20044. this material shall besubmitted no later than 30 days after the final signature on the agreement.(a)this requirement does not apply to colleges, universities and othereducational institutions.(b)the submission required by this section does not relieve the exporterfrom the licensing requirements for controlled technical data and goods.(c)acceptance of a submission does not represent a judgment as to whetherexport administration will or will not issue any authorization for export of technical data.sec. 779.10other applicable provisions.as far as may be consistent with the provisions of this part, all of the otherprovisions of the export administration regulations shall apply equally to exports of technical data and to applications for licenses and licenses issued underthis part.supplement no. 1 to part 779ñtechnical data interpretations1.technology based on u.s.origin technical data. u.s.origin technicaldata does not lose its u.s.origin when it is redrawn, used, consulted, or otherwisecommingled abroad in any respect with other technical data of any other origin.therefore, any subsequent or similar technical data prepared or engineered abroadfor the design, construction, operation, or maintenance of any plant or equipment,or part thereof, which is based on or utilizes any u.s.origin technical data, issubject to the same u.s. export administration regulations that are applicable tothe original u.s.origin technical data, including the requirement for obtainingoffice of export licensing authorization prior to reexportation.2.distinction between general and validated license requirements forshipment to qwy destinations of technical data and replacement parts.a number of exporters have recently asked where the line is drawn between general license and validated license exports to pqwy destinations of technical data related to equipment exports.the export of technical data under validated license is authorized only tothe extent specifically indicated on the face of the license. the only data related toequipment exports that can be provided under general license is the publiclycryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.672appendix navailable data authorized by general license gtda, or the assembly, installation,maintenance, repair, and operation data authorized by general license gtdr.771.20general license glx; exports to country groups qwy and the peopleõsrepublic of china.(a)scope.a general license designated glx is established, authorizingexports to civil endusers in country group qwy and the peopleõs republic ofchina (prc) of certain specified items.(b)eligible exports.the items eligible for this general license are thosedescribed in the advisory notes in the ccl that indicate likelihood of approvalfor òcountry groups qwy and the prc,ó except items described in the notes toeccns 1c18a and 2b18a. likelihood of approval notes that apply only to theprc, or to specified destinations in country group y also qualify for this generallicense to eligible destinations (however, those notes indicating country group qor w only, are specifically not eligible). in addition, those entries and subentireslisted in supplement no. 1 to this part 771 are eligible to export under this generallicense. however, this general license is not available for items that are also subject to missile technology (mt), nuclear nonproliferation (np), or foreign policy(fp) controls to the recipient country.(c)eligible consignees.this general license is available only for exportsto civil endusers for civil enduses. exports under this general license may not bemade to military endusers or to known military uses. such exports will continueto require an individual validated license and be considered on a casebycasebasis. in addition to conventional military activities, military uses include anyproliferation activities described in part 778 of this subchapter. retransfers tomilitary endusers or enduses in eligible countries are strictly prohibited, without prior authorization.the relevant part of the commerce control list is the òinformation securityó category, as described below (taken from supplement number 1 to section799.1 of the code of federal regulations).ii. òinformation securityónote: the control status of òinformation securityó equipment, òsoftwareó,systems, application specific òassembliesó, modules, integrated circuits, components, technology or functions is defined in the òinformation securityó entries inthis category even if they are components or òassembliesó of other equipment.note: òinformation securityó equipment, òsoftwareó, systems, applicationspecific òassembliesó, modules, integrated circuits, components, technology orfunctions that are excepted from control, not controlled, or eligible for licensingunder an advisory note are under the licensing jurisdiction of the department ofcommerce. for all other, exporters requesting a validated license from the decryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations673partment of commerce must provide a statement from the department of state,office of defense trade control, verifying that the equipment intended for exportis under the licensing jurisdiction of the department of commerce.a. equipment, assemblies and components5a11a systems, equipment, application specific òassembliesó, modules or integrated circuits for òinformation securityó, as described in this entry, and otherspecially designed components therefor.list of items controlledsystems, equipment, application specific òassembliesó, modules or integrated circuits for òinformation security,ó as follows, and other specially designedcomponents therefor:a.designed or modified to use òcryptographyó employing digital techniques to ensure òinformation securityó;b.designed or modified to perform cryptanalytic functions;c.designed or modified to use òcryptographyó employing analog techniques to ensure òinformation securityó, except:c.1.equipment using òfixedó band scrambling not exceeding 8 bands andin which the transpositions change not more frequently than once very second;c.2.equipment, using òfixedó band scrambling exceeding 8 bands and inwhich the transpositions change not more frequently than once every ten seconds;c.3.equipment using òfixedó frequency inversion and in which the transpositions change not more frequently than once every second;c.4.facsimile equipment;c.5.restricted audience broadcast equipment;c.6.civil television equipment;d.designed or modified to suppress the compromising emanations ofinformationbearing signals;note: 5a11.d does not control equipment specially designed to suppressemanations for health and safety reasons.e.designed or modified to use cryptographic techniques to generate thespreading code for òspread spectrumó or hopping code for òfrequency agilityósystems;f.designed or modified to provide certified or certifiable òmultilevel securityó or user isolation at a level exceeding class b2 of the trusted computersystem evaluation criteria (tcsec) or equivalent;g.communications cable systems designed or modified using mechanical, electrical or electronic means to detect surreptitious intrusion.5b11a equipment specially designed for the development of equipment or functions controlled by the òinformation securityó entries in this category, includingmeasuring or test equipment.cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.674appendix n5b12a equipment specially designed for the production of equipment or functions controlled by the òinformation securityó entries in this category, includingmeasuring, test, repair or production equipment.5b13a measuring equipment specially designed to evaluate and validate the òinformation securityó functions controlled by the òinformation securityó entries in5a or 5d.c. materials [reserved]d. òsoftwareó5d11a òsoftwareó specially designed or modified for the òdevelopmentó, òproductionó, or òuseó of equipment controlled by òinformation securityó entries 5a11,5b11, 5b12, or 5b13 or òsoftwareó controlled by òinformation securityó entries5d11, 5d12, or 5d13.5d12a òsoftwareó specially designed or modified to support technology controlled by òinformation securityó entry 5e11.5d13a specific òsoftwareó as follows.note: exporter must have determined that the software is not controlled bythe office of defense trade control, department of state, before using this general license.list of items controlleda.òsoftwareó having the characteristics, or performing or simulating thefunctions of the equipment controlled by the òinformation securityó entries in 5aor 5b.b.òsoftwareó to certify òsoftwareó controlled by 5d13.a;c.òsoftwareó designed or modified to protect against malicious computerdamage, e.g., viruses.e. technology5e11a technology according to the general technology note for the òdevelopmentó, òproductionó, or òuseó of equipment controlled by òinformation securityóentries 5a11, 5b11, 5b12, or 5b13 or òsoftwareó controlled by òinformation securityó entries 5d11, 5d12, or 5d13.notes for òinformation securityó:note 1:òinformation securityó entries in this category do not control:a.òpersonalized smart cardsó using òcryptographyó restricted for use only in equipment or systems released from control under 5a11.c.1 to c.6, by this note or as described inòinformation securityó advisory notes 3 and 4 below;cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant laws, documents, and regulations675b.equipment containing òfixedó data compression or coding techniques;c.receiving equipment for radio broadcast, pay television or similar restricted audience television of the consumer type, without digital encryption and where digitaldecryption is limited to the video, audio or management functions;d.portable (personal) or mobile radiotelephones for civil use; e.g., for use with commercial civil cellular radiocommunications systems, containing encryption, when accompanying their users;e.decryption functions specially designed to allow the execution of copyprotectedòsoftwareó, provided that the decryption functions are not useraccessible.note 2: òinformation securityó entries in this category do not control:a.òsoftwareó òrequiredó for the òuseó of equipment released by òinformation securityónote 1;b.òsoftwareó providing any of the functions of equipment released by òinformationsecurityó note 1;advisory note 3:licenses are likely to be approved, as administrative exceptions, forexports to country group w or cellular radio equipment or systems specially designed forcryptographic operation, provided any message traffic encryption capability that is withinthe scope of the control of the òinformation securityó entries in category 5 and that iscontained in such equipment or systems is irreversibly disabled.n.b.:provided message traffic encryption is not possible within such a system, the exportof mobile or portable cellular radio subscriber equipment containing cryptographic capabilities is permitted under this advisory note.advisory note 4: licenses are likely to be approved, as administrative exceptions, forexports to satisfactory endusers in country groups qwy and the prc of the followingcryptographic equipment, provided that the equipment is intended for civil use:a.access control equipment, such as automatic teller machines, selfservice statementprinters or point of sale terminals, that protects password or personal identification numbers (pin) or similar data to prevent unauthorized access to facilities, but does not allow forencryption of files or text, except as directly related to the password of pin protection;b.data authentication equipment that calculates a message authentication code (mac)or similar result to ensure no alteration of text has taken place, or to authenticate users, butdoes not allow for encryption of data, text or other media other than that needed for theauthentication;c.cryptographic equipment specially designed, developed or modified for use in machines for banking or money transactions, such as automatic teller machines, selfservicestatement printers, point of sale terminals or equipment for the encryption of interbankingtransactions, and intended for use only in such applications.advisory note 5:(eligible for gtdr). licenses are likely to be approved as administrative exceptions, for exports to satisfactory endusers in country groups qwy and theprc of the following cryptographic òsoftwareó;a.òsoftwareó required for the òuseó of equipment eligible for administrative exceptionstreatment under advisory notes 3 and 4 in the notes for òinformation securityó (category5);b.òsoftwareó providing any of the functions of equipment eligible for administrativeexceptions treatment under advisory notes 3 and 4 in the notes for òinformation securityó(category 5). [end of notes for òinformation security.ó]cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.676appendix niii. other equipment, materials, òsoftwareó and technologya. equipment, assemblies and components5a20b telemetering and telecontrol equipment usable as launch support equipment for unmanned air vehicles or rocket systems.5a80d communications intercepting devices; and parts and accessories therefor.(specify by name.) (also see s776.13 of this subchapter.)notes:1.these items are subject to the united nations security council arms embargoagainst rwanda described in s785.4 (a) of this subchapter.2.controls on this equipment are maintained in accordance with the omnibuscrime control and safe streets act of 1968 (pub. l. 90351).cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.677indexaaccess, 353control, 26ð27defined, 55ð56, 94n, 353facilitators, 60ð65see also back door accessinhibitors, 58ð60advanced research projects agency(arpa), 237nmemorandum of agreement withdefense information systemsagency and national securityagency (text of), 633ð636aeca, see arms export control act (aeca)algorithm, 378and key length, 353america online, 42ð43n, 148american national standards institute(ansi), 486anonymity, 43, 59, 480ansi, see american national standardsinstitute (ansi)applications programming interfaces, seecryptographic applicationsprogramming interfaces (capi)arms export control act (aeca), 114ð116,118, 255text of, 558ð573arpa, see advanced research projectsagency (arpa)assurance, 353asymmetric cryptography, 53ð54, 63, 75,313n, 353, 365ð367, 375ð377, 385ð388at&t, 60, 70n, 419clipper phones, 174ð175secure telephone unit (stu), 74ð75,235surity telephone device, 175attacks on cryptographic systemsfor asymmetric cryptography, 63bruteforce search, 62ð63, 124, 276, 287,381chosen plaintext, 381ð382ciphertext only, 287, 381exploitation of design factors, 60ð62exploitation of operational errors, 383known ciphertext, 390known plaintext, 381shortcuts, 63for symmetric cryptography, 63timing attacks, 63work factor, 64n, 181, 214, 288see also information warfare (iw);strong encryptionaudit trails, 3, 354, 370cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.678indexauditing, 354authenticationof an identity, 354, 367ð370, 374, 450, 468defined, 354of digital cash tokens, 478ð479of a file, 354infrastructure for, 338ð339of a message, 354, 367uses of, 42ð43, 47, 123ð125see also audit trailsauthenticity, 354authorization, 354, 368navailability, 354bback dooraccess, 56defined, 354hidden, 201ð201n, 203, 277open, 276ð277see also escrowed encryptionbanking and finance services, vii, 23, 35ð36n, 57, 123, 179, 312, 455ð458,470; see also credit cards; digitalcashbinary digit, 354biometric identifiers, 368ð369bit, 354bit stream, 355bollinger, lee, 344bush, president george, 100; see alsonational security directive 42ccalea, see communications assistancefor law enforcement act of 1995(calea)cantwell bill, 254ð255capi, see cryptographic applicationsprogramming interfaces (capi)capstone chip, 176, 355capstone/fortezza initiative, 10, 176ð177,179, 355caracristi, ann, 344ccl, see commerce control list (ccl)cellular phones, 11, 67, 217, 295, 327ð328central intelligence agency (cia), 91n, 95,100, 403, 422ð423, 428ð429; seealso executive order 12333 andexecutive order 12472cert, see computer emergency responseteam (cert)certificateauthorities, 75ð77, 355, 450ð454infrastructure, 232ð234certification, 355certification authority, 355checksum, 367cia, see central intelligence agency (cia)ciphertext, 172n, 355, 374circumventing laws against unescrowedencryption, 269, 330civil liberties, viii, 44n, 44ð46civiletti, benjamin r., 344ð345cj, see commodity jurisdiction (cj)cleartext, 355clinton, president william, 95, 100clinton administration, 41, 170, 235, 265ð266, 303, 376clipperchip, xii, 171ð174, 230, 355initiative, 356, 376, 445nsee also escrowed encryption standard(ees)cmvp, see cryptographic modulevalidation program (cmvp)cocom, see coordinating committee(cocom) nationscode grabbers, 42ncollateral cryptography, 356commerce control list (ccl), 8n, 115, 117,122, 125n, 135, 160n, 260; see alsoexport controlscommerce department, see department ofcommercecommodity jurisdiction (cj), 8n, 115, 165,260, 638ð640communications, xii, 20, 53ð54communications assistance for lawenforcement act of 1995(calea), 216ð221, 278, 281, 503,510ð511text of, 540ð550competitive access providers, 356compuserve, 148, 431ð432ncomputer emergency response team(cert), 241ð242computer science andtelecommunications board(cstb), xviiiðxix, 20n, 73ncryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index679computer security act of 1987, 235ð236text of, 551ð557computer system security and privacyadvisory board (csspab), 242conference on computers, freedom, andprivacy, xvii, 45n, 219nconfidentiality, 17, 53ð54, 123ð125, 371ð373of communications, 356of data, 356, 374defined, 3, 79ð81, 108relative levels of, 181, 183, 254, 314reliance upon authentication, 373see also cryptography; encryptioncongress, see u.s. congressconstitutional issues regarding laws onencryption, viii, 7, 85n, 160ð161n,271ð273, 304coordinating committee (cocom) nations,231, 251n, 310, 356, 434ð436, 442,639cordless phones, 218, 398ncountermeasure, 356credit cards, 22, 76, 481crime prevention, xv, 10, 47, 323, 472ð473,480criminalizing useof cryptography for criminal purposes,12, 94, 273ð274, 332ð333of unescrowed cryptography, 192, 265ð273crook, colin, 345cryptanalysis, 62, 379n, 380nof 40bit encryption algorithms, 8n, 63,73n, 115ð117, 120ð124, 276, 314ð317of 56bit encryption algorithms, 8, 63,71n, 121, 172, 288ð289, 312, 316ð318defined, 356see also data encryption standard(des); strong encryptioncryptographicalgorithms, 62ð64, 159defined, 356secret, 171, 201ð204applications programming interfaces(capi), 259ð262, 311, 474ð476sockets, 66, 127systems, 374ð377attacks on, 378ð383see also modularity; keycryptographic module validation program(cmvp), 233cryptographyfor authentication, 3ð4, 10, 55ð56, 176,324ð327, 469ð472for confidentiality, 3ð4, 8ð9, 54, 176, 296,470ð472for criminal purposes, 3ð4, 10ð11, 43ð43n, 84, 91, 303ð304for data integrity, 3ð4, 10, 55, 176, 324ð327, 472ð473defined, 356domestic availabilty of, 72ð74, 135, 138,299, 310foreign availabilty of, 4, 214, 308history of, xiiðxiii, 52ð54, 149ð150, 202,364ð365in information security products, 65ð66,476foreign, 132ð133market for, xii, 66ð72, 135ð136, 145ð152,310for nonrepudiation, 55as one element of information security,10, 296, 298regulations relevant to (text of), 637ð677strength of, 63, 152ð153, 250see also encryptioncryptography policy, 16adopting standards, 7, 222, 290, 316committee recommendations on, viiiðxvii, 1, 5ð13, 303ð339current u.s. policies, xi, 6, 15, 111ð112,249, 298, 301history of, 414ð420international dimensions of, 243ð244,430ð431, 438ð449process of formulating, viii, 226public debate over, xvii, 4, 7, 297ð298urgency regarding, xvðxvi, 39ð40,151ð152proper objectives for, 57, 68, 297ð303role of executive and legislativebranches, 7, 305see also executive branch; legislativebranch; standards; u.s. congresscsspab, see computer system securityand privacy advisory board(csspab)cstb, see computer science andtelecommunications board(cstb)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.680indexddam, kenneth w., committee chair, xvðxix, 343darpa, see defense advanced researchprojects agency (darpa)dataaggregation, 459ð460communications, 199, 441ð442nversus data storage, 323ð324, 528ð529compression, 270ð270n, 304integrity, 365ð367, 374data encryption standard (des), 72, 207,223, 228ð232, 288, 314ð318, 334,357, 365, 388ð389, 417ð420tripledes, 178, 203n, 214ð215date/time stamping, 57, 357, 371ndecompiling, 204, 357decryption, 185, 357; see also back dooraccess; cryptanalysisdecryption algorithm, 374defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa), 241defense department, see department ofdefensedefense information systems agency(disa), 237ð237ndefense intelligence agency (dia), seeexecutive order 12333denial of service, 357department of commerce, 73, 117, 128n,173, 176; see also executive order12472; commerce control list(ccl)department of defense, 158, 187n, 237ð238,487n; see also executive order12333; executive order 12472department of energy, see executive order12333department of justice, 274department of state, 114ð117, 121ð122, 126,142ð144, 162, 321; see alsoexecutive order 12333; executiveorder 12472department of the treasury, 173, 176, 190,468; see also executive order12333des, see data encryption standard (des)deutch, john, 97ð98dia, see defense intelligence agency (dia)differential work factor cryptography, 264,287ð288; see also attacks oncryptographic systemsdigests, 357digitalcash, 339, 477ð482information, 220, 280signatures, 57, 226ð227, 261, 326, 357,367, 370stream, 355digital signature standard (dss), 176, 222ð223, 225n, 229ð230, 259, 301, 357,418, 488digital telephony act, 357; see alsocommunications assistance forlaw enforcement act (calea)disa, see defense information systemsagency (disa)disassembly, 156n, 204, 215, 357disclosure of data, 357dna computing, 393ð394dod, see department of defensedouble encryption. see multiple encryptiondss, see digital signature standard (dss)dualuse system, 358eeaa, see export administration act (eaa)ear, see export administrationregulations (ear)economiccompetitivenessof u.s. industry and businesses, 1ð2,37ð40, 99of u.s. information technologyindustry, x, 38ð39, 73, 128ð129,155ð156espionage, 3, 46, 98ecpa, see electronic communicationsprivacy act (ecpa)ees, see escrowed encryption standard(ees)electromagnetic emissions, monitoring, 64,397ð398electroniccommerce, vii, 24ð26, 413, 478surveillancedefined, 587history of, 218, 410ð413cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index681legal requirements for, 84ð88, 396ð410and minimization requirement,218n, 219, 400ð401, 513see also foreign intelligencesurveillance act of 1978;u.s.intelligence activities; wireand electronic communicationsinterception and interception oforal communications actelectronic communications privacy act(ecpa), 396ð403, 412ð413elliptic curve cryptographic systems, 394email, 403ð403n, 469encryption, 15ð16defined, 53, 58ð59, 90n, 372technicalities in legal definitions of,269ð270, 273ð274, 303, 332see also confidentialityencryption algorithm, 374errorcorrection, 366nescrowagents, 77affiliation of, 180, 189ð193, 444certification of, 175liability of, 191, 197ð198, 330, 452ð454number of, 180, 183n, 188n, 189ð194,212responsibilities of, 180, 194ð198, 330,444ð447, 452trustworthiness of, 190binding, 210ð211, 215escrowable encryption products, 182, 262escrowed encryption, 15ð16, 61, 81, 298,359benefits of, 170contractbased, 191ð193, 263ð264defined, 167ð169economic implications, 177ð182, 271,330government control of, 158, 266ð268,328ð332law enforcement benefits, 4, 9, 11, 184ð187liabilities, 184, 329mandatory versus voluntary use, 185ð188, 199, 265, 320ð321policy issues associated with, 170proper escrowing, 177ð178, 188, 213ð214, 250nand signals intelligence, 175, 202ð203versus strong encryption, 169weaknesses of, 183see also unescrowed encryptionescrowed encryption standard (ees), xvi,9, 168ð175, 181, 223, 301, 358,419ð420, 488evaluation, 358exceptional access, 16, 80ð81, 109business or corporate, 104ð107defined, 169n, 250, 358enduser, 106ð107, 320government, 81ð104, 297time scale of operations, 94, 103voice versus data communications, 281ð284executive branch, role of, 7, 189ð190, 231,291ð292, 305executive order 12333 (u.s. intelligenceactivities), 573589executive order 12472 (assignment ofnational security andemergency preparednesstelecommunications functions),612620executive order 12958 (classified nationalsecurity information), 589612export administration act (eaa), 114ð115,118, 255, 415export administration regulations (ear),115, 415ð416part 779, technical data (text of), 656ð677export controls, 7ð9, 15, 249ð251, 298, 307ð322circumvention of, 133corporate perceptions of, 152ð153cryptography exemptions from, xi, 120ð125, 144, 188, 256description of, 114ð122dimensions of choice in, 252ð253of dualuse items, 8, 118, 162, 264, 310economic impact of, 40, 153ð154effect on national security, 157ð165effect on sales, 145ð153effectiveness of, 127ð134elimination of, 251, 254and enduse certification, 320export defined, 142foreign policy considerations, 162ð163,170cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.682indexhistory of, 414ð415impact on authentication products, 123ð125international harmonization of, 8, 243ð244, 256ð257, 443, 447ð449and liberal consideration, 117, 256ð262,317ð318licensing practices, current, 117, 122ð127, 249ð250licensing process for, 9, 114, 142ð144,647ð653, 667ð669limiting domestic availability, 7, 12,134ð138of other nations, 257, 434ð436providing technical data, 9, 159ð161,313ð314rationale for, 113ð114stimulating foreign competition, 8,155n, 155ð159, 309threshold between ccl and usml,118ð121, 138, 141, 254ð255, 310ð312, 415of transnational corporations, 126uncertainty of, 138ð144, 251, 321ð322see also arms export control act(aeca); commerce control list(ccl); export administrationregulations (ear); foreignownership, control or interest(foci); international traffic inarms regulations (itar)export defined, 641ffacsimile communications, 2, 149far, see federal acquisition regulations(far)fbi, see federal bureau of investigation(fbi)fcc, see federal communicationscommission (fcc)fear, uncertainty, doubt, 225ð227federal acquisition regulations (far), 187nfederal bureau of investigation (fbi), 82ð83, 88ð90, 138n, 184, 236ð237,334n, 399, 423; see also executiveorder 12333federal communications commission(fcc), 220ð221, 493; see alsoexecutive order 12472federal emergency management agency(fema), see executive order12472federal government, information securityfor, 289ð292, 328ð332; see alsocomputer security act of 1987federal information processing standards(fips), 485ð488defined, 358development of, 222ð224nist role in, 222, 289ð290related to cryptography, 173, 176, 223,418federal reserve board, 290ð291fema, see federal emergencymanagement agency (fema)fermat numbers, 386ð387fips, see federal information processingstandards (fips)firmware, 358first party, 358fisa, see foreign intelligence surveillanceact (fisa) of 1978foci, see foreign ownership, control orinterest (foci), u.s. companiesunderforeign intelligence surveillance act(fisa) of 1978, 87ð88, 173, 189,403ð410, 494text of, 511ð526foreign ownership, control or interest(foci), u.s. companies under,126nfortezza cards, 176ð177, 225, 259ð260, 468freeh, louis, 92nð93n, 93ð94, 268, 281freeware, 129n, 272; see also internetfuller, samuel h., 345ð346functionality, 358ggelb, leslie h., 346general services administration (gsa), seeexecutive order 12472gii, see global information infrastructure(gii)global information infrastructure (gii),439ð441n, 483globalization, 27ð29, 38, 50, 188, 308, 430gosip, see government open systemsinterconnect (osi) profile (gosip)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index683government classification, xiii, 4, 238, 307;see also executive order 12958government open systems interconnect(osi) profile (gosip), 224ð225government procurement, 225, 487ngraham, ronald, xxxii, 346ð347gsa, see general services administration(gsa)hhackers, 67nhardwareproduct implementations in, 65, 74, 205,296, 369nsecurity advantages of, 130security disadvantages of, 206ð209hashes, 367; see also oneway hashfunction; secure hash algorithm;secure hash standardhealth care industry, 256, 457, 459ð461hellman, martin, 347hewlettpackard, 261nhomologation laws, 437iibm, 228ð229, 417ð418idea block cipher, 229identification, 358identification key, 358iitf, see information infrastructure taskforce (iitf)implementation, 358import controls, 114ð115, 436ð438informationproprietarypotential value of, 153ð154security, 15, 66ð68, 294ð295government needs for, 10, 12, 46ð48,157ð159, 240, 267, 302private sector needs for, viiðviii, 12ð13, 30ð31, 40ð46, 152ð153, 302,335ð338threats to, xii, 2ð3, 32ð38, 153ð154,239, 299technologies, viii, xii, 19ð21need for research and development,12speed of change in, xv, 5, 281, 300ð302technology industryand economic security, 22ð23, 46,67ð68and national security, vii, xv, 3ð4, 9ð11, 47ð48, 94ð104, 157ð159u.s. leadership in, x, 38ð39, 73, 128ð129, 155ð156, 299, 308ð311theory, 364vulnerability, 15ð50, 293ð296warfare (iw), 35, 49, 108information infrastructure task force(iitf), 41, 242, 335, 483inman, bobby, xiii, 267integrated product, 358integrity, 359integrity check, 359, 366intellectual property, protecting, 228ð230,465, 482ð484intelligence communityand the intelligence cycle, 10, 425ð429mission of, 95, 423ð425regulation of, 87, 404ð405n, 408, 423see also central intelligence agency(cia); executive order 12333;federal bureau of investigation(fbi); foreign intelligencesurveilllance act (fisa) of 1978;national security agency (nsa);sigintinterception, 286ð289, 359, 399, 490, 492ð510internal revenue service (irs), 466ð467international aspects of cryptographypolicy, 243similar and different national interests,viiiðx, xivðxv, 104, 431ð434u.s. cooperation with other nations,102, 231ð232, 331ð332see also export controls; import controls;use controlsinternational traffic in arms regulations(itar), 114ð116, 120, 127, 133ð137, 142, 159ð161, 256, 359, 415ð416, 476excerpts from parts 120123, 125, and126 (text of), 637ð655internet, 21, 34ð35, 59, 64, 86n, 106n, 221,282, 432ngrowth of, 293loan application by, 458and networks, 52, 149protocols, 224ð225, 280ð281cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.684indexsoftware distributed on, 129ð132, 268see also netscape navigator; worldwide webinteroperability, 150, 178, 439, 443; see alsostandardsinterpretation of digital streams, 220irs, see internal revenue service (irs)itar, see international traffic in armsregulations (itar)iw, see information warfare (iw)jjudicial branch, role of, 190justice department, see department ofjusticekkatz, ambassador julius l., 347keas, see escrow agentskeydefined, 202, 359, 378distribution, 359distribution center (kdc), 377escrow. see escrowed encryptionescrow agents (keas). see escrowagentsescrow encryption, 359generation, 211ð213, 454length, 63, 214ð215, 287ð288, 319, 353, 380management, 53, 74ð75, 133, 173, 223,280, 359, 376ð377retrieval, 284ð285revocation, 105n, 213, 452key exchange algorithm, 176llatent demand, for cryptography products,149ð151law enforcement, 302central decryption facility for, 285ð286impact of cryptography on, 3ð4, 9ð10,90ð94, 184ð187, 322ð335impact of information technologies on,viii, 46ð47, 333ð335infringing on civil liberties, viii, 45n, 93requirements for escrowed encryption,180, 194ð197and seizure of records, 81ð83technical center for, 334wiretapping/electronic surveillance, seeelectromagnetic emissions;wiretappingsee also communications assistance forlaw enforcement act of 1995(calea); federal bureau ofinvestigation (fbi); executiveorder 12333law enforcement access field (leaf), 171ð173layered encryption, 277; see also multipleencryptionleaf, see law enforcement access field(leaf)legislative branch, role of, 7, 199link encryption, 11ð11n, 274ð276, 279, 327ð328lost sales, 146ð148, 214mmanufacturing industry, 461ð463, 469ð470;see also vendorsmarketdevelopment, 151ð152forces, xv, 7, 305ð307master card, see credit cardsmicrosoft windows nt, 135, 259ð260modularity, 140ð142, 223monitoring, 359mooreõs law, 63, 276, 385nmultiple encryption, 58ð59, 178, 215,383mutual law enforcement assistancetreaties, 331, 446nnacic, see national counterintelligencecenter (nacic)national communications system (ncs),see executive order 12472national computer security center(ncsc), 232ð233national counterintelligence center(nacic), 2, 242ð243national information infrastructure (nii),235, 483cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index685national institute of standards andtechnology (nist), 228, 235ð238,335ð337, 365, 418ð420, 485ð488publickey infrastructure requirements,450ð454see also federal information processingstandards (fips)national security act of 1947, see executiveorder 12333national security agency (nsa), xi, xiv,158, 227ð228, 235ð241, 289, 335,338, 416ð420, 422ð423role in export licensing, 123n, 126, 128n,141ð144, 162, 256role in skipjack/clipper, 173n, 174see also executive order 12333national security council (nsc), seenational security directive 42;executive order 12333national security directive 42 (text of),620ð628national security telecommunications andinformation systems securitycommittee (nstissc), seenational security directive 42ncs, see national communications system(ncs)ncsc, see national computer securitycenter (ncsc)netscape navigator, 73n, 76, 124, 132n,135, 208network working group, 280nnetworkbased encryption, 199, 278ð281networks, 149applications of, 282ð284backward compatibility issues, 151nvulnerabilities of, 52, 195, 274neumann, peter g., 347ð348new forum nations, 442; see also cocomnationsnii, see national information infrastructure(nii)nist, see national institute of standardsand technology (nist)node, 359nonrepudiation, 359, 365, 370ð371, 479nsa, see national security agency (nsa)nstissc, see national securitytelecommunications andinformation systems securitycommittee (nstissc)oobject code, 360object linking and embedding (ole), 360,475oecd, see organization for economiccooperation and development(oecd) nationsoffice of management and budget (omb),335, 486ð487; see also executiveorder 12958ole, see object linking and embedding(ole)omb, see office of management andbudget (omb)omnibus crime control and safe streetsact, 396ð397oneway hash function, 360, 367online services, 217ð218, 221; see alsoamerica online; compuserve;netscape navigator; prodigy;world wide weboperating system, 360oral communications, see wire andelectronic communicationsinterception and interception oforal communications actorganization for economic cooperationand development (oecd)nations, 244, 331, 442, 448osi, see government open systemsinterconnect (osi) profile(gosip)ozzie, raymond, 348pparallel processing, 63partial key escrow, 180password, 360patent and trademark office (pto), 230patents, xii, 228ð230pcmcia card (or pccard), 176, 360, 468;see also fortezza cardspen register and traffic analysis act (textof), 526ð540pen registers, 62, 84, 402defined, 360, 540perry, william, 310personal identification number (pin), 360petroleum industry, 463ð465cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.686indexpgp, see pretty good privacy (pgp)pharmaceutical industry, 200, 465ð466pin, see personal identification number(pin)plaintext, 9, 53, 270, 355, 360, 374plugin cryptography, see cryptographicsocketspretty good privacy (pgp), 76, 163ð164,182privatekey cryptography, 360, 375prodigy, 148productscertification and evaluation of, 70cryptography, 148, 201ð208defaults, 250, 258integrated or generalpurpose, 65ð66standalone or securityspecific, 65, 149,208ð211weaknesses in, 74proper escrowing, see escrowed encryptionproprietary algorithms, 70, 174, 203verifying, 207nprotocol, 73analyzers, 62negotiation, 71pseudorandom function, 367pstn, see public switchedtelecommunications network(pstn)pto, see patent and trademark office(pto)public cryptography study group, 267ð268public law 103160, ix, xivpublic switched telecommunicationsnetwork (pstn), 11counterintelligence access to, 534ð535national security/emergencypreparedness (ns/ep) network,35vulnerability of, 34ð37, 327ð328see also national security directive 42publickey certificate, 360ð361publickey cryptography, 53, 70, 290, 296,313, 353, 360, 375; see also nistqquantumcomputing, 392ð393cryptography, 394ð395rrc2/rc4 algorithms, 361reagan, president ronald, 99, 423; see alsoexecutive order 12333; executiveorder 12472realtime surveillance, 89ð90, 103reliability, 361remailer, 361reverse engineering, 205, 210, 230, 361risks addressed by cryptography, 361,469ð473rsa algorithm, 182, 227ð229, 313n, 325,361, 376rsa data security conference, 141nssafety margins in key length, 361, 384ð385satellite uplinks, 438schmults, edward c., 348schneier, bruce, 160n, 163ð165second party, 361secrecy, xiiiðxiv, 201ð208, 307, 378secretkeycryptography, 53, 171, 366, 375cryptosystem, 361, 383ð384secure hash algorithm, 361ð362, 370nsecure hash standard, 176, 223, 362secure sockets layer protocol, 124secure telephone unit (stu), 74ð75, 235security, 362security policy board (spb), 241securityspecific cryptography product,362sed, see shipperõs export declaration(sed)shannon, claude, 364shareware, 362shipperõs export declaration (sed), 119sigint (signals intelligence)and cryptography, 101ð102, 114, 317,335, 428historical examples of, 96ð99, 427utility of, 87ð88, 100ð101, 174ð175, 421ð423, 470ð471signaling system 7, 34skipjack algorithm, 171ð172, 176, 201, 212n,230, 362, 383, 391, 420slippery slope, 266smith, w.y., committee vice chair, 343ð344cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index687softwareadvantages of, 191ð192backward compatibility, 151n, 151ð152disadvantages of, 62, 64, 130integrated, 148objectoriented, 137n, 140, 165product implementations in, 20ð21, 65,204ð205source code, 362sovereign immunity, 189, 199spb, see security policy board (spb)specification, 362spillover effect, 123ð125spoofing, 362, 367standalone cryptography product, 362standards, 70ð71, 197, 222, 232ð234, 254,306, 485ð486n, 551ð556state department, see department of statesteganography, 270n, 372ð372nstone, elliot m., 348ð349strategic intelligence, 97ð101strong encryption, 101ð102, 114, 123, 170,254, 296, 382ð383stu, see secure telephone unit (stu)stuiii, 362superencryption, 269, 438symmetriccryptography, 53ð54, 172n, 362, 375ð376cryptosystem, 362system, 362ttactical intelligence, 96ð97taxation, 482tcp/ip, 225telephony, see facsimile communications;voice communicationstempest techniques, 64third party access, 362ð363; see alsoexceptional accessthreat, 363time stamping, 357title iii intercept, see wire and electroniccommunications interceptionand interception of oralcommunications acttoken, 363tpep, see trusted product evaluationprogram (tpep)traffic analysis, see pen register andtraffic analysis acttranslucent cryptography, 277ð278transparency, 185trapandtrace devices, 84, 402defined, 363, 540see also pen register and trafficanalysis acttreasury department, see department ofthe treasurytrojan horses, 56n, 64ð65n, 363trust, 363, 480ð482trusted product evaluation program(tpep), 233trustworthiness, 363, 379turner, stansfield, 98uunescrowed encryption, 7, 181ð183, 186ð187, 199, 268ð273, 303ð304united states postal service (usps), 468u.s. code, title 18, chapter 119, see wireand electronic communicationsinterception and interception oforal communications act (textof)u.s. code, title 18, chapter 121 and 206,see pen register and trafficanalysis act (text of)u.s. code, title 22, chapter 39, see armsexport control act (aeca)u.s. code, title 50, chapter 36, see foreignintelligence surveillance act of1978 (text of)u.s. congress, viii, 162, 187, 231, 305, 332ð333oversight by, 587reports to, 508, 524ð525, 539, 550, 561see also legislative branch, role ofu.s. munitions list (usml), 114ð117, 125ð127, 135ð137, 140, 162ð163, 389,644ð646separating cryptography products on,264use controls on cryptography, 436ð438usml, see u.s. munitions list (usml)usps, see united states postal service(usps)cryptography's role in securing the information societycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.688indexvvendors, role of, 140, 149ð153, 191, 206,274verisign, 76viruses, 64, 206visa, see credit cardsvoice communications, secure, 174, 278ð280vs data communications, 199, 221, 280ð281vulnerabilities, 24, 57, 293ð296, 363wware, willis h., 349weak encryption, 29, 61ð62, 101, 257ð258,276web of trust, 75ð76windows nt, see microsoft windows ntwire and electronic communicationsinterception and interception oforal communications act (textof), 489ð511wireless communications, viiðviii, 61, 275,279ð280; see also cellular phones;cordless phoneswiretapping, 62, 103, 218ð220, 439legal framework governing, 84ð88, 170and protection of civil liberties, 44n,285n, 285ð286utility of, 82ð84see also electronic surveillancework factor, 64n, 363world wide web, 65nzzimmerman, philip, 163ð164