detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5260bridge builders: african experiences with information andcommunication technology304 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309054836 | doi 10.17226/5260panel on planning for scientific and technological information (sti) systems insubsaharan africa, national research councilbridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bridge buildersafrican experiences with information andcommunication technologyoffice of international affairsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1996ibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press  2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine for their specialcompetence and with regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.this report has been prepared by the editorial subcommittee of the advisory panel on planningfor scientific and technological information (sti) systems in subsaharan africa. support for theproject and for this report was provided by the carnegie corporation of new york.a limited number of copies of this report are available from:office of international affairsnational research council2101 constitution avenue, n.w.washington, d.c. 20418additional copies are available for sale from: national academy press 2101 constitutionavenue. n.w. box 285 washington, d.c. 20418 tel: 18006246242 or (202)3343313 (in thewashington metropolitan area).library of congress catalog card number 9668711international standard book number 0309054834copyright 1996 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panel on planning for scientific and technological information(sti) systems in subsaharan africacochairsdr. john black, chief librarian (retired), university of guelph, guelph,ontario, canadajane bortnick griffith, chief, science policy research division,congressional research service, library of congress, washington, d.c.membersdr. gbade a. alabi, department of library, archival, and informationstudies, faculty of education, university of ibadan, ibadan, nigeriasteve cisler, senior scientist, apple computer inc., cupertino, californiadr. nancy hafkin, head, pan african development information systems(padis), united nations/economic commission for africa, addis ababa,ethiopiadr. heather hudson, director, telecommunications program, universityof san francisco, mclaren college of business, san francisco, californiadr. bernard lown (iom), lown cardiovascular center, brookline,massachusettstheophilus e. mlaki, director of information and documentation, tanzania commission for science and technology, dar es salaam, tanzaniadr. alex tindimubona, african science and technology exchange,kampala, ugandastaffwendy d. white, senior program officer, office of international affairspamela gamble, assistant, office of international affairsiiibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating societyof distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated tothe furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academyhas a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific andtechnical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy ofsciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineeringprograms aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, andrecognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. harold liebowitz is presidentof the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in theexamination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute actsunder the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its owninitiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i.shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering inproviding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the instituteof medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. harold liebowitz are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.the office of international affairs (oia) is concerned with the development ofinternational and national policies to promote effective application of science andtechnology to economic and social problems facing both industrialized anddeveloping countries. oia participates in international cooperative activities, engagesin joint studies and projects with counterpart organizations, manages scientificexchange programs, and represents the academy complex at many national andinternational meetings directed toward facilitating international cooperation in scienceand engineering. dr. f. sherwood rowland, dr. harold forsen, and dr. david rallare the foreign secretaries of the national academy of sciences, the nationalacademy of engineering, and the institute of medicine, respectively.ivbridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacebridgebuilders: african experiences with information and communicationtechnology brings good news from that continent. this volume tells sixteenremarkable storiesšfirstperson accounts of how information andcommunication technologies (ict) have been successfully introduced intoinstitutions for the benefit of scientists and engineers in subsaharan africa. theprojects described by the authors are case studies that focus on the lessons learnedin designing and implementing projects dealing with scientific and technologicalinformation (sti) and that examine the impacts these projects have had. for themost part, these are not big projects in terms of funding. they do, however,demonstrate just how much can be accomplished through leadership, dedication,and determination. the authors are very honest in discussing the problems theyfaced and the lessons they learned.by providing this systematic examination of the lessons learned by theseproject managers, the national research council's advisory panel on planningfor sti systems in subsaharan africa hopes to encourage the donor communityand many others in the sti community to engage in strategic planning for stiand to strengthen the design and management of scientific and technical systems.the advisory panel expects this volume to contribute to the development ofnational sti projects that are based on a firm and educated comprehension ofwhat is already in place and to catalyze necessary linkages between stiinstitutions and actors so that national sti networks can be developed to supportafrican scientists and engineers. the stories told by these authors should alsoencourage managers of other fledgling sti initiatives whose objectives aresimilar or complementary.prefacevbridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this volume has been a long time in the making. since 1989, the advisorypanel has observed the sti scene in africa with growing interest. through anumber of workshops and seminars in africa and through the travel of staff andpanel members, we have had the opportunity to observe, firsthand, the growingimpact of sti in africa. we have also been privileged to meet the authors fromthe volume and many others who are struggling to bring ict to their institutionsand countries.the authors included in this volume are not the only successful ict projectmanagers in africa and the panel regrets that it had neither the time nor theresources to bring more success stories to light. we hope that the ncr can saluteadditional projects in future volumes of case studies. in the meantime, we trustthat those bridge builders whose work is not described in this volume will beencouraged to share their activities with us and with others in their countries whocan benefit from their experiences.this volume would not have been possible without the tireless efforts of theauthors themselves. they patiently wrote, rewrote, answered questions, andbrought their contributions to the standards demanded of them. the editorialreview committee, which i also chaired and which was composed of panelmembers nancy hafkin, theo mlaki, g.b. alabi, and alex tindimubona, gavemuch of their time to read drafts of the studies and make queries of the authors.their knowledge of the field and their expertise on the situation in africa havebeen invaluable.as chair of the advisory panel, i wish to acknowledge the carnegiecorporation of new york, whose generous support of this project made thisvolume possible. realizing that information and communication technologiescould only be tools of empowerment for those who had access to them, carnegiehelped to "jumpstart" the information revolution in africa by supporting many ofthe projects described in bridge builders. by supporting small pilot anddemonstration projects, carnegie has helped innovative project managersovercome the social, technical, political, and economic barriers to introducingnew ideas and technologies.i also wish to acknowledge the leadership role of the office of internationalaffairs (oia) of the national research council. since 1989, they have beenhelping donors, policymakers, and project managers realize the benefits andproblems associated with the introduction of information and communicationtechnologies. through this and proceeding projects, they have encouraged theadvisory panel and others to study many aspects of sti activities and toconcentrate on the role information and communication services can play indecreasing scientific isolation and in improving the effectiveness of scientificresearch.most of all the oia, through this advisory panel, and carnegie have proventhat small projects can have a big impact. projects that encourage the process oflearning, familiarize users with computers and other information technologies,and demonstrate the use of these technologies in an everyday setting often have agreater impact than large projects that tax scarce resources.prefacevibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finally, on behalf of the advisory panel, i want to give particular thanks toseveral oia staff members. first, our appreciation goes to pamela gamble, whomade sure everyone arrived at the writing workshops when they were supposed tobe there and who handled all other logistical concerns with grace, good humor,and her usual efficiency. we also want to thank wendy white, the nrc programofficer who assisted the advisory panel throughout its activities. her knowledgeof the african sti environment and the people involved, combined with hersensitivity to the african context, has been invaluable to the work of the paneland, in particular, to the completion of this volume. her willingness to share herexpertise and to provide moral support to all involved goes far beyond the line ofduty.together, the advisory panel members, the case study authors, and the oiastaff have a broad understanding of sti, an appreciation for the uniqueopportunities and challenges in africa, a thorough knowledge of ongoing stiactivities, and a demonstrated commitment to create an enabling environmentwithin which african sti networks can flourish. their wisdom, vision, anddedication are reflected in this report.john b. black, chairmanadvisory panelprefaceviibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceviiibridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents introduction 1 case studies on the introduction of cdrom touniversity libraries 11 the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaamby john m. newa 13 cdrom for health information in zimbabweby helga patrikios 27 background summary: african index medicus project 45 communications for better health project in zambiaby regina shakakata 47 case studies on desktop publishing 63 desktop publishing at the university of zimbabweby xavier f. carelse 65 desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnologyby albina kasango 85 environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipescience pressby agnes katama 95 innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences 1989œ1992by alex r. tindimubona 109contentsixbridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. case studies on electronic networking 121 electronic networking for the research community in ethiopiaby lishan adam 123 networking in west africaby moussa fall 141 background summary: satellife and healthnet 153 mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in ugandaby charles musisi 157 the unima fidonet network: computer networking for communications in malawiby paulos nyirenda 177 background summary: a global computer network for change 189 bringing the internet to zambiaby neil robinson 191 case studies on the collection, management,and dissemination of local informationresources 215 napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africaby ermias dagne 217 a socioeconomic development information system for botswanaby stella monageng 233 kemri's management information systemby james n. muttunga 247 the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork projectby john a. villars 259 conclusion 273 appendixes a list of authors 281b list of acronyms and abbreviations 283c glossary 285contentsxbridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introductionbackgroundsince 1989, with support from the carnegie corporation of new york, thenational research council (nrc) through its office of international affairs(oia) has reviewed and identified ways to strengthen the state of planning,design, and management of scientific and technical information (sti) services inselected african countries. the program has studied many aspects of stiactivities, including database access and management, library development,scientific publishing and communication, and the role information technologiesplay in supporting these. the oia program has concentrated on the roleinformation and communication services play in decreasing scientific isolationand in improving the effectiveness of scientific research.in 1989, an oiasponsored meeting in nairobi identified the informationand communication technologies that held the most potential for the africanscientific and research community.1 looking at information and communicationboth as inputs to and results of the scientific process, the workshop participantsidentified cdrom, desktop publishing, and electronic networking as keyinformation technologies for african scientists. in addition, they identified thecollection, management and dissemination of local information resources as anarea of both great need and potential in africa.since that workshop, oia's advisory panel on planning for sti systems insubsaharan africa has provided advice to the managers of the diverse stiprojects that the corporation and others are supporting in africa. the panel foundthatintroduction1bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some of these projects are models for the further development of sti services intheir communities and that the project managers are in a unique position tocontribute to their own country's national sti planning efforts.they could play this important role, however, only if they first analyzedtheir own projects and looked closely at the experience and knowledge they hadgained. the panel recommended to carnegie that it draw on its knowledge of stiprojects in africa to produce a volume of case studies that would:ł focus on the lessons learned in designing and implementing sti projects; the impacts these projects have had; in our information base; share innovative and costeffective ways to market new products andservices and ways to measure the impact of these on the users; and share information on proposal formulation, evaluation methods, andinformation marketing.the editorial and selection processesto collect the case studies, the advisory panel appointed an editorialsubcommittee to design and manage the process in an efficient manner and toformally select the authors to be invited. this subcommittee met in addis ababa,ethiopia in april 1995. the subcommittee decided that the projects selected forinclusion in the case study volume should demonstrate the use of the keyinformation technologies and services that had been identified as most critical inthe 1989 nairobi conference.the subcommittee then debated the criteria to be used in the final selectionof case study authors. they decided that each project selected for inclusion in thecase study volume must: be catalyticšit should promote sti beyond the original parameters of theproject and have an effect beyond what might have been expected; demonstrate the use of local resources and not be totally dependent onexternal funding; be relatively small in terms of the amount of external funding available toit; demonstrable results; that is, the project must be beyond the planningstages and be offering services to users; and highlight the personal commitment and leadership of an sti pioneer.after identifying many projects that fit these criteria, the subcommitteelooked for gender and geographical balance and selected projects to represent asmany countries in subsaharan africa as possible. following much debate, thesubcommittee reached a consensus and nominated 18 projects to be included inthe case study volume. (one nomination was later withdrawn after thesubcommittee determined that it did not meet the criteria; and one nominee didnot accept the invitation.)introduction2bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the panel chairman wrote to the nominees and invited them to draftpersonal and informal accounts of their specific projects. the authors received anoutline that detailed the common elements that they were to include in theiraccounts. those authors who committed to writing a case study then participatedin one of three writing workshops that took place in july and august 1995 inharare, nairobi, and accra. authors came to these workshops with all thebackground materials they needed to write their chapters. in a collegialatmosphere, far from the pressures of their offices, they worked hard to producefirst drafts of their studies. these drafts were reviewed by the subcommittee andthe authors have had the opportunity to submit revised versions of their casestudies.the title of this volume, bridge builders: african experiences withinformation and communication technology, is meant to describe the active rolethese authors have played in introducing new information technologies into theirinstitutions. their personal accounts will illustrate the steps they are taking tobridge the gap between the ''information haves" and the "information havenots"and to build bridges between their countries and the worldwide movementsrelated to the global information infrastructure (gii). stepbystep they arecontributing in a major way to the development of africa's information culture.the information and communicationtechnology (ict) scene in africathe pace and complexity of modern research have greatly increased theinformation and communication needs of researchers, scientists, engineers, andtheir institutions. research and development relies heavily on the ability to gatherreliable data; have access to widely dispersed data and information; collaborateon projects; hold discussions and conferences; and disseminate the results.information and communication technologies can help the scientist at each stepof his or her research endeavor.taken together, this collection of case studies reflects a changing ict scenein africa. in 1989, the nairobi workshop participants were concerned aboutwhich information technologies would be most suited to their situations. by1995, project managers had proven just how successful the introduction of ictcould be in order to support science and research.the problems are a long way from being solved. in some areas, the paucityof software written in local languages hinders adoption of informationtechnologies. in other areas, basic informationprocessing tools are still in shortsupply. computer equipment is expensive and hard to maintain. consumables,such as paper, ink, toner, and other necessities of the computer age, almostalways have to be imported and are thus terribly expensive. regular contactamong colleagues or experts in the field is still difficult. many times, it is just asdifficult to communicate with scientists within a country as it is to communicatewith scientists abroad. african scientists and engineers still face isolation becauseof poor or expensive communication channels andintroduction3bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.because of a chronic shortage of funds, particularly hard currency, for purchasingbooks, periodicals, and subscriptions to international sources of information.in 1989, the advisory panel sensed that policymakers and donors were notwell focused on these problems. now, six years later, project managers,government ministers, donors, and scientists seem more prepared to recognizethat developments in the fields of information and communications services andtechnologies offer vast opportunities to make real progress. the pace at which theprice of communications and information systems has fallen has undermined thepreviously rigid link between a nation's wealth and its information richness.through the efforts of individuals such as the ones featured in this volume, moreand more people recognize that informatics (the merger of communication andinformation technologies) plays a fundamental role in the development of ascience culture and the building of a scientific infrastructure in developingcountries.there have been several highlyvisible initiatives since the 1989 meeting innairobi. in march 1994, vice president gore of the united states advanced theconcept of a global information infrastructure (gii) in a speech to theinternational telecommunications union's world telecommunicationdevelopment conference in buenos aires, argentina. he proposed that the giibe composed of local, national, and regional networks. as a "network ofnetworks," the gii should facilitate the global sharing of information,interconnection and communicationšcreating a global information marketplace.the prominent support of the gii, or the information superhighway, hasserved to focus unprecedented attention (and much hype) on the importance ofinformation and communication technologies. in the last few years, africa hastaken several important steps to be a part of the gii.first, in april 1995, the economic commission of africa (eca) hosted theafrican regional symposium on telematics for development. shortly after that,the conference of african ministers responsible for economic and socialdevelopment and planning passed a resolution entitled building africa'sinformation highway, which called for the establishment of a highlevel workinggroup on information technologies and communications in africa made up ofafrican technical experts.under the leadership of the pan african development information system(padis), this group has met twice. it is studying the economic and social and thescientific and technological implications of the information highway for africa.it will advise the executive secretary of the eca and african governments onpolicies and strategies that will assist in confronting and taking full advantage ofthis global phenomenon. in may 1996, there will be meeting of the ecaconference of ministers in addis ababa at which the highlevel working groupwill issue a paper called "an african information and communication initiativeto accelerate socioeconomic development."introduction4bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition, the south african government is organizing a ministerialconference on the information society and developing countries, also in may1996. this meeting, which is inspired by the 1995 g7 meeting on the sametopic, might further advance the international consensus on the fundamentalprinciples underlying the development of the global information infrastructure.finally, of special interest to africa, is the authorization of the lelandinitiative, or the africa global information infrastructure gateway project. thisis a $ 15 million crosscutting project managed by the u.s. agency forinternational development (usaid). its primary purpose is to disseminate thebenefits of the internet and other gii technologies to people in 20 countries insubsaharan africa in which usaid works. those countries closest to attainingconnectivity will receive benefits from the initial phases of the project.so, while the promises of the information age may be something less thanthe media attention would have us believe, there is no question that people arepaying increased attention to the potential of information and communicationtechnologies in support of science and development.lessons learned in the case studiesthe sixteen case study authors whose stories appear in this volume representimportant stepping stones in the development of africa's information highway. inmany ways, they are pioneersšintroducing new technologies before they haveachieved widespread acceptance. they have paved the way for others becausethey have proven that, with enough perseverance and personal energy, thetechnologies can work and can improve information services to the scientificcommunity. nothing is more basic to scientific institutions than the tools neededto conduct research, engage in discussions with other scientists, and publish theresults of research in a form accessible to all. the case studies includedescriptions of how ict can help support and build capacity for all of thesefunctions.cdromthe first three studies, written by john newa, regina shakakata, and helgapatrikios, describe the introduction of cdrom into university libraries. at the1989 nairobi conference, the participants expressed great excitement over thepotential of this technology. since then, cdrom has achieved widespreadrecognition as a highly costeffective and locally viable medium for accessinginternational databases. it also has potential for delivering full text documents toareas where the source documents are hard to obtain. its qualities of speed,power, and, above all, userfriendliness in information retrieval, and its value as atraining medium for online searching are detailed in these three studies.introduction5bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.here are some of the lessons learned by these case study authors: highlevel support of the projects has been critical to their success. suchsupport often allows for the provision of local funding and helps topublicize the service. the selection of the right vendors, not only for the equipment but for thedatabases, is extremely important. the products vary in content, userfriendliness, and search capability and some are more suited to theequipment found in africa than others. planners must face and meet the costs associated with maintaining theequipment and subscribing to the databases. the onetime provision of setup costs is not sufficient. cdrom projects can have side benefits. two of the case studies discussthe authors' roles in supplying records for the african index medicusproject (described on pages 45œ46). document delivery is still a problem. many cdrom databases helpresearchers identify articles that they cannot obtain locally. detailedabstracts are very helpful, as are full text cdroms containing, perhaps,documents in the public domain.desktop publishingthe next four studies are written by xavier carelse, albina kasango, agneskatama, and alex tindimubona. desktop publishing (or dtp) is the product oftechnological advances in personal computing, print graphics, and computergenerated typography. dtp can be used to design and produce anything that canbe printed: newspapers, books, posters, catalogs, journals, articles, or annualreports.each of these case studies emphasizes a slightly different aspect ofpublishing. xavier carelse discusses the equipment needed and lays out a logicalprogression for upgrades; albina kasango talks about training and personalcommitment; agnes katama discusses the steps taken to create a sustainable dtpunit and gives some creative examples of internship, or attachment, programs;and alex tindimubona discusses peer review systems and other aspects of ahighquality, scientific press.some of the lessons learned by the desktop publishing authors include: training of the dtp operator took unexpected time and resources. it is important to select equipment that is compatible with what theinstitution is using. buying the most popular or the easiesttouseequipment is not always the best course. dtp takes more than the basic computer: peripherals such as scanners,printers, and photocopiers are also essential.introduction6bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. dtp should not be confused with simple typesetting or design on acomputer. a dtp operation should be organized as much like aprofessional press as possible. project managers need to pay attention todeadlines, peer review, organization, and cost recovery.electronic networkingthe giišand its system of interconnected networkšhas dramaticimplications for broadening the knowledge base in most scientific fields. it isbecoming more important than ever for african scientists to be electronically connected to colleagues, information, and literature in order to keep up withadvances in their field, exchange ideas and information, and communicate theresults of their research. easier communication and more readily availablechannels for information exchange create new opportunities for internationalcooperation. scientists can: collaborate more easily; develop problemsolvingmodels; tap the information resources of other scientists and institutions; anddiscuss important issues without the need for expensive or timeconsumingtravel. systems operators and scientists can also benefit from remote systems inorder to share software and gain access to computing resources. indeed, access tonetworks and digital libraries may well be as important to economic and socialwellbeing in the information age as access to trade routes and natural resourceswas in the agricultural and industrial ages.2building and sustaining electronic networks in africa has been challengingbut, as the next five case study authors prove, it is possible. lishan adam,moussa fall, charles musisi, paulos nyirenda, and neil robinson describe theirefforts to bring electronic networks and, eventually, the internet to theirinstitutions or countries.the lessons they have learned include: training is the main aspect of infrastructure development and should not beunderplayed. building local networks first helps develop a user base that will be willingto sustain international connections and more sophisticated applications. good network management, which includes marketing, accounting, andstatistical analysis, is important, no matter how small the network. network startup takes considerable time and energy. often users areunsure of the technology and require extra support in order to get started. certain hardware is more suitable to poor telecommunication lines andharsh environmental conditions than others. it pays to study what hasworked well for others. software written in local languages helps users adapt faster to computerbased communications.introduction7bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the transition from subsidized to feebased email services can be difficultand controversial; while subsidies might be critical in introducingnetworking technologies, they can contribute to a climate in which usersdemand free information services.collection, management, and dissemination oflocal information resourcesthe final four case study authors focus less on a specific technology andmore on developing local information resources and services for a specific groupof people. ermias dagne describes how a group of scientists interested in naturalproducts research has formed its own network in order to convene professionalmeetings, sponsor special training opportunities, and publish journals andconference proceedings. stella monageng discusses her activities in creating andmanaging a specialized database for botswana's socioeconomic developmentinformation. james muttunga writes about his efforts to introduce computertechnology and information management systems at the kenyan medicalresearch institute. john villars describes a national information network that hisinstitution has developed for ghana.the lessons learned by these four authors are broadranging but include: too little attention is paid to collecting locallyproduced information. whatis available is often not distributed to those who could use it most. funding for these types of projects is extremely difficult to come by andvirtually impossible if support for the project does not come from thehighest levels of the institution. equipment purchase, maintenance, and repair can be difficult. it is hard toget reliable and unbiased information about technology resources. training must be an essential component of the project. if the project is to be implemented in phases, then it is best to installequipment first in those units that have an existing and specific need forautomation; otherwise, the equipment may go unused and this will causefrustration all around. network programs thrive on a giveandtake basis. all members must bewilling to shoulder some of the burden.conclusioninformation and communication technologies over the past few years havechanged the way in which we work and communicate with each other and thesecase studies demonstrate in a very personal way just how much has changed inthe way science is learned, communicated, and disseminated. these changes areso vast that the authors demonstrate that they, and the scientists and researcherstheyintroduction8bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.serve, need to learn an entirely new set of skills related to the current ways ofconducting, writing about, and disseminating scientific research to policy makersand the public.these case study authors have made very specific and measurablecontributions to their institutions. they have also made contributions that are lessobvious. they are, for example, contributing to information literacy, or the abilityto access, evaluate, and use information from a variety of sources. they areteaching the scientists and researchers they serve to use computers and otherinformation technologies competently, to work with others productively, and toaccess and use information resources. the authors also address how important itis for them to promote policy changes within their institutions and countries thatfavor the gathering and sharing of information.these case studies provide valuable insights into project management anddesign. while they might describe very specific situations, the experience of theseauthors should prove helpful to anyone implementing projects in these areas: national sti network building; electronic network development; library collection or services development; document delivery schemes; cooperative database development; standardization efforts; marketing of information services; implementing costrecovery schemes; operating sti projects on a sustainable basis; training programs for information technologies and services; introduction or application of information technologies; collection and description of locallyproduced information; or scientific communication or publishing.by examining the lessons learned by these authors and the impacts theirprojects have had, policy makers will see how important it is to become engagedin the effort to give equitable information access to all africans. in addition,governments, foundations, development assistance agencies, and other membersof the donor community can look at these lessons to develop a new generation ofprojects that are based on a firm and educated comprehension of what is alreadyin place. finally, project managers in africa can use these case studies to learnhow to implement necessary linkages among their institutions so that nationalsti networks can be developed. many others who have been reluctant to beginprojects in this field should be inspired to follow these leaders and to designactivities that will help multiply the positive impact of information andcommunication technologies for everyone.introduction9bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. national research council, board on science and technology for international development(1989) science and technology information systems and services in africa: report of aworkshop held in nairobi, april 19œ22, 1989. national academy press, washington, d.c.2. peters, paul evan (1995) networked intellectual property: brainache of the decade. educomreview 30 (3).introduction10bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.case studies on the introduction of cdrom to university librariescdrom (compact disc, readonly memory) is a high density storagemedium on which electronic data are etched by laser onto a compact disc master.a single cdrom can hold still images, motion video, audio, and digital data.with its vast storage capacity (a single cdrom can store as much data as 1,500floppy disks or 200,000 printed pages of text), ease of mailing, and tolerance ofharsh environmental conditions, cdrom offers a practical solution to theinformation isolation experienced by researchers, information professionals, andscientists in many developing countries.these case study authors live in areas where high costs and technicaldifficulties deter online access and searching. they demonstrate that cdromcan bring the following gains: userfriendly, interactive online searching of databases by library staff andendusers; current citations, with abstracts that often provide sufficient information tonegate the need for source documents; selected citations and abstracts that can be used for national digests ofrelevant material; an enhanced image of library staff due to their dramatically improved abilityto deliver current information and to demonstrate computer skills; and demystification of microcomputer technology for staff and endusers.11bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cdrom has proven appropriate to these authors because it reduces theneed for online links and it operates under difficult conditions, such as heat,humidity, dust, and unstable power supply. the authors did find, however, thatwhile there is a relatively low capital cost for the equipment, the cost ofsustaining the subscriptions to the databases is still a problem.these case study authors demonstrate how they have used cdrom as apowerful tool to develop local computer literacy by providing the opportunity forhandson use of a sophisticated system. they also describe how cdrom hasbeen used to develop both local and panafrican databases and digests ofrelevant information.12bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the cdrom service for the university ofdar es salaamby john m. newadr. john newa is director of library services at theuniversity of dar es salaam. he has worked on the promotionand development of information centers in tanzania. since1990, he has been concerned with the introduction andapplication of information technologies in libraries.   background and context of the projectthe university of dar es salaam was the first university for tanzania. theunited republic of tanzania was the outcome of the political union in 1964between the former british protectorates of tanganyika (independent in 1961)and zanzibar (independent in 1964 following a bloody revolt against the arabsultan). it is located on the indian ocean between kenya and uganda in thenorth, burundi, rwanda and zaire in the west, zambia and mozambique in thesouth. the country has a population of about 27 million and is growing at the rateof 3.1 percent (1991).1 people use kiswahili as the national language. english is asecond language and the language used in institutions of higher learning.tanzania is ranked second from the bottom worldwide in terms of its grossdomestic product and its economy is mainly agriculturalbased. it was reportedlygrowing at the rate of 3.6 percent in 1992. the industrial sector is increasing andaccounts for 40 percent of the national economy. through the internationalmonetary fund's policies of structural adjustment, the economy is said to beimproving, although the man on the street says life is getting more difficult.the country recorded a literacy rate of over 80 percent in the late 1980s. thepolicy of universal primary educationšintroduced in the early 1970s and callingfor all girls and boys to have a basic seven years of primary educationšis inplace.the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam13bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.yet the total number of children enrolled in secondary schools is less than 10percent of primary school graduates, and the number of those who struggle andmake it to the universities hardly reaches 0.05 percent. in recent years deliberateefforts have been made to increase the amount of science and technology in thecurriculum at all levels of education.scientific and technological training is given more emphasis in the teachersand technical colleges, as well as in the several vocational institutes spread allover the country. the government, through the ministry of science, technologyand higher education, is making deliberate efforts to prepare the country for the21st century when scientific and technological information developments will becritical for national socioeconomic development.at the national level, the commission for science and technology(costech) is responsible for the adoption, development, and dissemination ofscientific and technological information. the target of the ministry of science,technology and higher education is to raise the national expenditure on researchand development (r&d) from the present 0.2 percent to 1 percent by the year2000. besides creating the scientific and technological infrastructure in r&dinstitutions, costech is in the process of creating three databases: a directoryof scientists and technologists; a directory of scientific and technologicalinstitutions; and an inventory of scientific and technological equipment.the need for adequate scientific and technological information (sti) is feltin the research institutes of all sectors, including agriculture, forestry, health,industry, wildlife, and fisheries. however, i feel that the greatest need for theprovision of sti is in the institutions of higher learning, especially theuniversities that are expected to support teaching, research, and consultancyactivities.when the cdrom project was first being prepared in 1991, the stiinfrastructure at the university of dar es salaam (udsm) and throughout thecountry was still underdeveloped. there were only a few international vendoragencies for sti hardware and software in the country: among them, ibm,international computers limited (icl) and wang. there were two electronicmail nodes: one at the medical library in connection with the healthnet projectand another at costech. at the udsm, besides the university computercentre, there were personal computers in only some departments. the library hadtwo computers. there was also a ground station for communication using a lowearth orbiting (leo) satellite connection between the department of electricalengineering and essex university, in england. as far as cdrom services areconcerned there was one cdrom workstation each at the united statesinformation center library (for the books in print database), at the britishcouncil library (for the british books in print database), at the demographicunit of the university of dar es salaam (for the popline database), and in thedepartment of crop science at the sokoine university of agriculture (for a fewdatabases from the commonwealth agricultural bureaux).the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam14bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as the cdrom service project was getting under way in 1993, anelectronic mail node was installed at the university computer centre, withconnections to various departments of the university. for a variety of reasons,including the lack of email technicians and the need for a secure location to placethe equipment, the library did not get its email connection until may 1995. untilthen the university library used the medical library and computer centre emailnodes for sending and receiving messages. the university computer centreexpected to install an internet connection via leased line to south africa innovember 1995; however that proved too expensive and the computer centre iscurrently waiting for the arrival a satellite dish that they will use to connect to theinternet.at this point the university of dar es salaam is in the process of adopting atechnology information policy that will encompass the various universityoperations, including administration, student administration, finance, and theautomation of the library.project descriptionthe university of dar es salaam academic community was facing theproblem of availability of and access to current information for its teaching,learning, and research activities. our scholars and researchers were isolated fromtheir colleagues in the region and overseas. limited resources made it difficult toacquire and provide current information resources, including the maintenance ofadequate periodical subscriptions. the lack of information technology resourcesand the poor telecommunication infrastructure ruled out online connections withinformation databases in the region and abroad.for all of these reasons, we decided to introduce cdrom service to theuniversity. we had heard about the successful introduction of cdrom at themedical library in zimbabwe and wanted to provide our own library users withthe same benefits: especially convenient and relatively inexpensive access tocurrent scientific, technological, and socioeconomic information.the financial support provided by the carnegie corporation of new yorkallowed for the purchase of two cdrom workstations, their accessories, a laserprinter, and initial subscriptions to two cdrom databases. the institute ofscientific information's (isi) science citation index and the social sciencecitation index were selected for their breadth in providing for the teaching,learning, and research needs of a large section of the university academiccommunity. we hoped that this broad appeal would give the new service goodpublicity.the cdrom service started operation with two donated engineeringdatabases provided by american association for the advancement of science(aaas)šengineering index page one and compendex plusšand the distanceeducation database from the international centre for distance learning (icdl),donated by the commonwealth association for distance education. the libraryalso decidedthe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam15bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to acquire two additional databases, eric and tropag, which we believed tobe of more general interest to the larger section of the academic and researchcommunity at the university and in other r&d institutions in the country.within its interlibrary loan program, the library had provision for documentdelivery through coupons purchased from the british library lending division inboston spa. this provision enabled the library to provide a modest documentdelivery service emanating from the cdrom database searches. in order tocope with the increasing demand from the cdrom service, the documentdelivery financial allocation had to be more than doubled.the library was also maintaining a total of about 800 current journalsubscriptions, 40 percent of which came through the assistance of the swedishagency for research and economic cooperation (sarec), 20 percent throughaaas's support within the subsaharan africa program, and 40 percent from thelibrary's own resources. the photocopying service of the library was alsoimproved by the purchase of additional heavyduty machines. the photocopyingmachines had been purchased with funds from sarec within its librarysupport to tanzania libraries programme.as originally intended, the cdrom service has provided the academic andresearch community at the university, in particular, and in tanzania, in general,access to current information and has relieved the isolation of scholars andscientists in the region and abroad. in brief, the service provides scholars andresearchers with the capacity of 15 different and updated cdrom databases intheir subjects of interest and provides document delivery to most items requested.the databases include subjects in science and applied technology, socialscience and the humanities, and law. document requests from databasesearches were met by services from the british lending library and recently fromthe massachusetts institute of technology through the aaas. our assessment isthat the document delivery service, in terms of documents requested and time ittakes to get the documents, has not been found satisfactory by our cdromservice users.when we acquired the cdrom service, the only other operational service iknew about was at the medical library, which was part of the healthnet project.my visit to the department of crop science at the sokoine university ofagriculture in the company of a team of experts from bostid indicated that thefacility was not being used. i am also informed that about 1993 a cdromfacility was introduced at the uyole ministry of agriculture, research andtraining institute. it is not known which databases were donated to the institutebut i guess these might be products of the commonwealth agricultural bureaux.again the state of its functionality and extent of use is not known.costech acquired one cdrom workstation about 1993, which becameoperational in the same year, using patent databases from the u.s. patent andtrademark office and the european patent application bibliography. when ivisited the facility recently, the cdrom drive was out of order. the ministry oftrade and industry registry office is also reported to have one cdromworkstation.the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam16bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 the art of proposal writingthe personal contacts who gave us information on the technology šandwhere and how to get itš made a large difference in the quality of the proposal.the lobrary had earlier contacted dr. patricia rosenfield at the carnegiecorporation of new york. she suggested that we meet with wendy white of theu.s. national research council, who was scheduled to visit tanzania in 1991as a guest of costech. the project proposal for the cdrom service wasrevised with her help and expertise before we submitted it to carnegie. whenyou are new to proposal writing like we were, it is very helpful to have someonecome along and help you compose answers to the reviewers' criticisms! foeexample, we thought that we had to address the reviewers' comments bychanging our proposal to agree with them. we didn't know that we couldchallenge  the reviewer by giving our justification for why we proposed to dothings a certain way or to use a certain product vendor.the office has also received a wide range of patent cdrom databases.however the facility is not yet operational awaiting the training of staff. so as faras the general academic and research community is concerned, the cdrom atthe university library was the first facility with a reasonable degree of usage.since our cdrom facility has been operational, there has been keeninterest to spread the technology to other institutions in the country. as seenabove the cdrom service has since been introduced in other informationinstitutions in the country. the udsm library service has built upon the library'sand the university's interest to acquire more personal computers. since then thelibrary has acquired six computers, which are used in a variety of operations,including the creation of three local databases, in education, environment, andbiodiversity. under the udsm library's coordinating role for the sarec librarysupport programme to tanzania, we have also acquired four personal computersfor other universities and research institutes. as will be seen below, the tempogenerated is now helping us make a credible case for the library's partial orcomplete automation.project experience and implementationcorrect decisions concerning how to go about writing an acceptable andexternallyfunded project proposal, the handling of the grant, and the acquisitionof hardware, software, and databases have been critical to the effective andefficient operation of the cdrom service. the story of how we learned aboutthe technology, what it could do for us, and how and from whom to acquire it hasbeen given above and in box 1. because we had little expertise and experience atthe udsm library on appropriate equipment and databases, contacts with otherafrican librariansthe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam17bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the region and individuals abroad at meetings organized by the aaas and theu.s. national research council were very helpful. still, our lack of experienceresulted in heavy reliance on vendor recommendations for hardware and softwareand little control over the versions and price paid.we decided to use the icl local agent as a vendor for the hardware andsoftware, so as to ensure the availability of spare parts, service, and consumables.lengthy and cumbersome customs procedures were avoided by asking thecarnegie corporation to make direct purchases from the vendor's parent companyin london. a twoyear service contract with the local vendor at the time ofpurchase solved the problem of installation and maintenance. the local backupservice has proved to be critical to the smooth operation of the service. yet i haveheard criticism from the director, aaas library program for subsaharanafrica, that the price paid for the udsm's cdrom hardware was the highest inafrica. i swear that it was not caused by the library director's demand for kickbacks! it could be a factor of international and local vendors' price markups, or aresult of the country's customs duty structure for computer products imported intothe country. the first two cdrom workstations were actually bought directlyby the donor from icl london and sent to the udsm library.we faced a number of problems before the service got under way. first, thecost of the entire package from the local vendor was comparatively high. then,the installation of the facility took longer than our donor could understand. wehad peculiar local problems of security and high humidity. it took about sixmonths for the estates department of the university to fix security grills andprovide air conditioning for the cdrom facility. that was to ensure that theequipment was safe from possible theft and could not be damaged by the highdar es salaam humidity. so, although it took us longer than expected to becomeoperational, we have had no serious problems in the safety and operation of thefacility.the purchase of cdrom database subscriptions has also been problematicfrom the outset. first of all, the cdrom databases selected were very expensiveby our standards. in addition, financial transactions with database dealersoverseas were long and difficult to execute, partly because of financialregulations at home and partly because of some irksome conditions set by thevendors. for example, the vendors required that we sign lease agreements beforepurchase and delivery. the database vendors contacted would not acceptunesco coupons. because of that initial experience, we have in subsequentyears paid our database subscriptions through a londonbased book agent whoaccepts payment in unesco coupons. we also learned that, in some cases, thecdrom databases actually belong to the publisher and were only being leased to us: we would have to return one disc before an update would be issued or if wehad to cancel the subscription at a future date. 2from the beginning we realized that it was our responsibility to have a fewdatabase subscriptions that were rather popular, rather than rely completely on thegrant. we chose a department with high visibilityšreferencešto house thecdrom service. this department was fortunately headed by a very able,effective, and efficientthe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam18bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scholar and professional who had great personal drive. this has proved to be anasset to the service.box 2 the benefits of cdrom''now that we have an efficient cdrom service in the library, there is novalid excuse for one not to register for a ph.d. locally nor to produce scholarlypublications, or go overseas for literature review."chairperson, appointments committee for academic staff at the udsm,june 1993.effective march 1994, we formed a cdrom service committee whosemembership includes two endusers (people of senior academic ranks in thefaculties of engineering and science) and four library professionals (thedirector, and the heads of the reference, periodicals, and readers servicesdepartments).in a concrete way, the university teaching and research community havereacted very positively to the project. (see box 2.) since the cdrom servicebecame operational more and more users have turned up. the cdrom serviceis now the most important part of the library for teaching staff and postgraduatestudents and researchers. the library's 1994/95 annual report indicates that therehas been an average of 53 searches per month and a total of 1,540 since theservice started in october 1993.the image of the library staff has also been significantly boosted amonguniversity professors, students, and committees. the cdrom service hasfrequently been cited by the higher degrees committee as reason for academicstaff and postgraduate students to enroll in the university. since the cdromservice became operational, the appointments committee for academic staff nolonger accepts complaints about lack of access to scholarly publications.everyone on campus is expected to use the new service to improve their ownscholarship.promotion and publicity for the cdrom serviceswe widely publicized the cdrom service within the university communityand outside. we initially announced the service in various university committees,including faculty boards and the senate. we sent circular letters to all heads ofdepartments within the university and to all academic staff members, and weposted notices on all bulletin boards. we sent similar letters announcing andexplaining the service to other universities and research institutes. we preparedspecial publicity leaflets and spread them all over the campus and outside. the1993/94 library guide and university prospectus and subsequent annual editionshave included a sizable section on the cdrom service.word of mouth still plays a very important part in african communicationchannels. since the 1993/94 academic year the service has featured prominentlyin all freshman and postgraduate orientation programs. i have spoken about theservice in various forums, including the senate, the committee of deans, facultyboards, andthe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam19bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other academic gatherings to both announce and explain the service and itsbenefit for teaching, learning, and research.the library cdrom committee took part in a number of departmentalseminars as well as in postgraduate research seminar programs. so far the libraryhas organized two exposition days for the cdrom service that were very wellattended by both the university and external community. we organized the firstexposition day when the service was just getting under way. we held the secondexposition day during the university's silver jubilee week in july 1995; it wasofficiated by the former president and chancellor of the university, mwalimuj.k. nyerere. the mass media, including newspapers and television, widelycovered the event. recently we decided to place one of the three cdromworkstations in the public area near the public catalog. the visibility of thefacility may attract more users. we trust that these marketing and promotionalefforts will improve and increase the use of the cdrom service.outreach activitiesin fact we are already providing outreach service to users in sisteruniversities and research institutes. we have given access to a number of externalusers. in connection with other library current awareness services, we providesearches for users from outside the university. we have desktop publishingequipment on order that will allow us to produce and disseminate an informationbulletin to users in the university and outside. the major limitation that we arefacing now is poor and slow communication with institutions that do not haveemail or other telecommunication facilities. thus in addition to providingtraditional library products and services, such as bibliographies and newsletters,we plan to use the cdrom service as a launching pad for direct and aggressiveservices, directed at answering specific needs of s&t practitioners andresearchers. this will include sdi (selective dissemination of information),retrospective searches, assistance in question formulation, bibliographies ondemand, question and answer services, referral, photocopying, and citationtracing. these are in addition to the document delivery service.results, impact, and benefits of the projectwe put a monitoring system in place when the service was launched. wekeep records for users and their particulars, as well as records of searches. we arein the process of installing a system that can do that automatically. currently allis done on daily record sheets which are cumulated weekly, monthly and yearly.table 1 shows usage according to the broad categories of staff, postgraduate andundergraduate students, and others. table 2 shows the number of searchesrequested according to the database.the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam20bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 1 usage statistics, 1993œ1995staffpostgraduateundergraduateotherstotal199318422567199419540412627752199510433825128721since may 1995, the library has embarked on a project to evaluate the cdrom service, particularly the various cdrom databases held by the library.we identified senior academics and postgraduate students who had used theservice and asked them to evaluate the databases in their various aspects,including the amount of information and its usefulness, relevance, currency, andcoverage of the africa region. from this evaluation and others to be conducted inthe future, we will determine whether or not the cdrom service is having thedesired effect. unfortunately because of a change of the librarian in charge of thecdrom service in the library, this important report is not yet out.we are bearing in mind erick baard's injunction that: "a correct assessmentof an information technology innovation should include an examination of itsrequirements as regards physical and social infrastructure, its possible effects onnew environments, and finally the nature of the limitations to informationutilization which it is designed to alleviate."3table 2 searches by databasedatabase199319941995compendex plus32154199social science citation index9154199science citation index86551tropag and rural economy84121educational resources information center49351agecond64616arts and humanities11international centre for distance learning6public affairs information services3312life sciences4756social science index20popline1035applied sciences2212current citation4current contents4biotechnology5total67702721the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam21bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trainingwe have also taken serious steps to take care of the training aspect for bothlibrary staff and users. we expect staff to have basic computer skills and someability in troubleshooting, in case of minor operating problems. in order toundertake database searches effectively, cdrom operators need knowledge andexperience in information retrieval techniques. so far all this has been onlypartially accomplished because, although professional staff had some exposure intheir professional training, the rest of it, especially for the support staff, has beendone on the job. many academic staff members have had some databasesearching experience during their studies overseas. the bigger problem is withthose who trained locally. the training of this group, together with that ofstudents, is done by the library staff during their early database search sessions.the library has persuaded some teaching staff to have demonstrations in theirclasses or during seminars. the problem has always been whether to take theequipment to the class or to bring the group to the library cdrom facility. wehave also used the exposition days as an opportunity to train both teaching andresearch staff and students in conducting database searches. we are stillstruggling to get training in troubleshooting for our staff, but opportunities in theregion and abroad have not presented themselves.analysis of lessons learnedin hindsight we can say what went right: it was critical to have a good and acceptable cdrom project proposal andwe were lucky that somebody happened to be there at the right time. we consulted and got the support of the university authorities before wesent out our project proposal. that support has been very critical in anumber of ways, including provision of adequate local funding, and inpublicizing the service. the decision to choose that particular vendor for the purchase of theequipment was also right. backup service has been very critical and thelocal icl agent has generally not let us down.there is no doubt that the cdrom service technology has done awonderful job in alleviating our problems of availability of and access to currentinformation. it is definitely a technology that we can afford. in implementing thetechnological innovation at the dar es salaam university, we did our level best tomake the right decisions, and some of the problems are beyond our control.so far our user statistics are still low. we should have made the cdromservice accessible to undergraduate students. that should have boosted our userstatistics to an optimal level. we are discussing that issue in the cdromservicethe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam22bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee and the idea is likely to be accepted and adopted. we are alsoexperimenting with various ways of making the document delivery service easierand cheaper for users.there is little that we can do about the high cost of hardware and the isidatabase products. we wished we had started with cheaper products. we couldalso have shortened the period of waiting for the purchase and the delivery of theequipment. that might have required us to use the services of another localagent, other than the icl agent. but then that might have meant compromising onthe backup service. unfortunately practically all hardware and software has to beordered from overseas, and not locally or in the region. we had to resort to usingpersonal contacts in the region and abroad from the beginning to theimplementation stage of the project in order to obtain all the equipment andprograms we needed.at this point we have managed to convince our major cdrom databasedealers, isi and silver platter, to accept payment in unesco coupons. by thismethod, we have managed to bypass the cumbersome bank transfer procedures.the application of information and communication technology (ict),however, raises some old problems: if not used properly, ict could perpetuatethe dependency syndrome of the poorer african countries on the westerncountries. of course this is a controversial issue like "appropriate technology" or"aid" in both the north and the south. as other case studies have shown,however, the technology can also be used to africa's advantage. for instance,cataloging and capturing locallyproduced material for distribution on cdromwill be of great benefit to africa. dissemination of local information databases tothe north can provide a give and take situation between the south and the north.the sustainability issue is very critical. the donor agency and the universityhave raised it on numerous occasions. the library and the university must havethe necessary resources to carry on the project, when the donor's project periodcomes to an end. here the need to make provision for local resources is critical.the local contribution is actually important throughout the functional operationof the project.we have made significant efforts to cultivate individuals, departments, andresearch institutes inside and outside the university to contribute to thesustainability of the cdrom service. we have indicated that all users of theservice must contribute to the cost of the service in one way or another. duringthe initial and launching period everything has been provided freeofcharge;however, as the service becomes critical to users, the users will be requested topay at least a nominal cost for printing. we also ask users to pay for photocopiesof documents delivered. we charge outside users a small user fee.teaching departments of the university are requested to consider subscribingto cdrom databases in their respective subjects within their link agreementswith overseas universities or include the databases within their documentationcomponents when presenting proposals to donor agencies. the faculties ofeducation and engineering, for example, will take up subscriptions to eric andengineeringthe cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam23bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index, respectively, should the library fail to pay for those subscriptions. thefaculty of science will take up databases in the sciences. recently the faculty oflaw consulted the library on the acquisition of hardware and software, includingdatabases in law. some departments also have arrangements to pay for the cost ofdocument delivery for their staff and postgraduate students.it is also important to think about twinning arrangements with other projectsgoing on in the library. this ensures the successful implementation and mutualsupport of the projects. for the university of dar es salaam library this hasincluded project support from sarec, the aaas journal donation program, andthe uno/raf/006/gef biodiversity project. one project seems to have amultiplier effect on others. it is after you have one project running smoothly thatyou attract other, related information technology projects. since we started thecdrom service project in 1993, we have had two other local database creationprojects.conclusions and recommendationsthe introduction of the cdrom service technology has solved a criticalinformation problem for the udsm and tanzania. but there are severalchallenges, beyond the issue of sustainability. recognizing that the udsmlibrary cannot afford to ignore the cdrom technologyšfor fear of being leftfurther behindšwe have some concerns about whether the cdrom technologycan be technically maintained. do we have enough local expertise to repair andreplace the technology, for example? so far we have depended on backupservice from the vendor. so the problem of maintenance is not difficult in thecountry, but it could be cheaper and faster if we had the qualified personnel at theuniversity or in the library.the cdrom databases we have from overseas cannot meet all of our stineeds. for development purposes, tanzania's scientists need to have access tolocal and regional information resources, as well. there is considerableinformation in the form of grey literaturešunpublished or unindexed reports,studies, and surveys by government and r&d institutions. a start has been madeby the udsm library to create databases of local literature on environment,education, and biodiversity. the next important step is to create regional andcontinentwide databases. this effort should be coupled with a campaign toconvince scholars, scientists and practitioners to publish locally. although theudsm library is one of the african university libraries participating in theevaluation of international databases, the outcome of that evaluation is not yetcomplete at our university, and results from other african universities are not yetout.as stated above, cdrom database information providers and vendors setconditions that are difficult to meet in developing countries. should we, forexample, cancel subscriptions to print indexes and rely on their compact discequivalents? if we do, what will happen if we cancel the cdrom subscriptionand we are asked to return the discs?the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam24bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this technological innovation also gives sti workers in the third world anopportunity to think seriously about the development of appropriate stitechnologies in the south and the adaptation of sti technologies from the north.it is our hope that our friends in the north will support this noble endeavor.it is important to operate a project in accordance with the agreement andexpectations of the donor agency. we tried as much as possible to keep to theseconditions. we are convinced that because of this, besides the growing userdemand for the service, the carnegie corporation accepted our application for theextension of the project by supplying an additional cdrom workstation andtwo cdrom database subscriptions, a desktop publishing facility, and supportto outreach activities.notes1. statistical data in this report is taken from jamhuri ya muungano wa tanzania. hotuba yawaziri wa nchi katika ofisi ya rais na makamu mwenyekiti wa tume ya mipango, mh.s.a.kibona (mbunge) wakati akiwakilisha bungeni taarifa ya uchumi wa taifa ya mwaka 1992na mapendekezo ya mpango wa bajeti (rolling plan and forward budget) kwa kipindi cha1993/94œ1995/96, tarehe 17 julai, 1993. dar es salaam: government printer, 1993.2. we have since learned that this is a problem faced around the worldšin both developed anddeveloping countries.3. baard, erick (1982) appropriate information technology: a crosscultural perspective,ujislaa, 4(4):263œ268.the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam25bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the cdrom service for the university of dar es salaam26bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cdrom for health information inzimbabweby helga patrikioshelga patrikios went to school in new york and belfast, andto university at trinity college dublin, where she readfrench and italian language and literature. she worked as atv documentaries researcher, teacher and editor until hermarriage to a rhodesian brought her to harare (thensalisbury) in 1972. she took a higher diploma in libraryscience by correspondence with the university of southafrica in 1978, and has worked ever since at the library ofthe university of zimbabwe. she has been medical librariansince 1985, and has published and presented many papers on her work there. shewas appointed deputy university librarian in 1994.background and context of the projectin recent decades, throughout subsaharan africa, academics, scientists andresearchers have seen the decline of once flourishing institutes and universities aseconomic conditions worsened, and inflation and devaluation of local currenciesexacerbated the chronic shortage of hard currencies. the deficiencies intraditional information sources, arising from economic, geographical and culturalfactors, have worsened perceptibly in the past two decades. and while theinformation explosion in the north is fuelled by dramatic developments ininformation technologies, the south must watch the gap between its owninformation sources and those available in the industrialized countries grow everwider. can that gap be narrowed or even bridged, or will the poorer countries befurther marginalized in terms of technology and information access?fortunately, in many african countries, the advent of the personal computerhas enabled libraries to leapfrog two decades of development in informationtechnology, and move straight into effective and appropriate solutions to some ofthe problems of information storage and retrieval. institutions and privatecompanies which had never seen a mainframe or minicomputer began in themid1980s tocdrom for health information in zimbabwe27bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acquire microcomputersšoften initially only for word processing, butincreasingly for compiling databases and other specific applications.in zimbabwe, at the medical library of the university of zimbabwe(uzml), the process began with cdrom. this case study will describe howand why that process was set in motion, and its immediate and longertermeffects on the services of the library and on its staff and users.zimbabwe has a population of 11 million people, 70 percent of whom arebased in the rural areas. independence from the illegal white minority rule of iansmith's rhodesia was achieved in 1980; by 1990 zimbabwe's developmentprograms were well advanced, particularly in the fields of education and thehealth services.the colonial legacy included a centralized health service, with aconcentration of sophisticated curative services for a minority in the urbancenters. (see box 1.) the goal of the new ministry of health was to create anextensive network of primary health care outlets in the rural areas, reallocatingexisting resource to establish new clinics and upgrade general and districthospitals. the success of their policies was seen in a steady improvement inhealth status indicators during the middle and late 1980s, including maternal andchild morbidity and mortality; nutritional status; and expanded immunizationprograms.harare, the capital, is the home of the university of zimbabwe, establishedin 1958, which includes the country's only medical schoolšadded in 1963. aswell as the 500 medical students, the faculty has departments of nursingscience, pharmacy and rehabilitation, and the school is a regional center forpostgraduate programs in the medical specialties. the present total of studentsapproaches 1,000, and student intakes continue to grow.the medical library was well planned from the outset, with a goodcollection of journals and textbooks, and a current awareness service foracademics. as the country's only medical library it was in principle accessible tomembers of the health professions outside the university; but since it was situatedin the main university library on the campus in an outlying suburb, it was littleused other than by staff and students of the faculty. in 1978 the library moved tothe spacious premises of the new medical school and teaching hospital close tothe city center, where more nonuniversity health workers began to make use ofit.box 1 preindependence health servicespreindependence health services had neglected information support;medical and nursing education were historically centralized, and the only othersources of information and educational material lay in the small collections at thenursing schools. the library at the ministry was a dusty storeroom piled highwith government reports. the achievement of independence made rapid growthand change possible not only for the health services but for health informationtoo.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe28bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in 1983, following recommendations from a world health organizationsponsored workshop in tanzania, the uzml, as the only major medical library inzimbabwe, was designated national focal point for health sciences informationservices, by both the ministry and the university. an outreach librarian wasappointed to deliver services to health workers in provincial and rural hospitalsand health centers. in 1984, we carried out a survey of their information needsand priorities.1anecdotal evidence from rural health professionals of a dire lack of access toinformationšan absence of current textbooks and journals, or indeed anyconsiderable hospital libraryšhad prompted the survey, which had a 74 percentresponse rate; this evidence was emphatically confirmed by the 63 doctors and 10senior nurses who responded. their expressed priorities were to have corecollections of books and journals at their workplaces, and 90 percent consideredthe lack of current medical information to be a serious difficulty or disadvantage.some of these needs were addressed by a joint health informationcommittee, which we established with the ministry of health for this purposešcore collections of 40 textbooks and 13 manuals were provided by a scandinaviandonor for all hospitals and clinics. adequate journal collections could not beprovided to all hospitals, so we compiled instead a digest of medline abstractson zimbabwe's health issues, current health information zimbabwe (chiz), afree update for all zimbabwe's health professionals. the abstracts were providedfor us by the world health organization (who) in geneva, who sent us themonthly medline printouts produced by the swiss host datastar. datastar ransearches using a profile of zimbabwe's major health problems, compiled withadvice from former district medical officers.we tried, in the mid1980s, to gain access to the online databases of theu.s. national library of medicine and to medline in particularšthe index,with abstracts, to over 3,700 of the world's major biomedical journals, with over 8million records. the obstaclesšhigh and unpredictable costs in scarce foreigncurrency (for passwords, telecommunications, connect time and printouts)šweretoo great. a further disincentive were the complex command syntaxes of thedatabases, and the need for considerable familiarity with the medicalterminology.a less demanding more userfriendly medium was needed to accessmedline. in 1988, while visiting a london medical school library, we saw itšin the shape of cdrom, in fullcolor actionša technology based on laser discsthat was just then beginning to penetrate european markets. the advantages ofcdrom were immediately obvious: the powerful laser discs, used inconjunction with an ultrafriendly search engine, mounted in the homely personalcomputer, bringing international bibliographic databases into the most remotecentersšand at a predictable cost. unlimited online searching and training time,unlimited information retrieval, unlimited access to the almost mythical databasesof the world's most advanced scientific institutionsšthese were suddenly withinour reach.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe29bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project descriptionin mid1988, a project proposal went off to the carnegie corporation of newyorkšfor the acquisition of cdrom equipment with a subscription to themedline database. the general objective of the project was to improve thehealth information service at the uzml, with the specific objective of providingusers in the medical school and throughout zimbabwe with medline literaturesearches.the medical library had three professional (graduate) staff, threediplomates, and adequate secretarial and other support staff. the referencelibrarian had nursing training behind her, as well as her library qualifications.most of her working hours hitherto were spent scanning the latest journal issuesfor individuals requiring current awareness updatesša selective disseminationof information (sdi) service. we did not yet know that this task could be reducedto some minutes a month. all of us were excited by the prospect of introducing acomputerized service into the library at last.neither i nor any of my colleagues had ever laid hands on a computer. noone in the university library had computer skills. many of us were conscious ofbeing left behind while libraries in the north were forging ahead with newer andbetter computer applications for information storage and retrieval, and libraryhousekeeping systems. among the major benefits of the project would be thefamiliarization of library staff with microcomputer technology.we also counted on providing our own medline searches for chiz, andrelieving who's library in geneva of that expensive burden. we could alsorevise our search strategy at will without incurring further expense or trouble forwho.the response from carnegie was rapid and positivešwe received adiscretionary grant for a feasibility study of a medline on cdrom searchservice. the grant also enabled us to buy a personal computer, the two drivesneeded to search the current fiveyear medline file, and twoyear subscriptionto the medline database.project experience and implementationwhat were our problems, errors, and successes in implementing the threephases of our project?hardwareour initial choice of hardware was poor. since we did not even know whichquestions to ask, we were guided by earlier advice from another donor's programofficer, which stressed the importance of securing reliable local (ibm)maintenance. we ordered the smallest cheapest ibm: a ps2 model 30. we wereguided by excessive thrift, rather than by criteria of power and speed, of whichwe thencdrom for health information in zimbabwe30bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.knew nothing except what we learned from the conflicting advice given by localcomputer experts. they in turn knew nothing of the rapidly growing exigenciesof cdromšan unknown technology in zimbabwe in 1988.in reality the harare private sector offered more than enough microcomputersupport to go round; furthermore, a snippet of local lore that we absorbed hasproved to be well founded: in harare's temperate and relatively dustfree climaticconditions microcomputers, even the cheaper ibm clones, generally give littletrouble. we rightly did not budget or contract for an expensive maintenanceagreement with the local ibm agentsša hefty 10 percent of the equipment's costper year, the local standard charge. (the high cost of equipment in africa shocksbuyers in the northšthe addition of transport and duties almost double prices ofany imported goods.)instead we allowed in our budget for (lower) maintenance costs and havealways spent less than was budgeted on hardware and software problems. a pieceof late news: recent extensive building operations next to our library have created areddishgrey dustšclay and cementšwhich now thickly coats the edges andinsides of our drives. they are giving occasional trouble now.the pioneer personal computer, within three years of purchase, was unableto process the burgeoning medline database. we ran out of space on the 20megabyte hard disk before the end of the first phase of the projectšthere wasbarely room for medline software (13 megabyte) and word processingsoftware, and ultimately everything but medline had to be deleted. whenmedline needed 28 megabytes of disk space and at least one megabyte ofram, and we found the machine's hard disk and ram could not be upgraded, itwas relegated to word processing use.clearly, as novices, we should have sought and found more expert adviceoutside zimbabwe before deciding what to buy. (see box 2.) it was a colleague innew york who discovered that the drives we had ordered were incompatible withthe personal computeršjust in time to prevent their shipment; it took severalmonths to rectify that error; and when the equipment was all finally assembled,we found that the driver extension software was superseded, so that more weekspassed while we awaited the current version.box 2 relative speed of equipmentwhen, before ordering, i contacted the medline vendors in new york toask whether our choice of equipment was appropriate for their databasesoftware, they said it would be fine, but warned that its performance would be abit sluggish. i responded, quite seriously, that was just fine, since we too weresluggish–. it turned out that we could go off and brew tea during some of thelengthier search processes, and still find the search in progress on our return.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe31bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.professional advice provided by carnegie, and firsthand experience, helpedus in making better decisions on equipment in later phases of the project. fouryears later, for instance, we were encouraged by a local supplieršand were verytemptedšto network existing and new personal computers so that allworkstations in the library could access all cdroms. we learned, though, thatnot only would the proprietary networking costs of our database vendors havebeen beyond our longterm means, but also the absence of expertise in the librarysystem needed to maintain the network would have left me with thatresponsibility. we knew that neither i nor my colleagues could muster the time orskills needed.as time passed our local suppliers learned much more about cdrom; wetoo learned, as personal computers became cheaper, faster and more powerful interms of clock speed, disk and memory size, that we needed to allow for rapidgrowth in the number and size of databases, for much more ram, for windowssoftware for the databases which would, before long, be available only inwindows; for antivirus packages to check the diskettes on which our usersincreasingly needed to download their search results.our initial choice of a vendor for the medline database (from a productrange of eight competing companies) was based on advice from a large medicallibrary in milwaukee, which had closely examined all the options, and on journalarticles which rigorously evaluated the search features of the different versions.our chosen vendor, ovid technologies (formerly cd plus), has prospered,multiplied and improved its products, and supported us with discounts. cd plusresponded, though not always promptly, to the software difficulties that arosefrom time to time as new features were developed. we learned to correct some ofthem by the simple expedient of reinstalling the software. other software failuresneeded input from our suppliers. the only personal computer in which we failedto install the recent much larger dos version of ovid's medline is an ibm ps2model 70; it accepts only the windows version of medline.delaysour greatest frustrations came from the delays that held up the first phase byone year. there were delays in obtaining the correct drives and software; it tookmore time to cajole duty free certificates and import permits from the state's thenponderous bureaucratic machinery. the wasted year, 1988œ1989, nonetheless sawa degree of progress in sti at uzml. we learned word processing on thepersonal computer, which was delivered within only a few months. once thelibrary had at least one functioning workstation (and by the second phase ofsupport we had three) and could keep our search service going, we could toleratesubsequent delays. the cliffhanging saga of the supplier who held us up in thethird phase of the project by converting funds for equipment to his own use mustbe documented elsewhere; he delivered our goods in the end, but a year later thanplanned.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe32bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.results, impacts, and benefits of the projectwhat have cdrom technology and the microcomputeršthe availabilityof inhouse biomedical and health databasesšbrought to the library, to themedical school, its staff and students, and to the country's health workers? whouses medline most? why do they want medline searches? the datagathered from our search request forms give some answers.numbers of medline searches madethe average number of searches rose from 80 searches per month (1989š1990) to 450 per month in 1995 (november). (see figure 1.) in march 1995 arecord 700 individual searches and monthly updates(sdis) were recorded.categories of search requestersundergraduate and postgraduate students represented 36 percent and 15percent, respectively, of all searchers in a 6month sample of 1,660 searchrequest forms in 1994. (the 58 monthly sdis that are automatically generated asupdates for individuals were not categorized.) other searchers were academicstaff, nonacademic staff, or government workers, or from ngos, parastatals, orthe private sector. (see figure 2.)purpose of searchesin the same sixmonth period, research and assignments (in which there maybe overlap) accounted for 41 percent and 13 percent, respectively; teaching 4percent; updates and sdis 20 percent; patient care 8 percent; publications 2percent; in 12 percent no purpose was given. (n = 2008 searches including sdis.)figure 1 monthly average of cdrom searches conducted, january 1990 tonovember 1995.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe33bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 2 medline searches by user categories.survey on the use of medline and its abstractsin march 1995 we carried out a survey on the use of medline by staff andstudents of the medical faculty.2 a questionnaire sent to 252 staff andundergraduates sought to gain information on: numbers of medline users and nonusers; frequency of use; the value of searches and of abstracts; the number of end users and the need for training in end user searching; and reasons for nonuse of medline.we had a response rate of 50 percent (n = 252). of 122 academic staff towhom we sent questionnaires, 49 responded. of the 130 finalyear students towhom we sent questionnaires, 67 responded. of the total 126 respondents, 119used medline and only seven had never used medline. (see table 1.)we can surmise that those who have used medline are much more likelyto respond to a questionnaire on its use than those who have not used it; thus amuch greater proportion of the 50 percent who did not respond may have beennonusers. the reasons given by respondents who had never used the servicewere lack of knowledge about it and lack of time to use it. additional surveyresults are given in tables 2š5.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe34bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 1 medline users/nonusersacademicsfinalyear studentsmedline users(n = 54)92%(n = 65)97%medline nonusers(n = 5)8%(n = 2)3%table 2 frequency of use of medlineuse of medline per month(n = 114)%use it often (5 times or more)1211use it regularly (2œ3 times)2421use it occasionally (once)4136use it rarely (less than once)3732table 3 value of search resultssearch results satisfactory(n = 117)%usually7867sometimes3227rarely76never00table 4 usefulness of abstractsabstracts as a source of information(n = 116)%very useful7464moderately useful4135not useful11cdrom for health information in zimbabwe35bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 5 completeness of information in abstractsabstracts provide information complete in itself:(n = 117)%usually2320sometimes6253rarely2320never97training in medline searchingthe library has periodically offered training in medline searching tousers: 49 percent of respondents had received some training. most of these werestudents: only 17 (31 percent) academic staff had received training.the survey showed that most staff and students did searches assisted by alibrarian; only 25 percent of respondents (n = 29) were able or willing to do theirown searches, although half had received some training. training was thusdeficient in some way for half the participants. ninety percent (n = 87) wereinterested in receiving training from library staff and/or the medline tutorialprogram.it is important that we enable more end users to make searchesindependently of library staff. because few of our staff have a strong grasp ofmedical terminology we are concerned that the quality of more complex searchesmay be uneven. the more end users with search skills, the higher the potentialrelevance of search results, and the more staff time saved.availability of fulltext articlesmedline citations carry a note if the journal cited is held by our library,and most users reported making some effort, sometimes, to locate such journalarticles. but less than half of our users attempt to obtain articles through thelibrary's interlibrary loans (ill) service. there had been a boom in illrequests, almost matching the growth in the numbers of searches, from 1990 tomid1994. the service then declined sharply when ill funds ran out.users have little confidence in the library's runs of journals, which arebroken by frequent temporary or permanent stoppages of subscriptions; they areunwilling, too, to depend on the unreliable and very slow ill service. when itsfunds run out we are dependent on the goodwill of two or three south africanlibraries, which cannot, of course, meet all our needs. in response to the library'sattempts to improve ill services, the university has recently approved, inprinciple, the introduction of realistic (almost full costrecovery) charges, asopposed to highly subsidized minimal charges for ill documents. while studentswill continue to be subsidized to some extent, researchers (academic staff) will beexpected to pay for ill services.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe36bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.immediate and longterm outcomes of the service: productsand spinoffssearchesmedline now produces over 380 individual searches each month, as wellas 58 monthly updates for individual researchers and clinicians; it also producesthe monthly printouts of abstracts for our national digest current healthinformation zimbabwe (chiz).journal selectioncdrom (used with the bibliographic database management programpapyrus) enables us to use medline in bibliometric studies to identify thosejournals which most frequently publish articles of relevance to zimbabwe's healthproblemsšthe citations selected for chiz and those selected for printing out byour users. the most frequently cited titles are included in a revised core collectionof mostneeded journal titles.the bradford's law of scatter (illustrated in many studies including one atthe national library of medicine, where it was found that only 300 titles of its22,000 periodicals satisfied 70 percent of all requests3 ) reinforces the benefits ofaccessing journals through a document delivery service, rather than ''owning"expensive subscriptions to littleused journals. the "ownership versus access"algorithm we have developed4 can be brought to bear on the selection process nowthat lists of most frequently cited titles can be built on objective criteria ratherthan relying solely on manual analyses of interlibrary loans, or on the possiblyidiosyncratic or unrepresentative demands of often transient specialists and otheracademics.abstractsthe survey demonstrates the dissatisfaction of users with our journalcollection and interlibrary loans service, and a considerablešand certainlylamentablešdependence on abstracts rather than on fulltext articles, with 73percent "usually" or "sometimes" making do with abstracts alone. how valuablecan abstracts be, how complete the information they contain? no clinician,researcher, or librarian would advocate total dependence on abstracts. many ofthem do not accurately reflect the main findings or conclusions of their fullpapers, and rarely (except in terms of the unassailable reputation of the sourcepublication) enable a critical evaluation of a paper's real worth in terms ofmethodology and other criteria. a recent study on the reliability of reviews ofabstracts for scientific meetings found that reviewers disagreed substantiallywhen evaluating the same abstracts and that structured review criteria wereneeded.5 the proportion of structured abstracts in the medical literature isincreasing, however, and enhances the value and usefulnesscdrom for health information in zimbabwe37bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of bibliographic databases. (see box 3.)box 3 the importance of abstractswe have learned anecdotally too that our users find that abstracts can anddo provide critical information in a crisisšour drug and toxicology informationservice, for example, inevitably has to rely on abstracts in emergencies.abstracts inform policy and assist planning. they have had to satisfy our usersfor information on management of diseases and poisoning cases for decisionson drug prescribing and dosages, for literature reviews, for preparing lectures,for updating practical knowledge and skillsšbecause the backup of full texts isnot available quickly enough. it may be deplorable but it is also true that in manycontexts, including our own, the backup texts will never be available, or willarrive too late. it must be recognized that in the poorer countries of the world anabstract is likely to be all the reader will ever see of journal articles.outcomes for health professionals, patients?while published data demonstrate the impact of medline on patientoutcomes in the usa6,7,8 we are not able in zimbabwe to quantify what the directand indirect benefits of cdrom databases and their abstracts are, in terms ofimproved efficacy of health professionals, or improved health status indicators,for instance. there were considerable gains in the health status indicators ofzimbabwe's people after the country won its independence in 1980, but these arenow being rapidly eroded by the combined effects of the aids pandemic, and ofthe economic structural adjustment programs being implemented in recent yearsin many african countries.in a 1993 snap survey of opinions of senior academic staff on medline'seffects the following were among their comments: "its comprehensiveness andcurrency [make it] revolutionary"; "it makes life so easy – very helpful forresearch and teaching"; "it plays a very important role in teaching med studentsenabling them to keep up with the latest information – is invaluable for theirclinical presentations"; "it helps me keep up with appropriate management ofclinical problems''; "it is indispensable for research protocols and write ups ofresearch projects"; "in the recent meningitis epidemic it provided essentialepidemiological and serotyping data for appropriate measures for prevention,control and management"; "it plays a major role for me as a consultant teachingjuniors."some examples (from the 1995 survey) of respondents' reactions to aquestion on the effects on their work of not having access to medline:"dramaticšmy research and teaching capability would collapse without it"; oneurologist declared he "would scream"; others spoke of "catastrophic","devastating" and "drastic" effects, and "the end of the road."cdrom for health information in zimbabwe38bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.promotion of the cdrom literature search servicewe promoted the service initially only to medical school staff and not tostudents, anticipating an unmanageable demand on our single workstation. onlytwo members of staff (out of over 100 in 21 departments to whose chairmen wesent promotional circulars) appeared at our medline open day. we assume thatinitially news of medline and popline spread largely by word of mouth,since there was a steady increase in use after the first few weeks.after a formal presentation of the first workstation, involving the unitedstates information service (usis), the small paragraph on the event whichappeared in the daily paper showed a total lack of understanding of thetechnology on the part of the reporter. our handout about cdrom was beyondhis comprehension š we realized how important it is to recognize theimpenetrability of new technologies to those who have no experience of them,and to learn how to communicate their capabilities in the simplest possible way.we reinforced our initial lowkey circulars and notices only when we hadacquired two more workstations in the second phase of the project, bypromotional demonstrations of medline (using a datashow projector weacquired in the second phase of the project) at professional meetings of interestgroups (such as pharmacists, physiotherapists, primary care physicians). toprovide these demonstrations our reference librarian, with help sometimes fromme or another colleague, had to load her car with a personal computer, fourdrives and a printer, drive to the meeting venue and reassemble the workstationthereša considerable undertaking. from followup visits and search requestsfrom those sectors we knew the demonstrations made an impactšseeing isbelieving. (recently staff in our main library took cdrom to individualfaculties, and they too found that an immediate increase in use of the databasesresulted.)demonstrations of cdrom searches get the most attention in our libraryorientation sessions for students; postgraduate students are given a longerintroduction than undergraduates, and are strongly encouraged to read databasetutorials and take the training which is always available from our staff. however,offers to academic staff and students of training for individuals or small groupshave had little response thus far. the lack of interest in our offers of training isnot surprisingšvery few students and staff have had the opportunity to acquirecomputer skills, and most still have no access to any computer other than ours.they will have to start by learning basic computer skills, and only then attempt touse the (relatively userfriendly) interface software.training is more likely to be accepted if it is informally given, by way ofexplanations to a search requestor as he helps a librarian make his search. ourunderstanding of the problem of low uptake of training is that, unless userspractice and enlarge on newly acquired search skills on a regular basis, theyforget them between visits and have to start again. many of our users have verylittle spare time for acquiring new skills outside their daily work schedule.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe39bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 4 the african index medicus projectour database, utano (the shona word for health), provides records for usto contribute to who's recent database initiative, the african index medicus(aim). the innovative aim project assembles (at who headquarters inbrazzaville) abstracts of mainly unpublished "grey" literature collected from agrowing number of african countries. who produces and circulates regularprinted updates to libraries in africa, and to subscribers in african institutesthroughout the united states and europe.the medical school is constructing a new health sciences building andplans to incorporate considerable computeraided learning facilities in thebuilding. easy access to computers will then no longer be limited to the library'scdrom facilities.other uses of microcomputers in the medical librarya database of local health literaturethis project to create and compile a database of local unpublished healthliterature was funded by idrc and implemented in 1991œ1992, concurrently withour expanding cdrom service. (see box 4.) the contract staff, the training indatabase use (unesco's micro cds/isis) and the hardware brought to thelibrary by the project reinforced our understanding and appreciation of thepotential and value of computerization, and has since offered continuingopportunities to all our professional staff to widen their computer skills. thedatabase, after the expiry of the contracts of project staff, has continued its slowbut steady growth, as two of our staff members gradually master the complexitiesof the isis software.email: local and international access to informationemail now enables health workers outside the capital to get access tomedline searches and other material from the harare library and beyond. inour third year of reliable email access, we now operate through zimbabwe'supgraded telephone system, through satellife's local healthnet node in harare,which links us with other major international email networks as well as with thehealthnet users in provincial medical directorates and many of the districtoffices. the number of medline search requests emailed to our outreachlibrarian from the provinces doubled last year. we download and return searchresults to users by email, and can at last scan and email photocopies of articles inthe library instead of mailing photocopies (which may take a week to deliver).the main limiting factorcdrom for health information in zimbabwe40bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the use of email is the still small number of health professionals with easyaccess to and familiarity with personal computers; but the time taken to scan andrun an optical character recognition program against the copy is also somethingof a deterrent.moves to bring us online into the internet may bear fruit in the next year ortwo. meanwhile email and the grateful med search interface give us easy andlowcost access to the medlars databases of the national library ofmedicine, through the bitnis program,9 which enables a turnaround time of 24œ48 hours. the costs of our email services are modest: each of our two stationscosts about $7.00 per month, less than the cost of one fivepage fax.the impact of microcomputer technologies on library staffmany libraries in africa, including our own, have become shelters fordwindling and aging printed resources. the effects on library staff of acquiringcomputer skills and delivering computerized and very current information are allthe more positive in this context. the image of traditionally lowstatusprofessionals has been subtly but unquestionably enhanced by their newcapabilitiesšdoctors and nurses now request appointments for searches withlibrary staff – who have something valuable to offer at last. this empowermentof librarians increases their morale at a time when economic forces have acontrary effect on the work force; computers make the job more fun for themajority of staff who enthusiastically embrace the new technologies.the growing use of personal computers in our library imposes on us the needto reexamine our management structure; lines of authority have to be redefined.there is need for greater flexibility in job descriptions and responsibilities, needfor recognition and monitoring by senior management of any radical increases orreductions in workloads brought about by automation, need for rewardingexceptional skills and providing opportunities for the development of those skillsto those who show aptitude. if sustained progress in use of the new technologiesis to be made, the old rigid and hierarchical structures of libraries must bend andexpand to allow for new patterns and areas of growth. the application ofperformance indicators to services and processes is one obvious method ofplanning and managing the changes which automation inevitably brings in itswake.analysis of lessons learnedunquestionably cdrom databases, medline in particular, have broughtabout a radical change in the information seeking behavior of our users:unprecedented rapid and easy access to current and archival journal literature; andan increased awareness and documented increased use of the journal literature.10we believe, however, that the most significant and valuable outcome of thisservice has been the growing awareness in its users of a range, literally a world ofotherwisecdrom for health information in zimbabwe41bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.unknown information sources. it has been by far the greatest force for progress ininformation access that our users have experienced.however, while the advent of cdrom has been a dramatic success in ourlibrary, and while email is the cheapest known method, pro rata , for the speedytransmission of data, there are funding and technical issues that cannot beignored. we have learnedšpainlessly so far, thanks to the generosity andflexibility of our donorsšthat onetime setup costs are not a reality.planners must face and meet the costs of maintaining and updatingexpensive hardware to keep pace with changes in database sizes and interfaces;they must have access to expert and unbiased information on the newtechnologies to avoid costly mistakes in purchasing inappropriate equipment.they must allow for the relentless growth of ram requirements; the need formultiple workstations when multiple users want access to databases; the need forthe more expensive laser printers when printing out images from fulltext cdroms or other electronic sources such as world wide web. the internet hascome to neighboring countries and is likely to reach us too before very long, withfurther implications for hardware, training and other costs. growth anddevelopment in the technologies are inevitable and expensive. institutionalsupport and involvement become increasingly vital if the technologies are tosurvive and prosper in the long term in africa.the lack of concern of institutional planners for information supply may beattributable to negative experiences and low expectations in the libraries theyhave known, as much as to the failure of educational systems to includeinformation retrieval skills in their curricula. we expect medline to break thatcycle in zimbabwe, by sensitizing studentsšthe planners of the futurešto theexistence of vast and formerly unknown resources. the cost of introducing andmaintaining a medline search service, represented as a proportion of thebudget of a medical school or a health ministry, would be insignificant. thatcost calculated as a percentage of the salary of each health professional ingovernment service would be negligible; its cost effectiveness in terms of thedevelopment of human resources and services would be obvious.our survey, made after five years of use of medline, shows that thisdatabase has become essential to the work of many of our academic staff: eightyper cent of respondents stated that they would elect that the library cancel tenjournal subscriptions rather than the medline subscription. we are likely tohave to make just such a substitute in the near future. as a first step it is essentialto expose present and future generations of planners, teachers and practitioners tothese databases. the fact that the library has been able to offer four or fiveworkstations providing medline and other databases to all comers has meantquick, easy, and free access to vast quantities of medical literature, which wouldotherwise be inaccessible.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe42bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendationswe have realized to a considerable extent the potential of cdromtechnology at the uzml. the primary effects of the medium have been a vastlyincreased access to and use of current health information sources, whether in theform of abstracts or fulltext journal articles or segments from constantly updatedtextbooks; and along with this increase there have been very significant changesin the information seeking behavior of large proportions of academic staff andstudents in the medical faculty and of health professionals in government serviceand the private sector. there is evidence elsewhere, and we must to a great extentassume, that the increased use of the literature and the resulting increasedknowledge base of health professionals must produce the secondary and mostimportant benefits of improved health services in general and better patient carein particular.our experiences in providing cdrom literature search services suggestthat increased and more effective use would be made of the databases, and ofother computer technologies such as email and eventually the internet, if more ofour present and potential users had been previously exposed to computers, or hadsome computer training. economic circumstances in zimbabwe have hithertoprevented all but the most privileged sections of our present and potential usercommunity from owning or having easy access to computers. however, the rateof growth in the computer industry, and growing awareness among members ofthe health care community of the immeasurable benefits of personal computersšto which our project has made a major contributionšsuggest that a critical massof computer users will have been reached in the longer term.once this critical mass has been achieved, the question of sustainability willcease to be such a worrisome issue. institutions, health services, and individualswill have their own strong motivation to supply the material and human resourcesnecessary to exploit and develop the new technologies.notes1. patrikios, h.m. (1985) socioeconomic changes in developing countries: the concern of themedical librarian? in: medical libraries, one world: resources, cooperation, services.proceedings of the fifth international congress on medical librarianship. tokyo: keiouniversity medical library.2. patrikios, m.m. (1995) effects of medline abstracts on information use in an africanmedical library. paper presented at 7th international congress on medical librarianship: healthinformation for the global village, washington, d.c.3. warren, k. (1987) the evolution of selective biomedical libraries and their use in thedeveloping world. journal of the american medical association 257(19):2628œ9.4. patrikios, h.m. (1994, 1996) a minimal acquisitions policy for journals at the university ofzimbabwe medical library. in: survival strategies in african university libraries. americanassociation for the advancement of science.5. rubin, h.r. et al. (1993) how reliable is peer review of scientific abstracts? looking back atthe 1991 annual meeting of the society of general internal medicine. journal of generalinternal medicine  8(5)255œ8.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe43bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6. lindberg, d.a., et al (1993) use of medline by physicians for clinical problem solving.journal of the american medical association  269(24):3129.7. wilson, s.r., et al. (1989) use of the critical incident technique to evaluate the impact ofmedline: final report. palo alto, ca: american institutes for research.8. klein, m.s. et al. (1994) effect of online literature searching on length of stay and patient carecosts. academic medicine 69(6)489œ95.9. search costs are currently being funded by satellife, cambridge, massachusetts.10. patrikios, h.m. (1993) a minimal acquisitions policy for journals at the university ofzimbabwe medical library. in: survival strategies in african university libraries: newtechnologies in the service of information. american association for the advancement ofscience, washington, d.c., p. 96.cdrom for health information in zimbabwe44bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background summary the african indexmedicus (aim) projectthe need for improved access to bibliographic and other information relatedto health issues of african countries has long been felt by researchers,development agents, health administrators, and planners both inside and outsidethe continent. very few african health and biomedical information sources areincluded in the world's leading bibliographic databases. thus, access toinformation on health and medical research in the region is inadequate and,unless researchers publish in nonafrican journals, their work may be overlookedor duplicated. further, there is a wealth of untapped information in books, reportsand studies from international development agencies, nongovernmentalorganizations and local institutions.the african index medicus (aim) was initiated by the association forhealth information and libraries in africa (ahila) to provide improved accessto health information published in or related to africa. at its consultative meetingin january 1993, in accra, ghana, ahila members made decisions regardingcontents, standard datainput format, methods of exchange of database records,and training needs. participants at this meeting included ahila committeemembers, potential pilotsite librarians from ghana, kenya, nigeria, zambia, andzimbabwe, and technical support staff from the world health organization. withsponsorship from the health foundation (new york), who has recentlycompleted training of librarians in cameroon, ethiopia, ghana, kenya, nigeria,tanzania, and uganda.with technical assistance from the world health organization (who) andsupport in the form of training and equipment from the health foundation andother agencies, the project is steadily growing with the motivation and hard workbackground summary the african index medicus (aim) project45bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the african health librarians. indeed, regina shakakata, one of thecontributors to aim, calls the project "the pride of africa because it developedwith the efforts of ahila members." ms. shakakata says that, in zambia, theaim project means that the local literature created by health professionals isindexed and disseminated widely using the printed media intranationally and theinternet gophers internationally. as a spinoff service, her medical librarycollects the full text articles of the indexed items and integrates them into theuniversity of zambia medical library collection.the project is a decentralized one that gives participating institutions greaterbibliographic control of their national health information materials. databases ofbibliographic records of local health materials are created at the national level,using cdsisis software. they are then merged with records relating to health inafrica emanating from other international databases, such as who's wholis,popline, and others. the bibliographic database is only one of the componentsof the project. aim also intends to create files on healthrelated research, healthinformation experts, and health information resources and services. seven issuesof aim have appeared. input centers are in anglophone and lusophone countriesand francophone countries have been encouraged to join in the project.a sample file from the database is available on the internet from the whogopher (gopher.who.ch) in order to give visibility to the project in developedcountries. through increased visibility, who and the aim participants hope togarner support for ahila's efforts by encouraging people and institutions tobecome affiliated members in order to receive the latest print version of aim.ahila's existence depends on its membership. many of the aim participantshave pointed out the difficulty of getting such a project off the ground with littleor no funding. they encourage other african countries to join the aim projectand welcome partnerships with bilateral agencies and others interested in thisunique grassroots, southsouth project.the success of the african index medicus project is due, in large part, to theefforts of dr. deborah avriel, who joined who in 1984 and was chief librarianfrom 1987 until her death in june 1995. dr. avriel's global vision consistentlyemphasized the importance of library and information services for healthprofessionals in the developing world. her enthusiasm and commitment to thecause of health information in the poorer countries motivated and encouraged hercolleagues even at a distance. as a vocal supporter and untiring friend of africa,she gave vigorous backing to the launching of the aim project.background summary the african index medicus (aim) project46bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications for better health projectin zambiaby regina shakakata  regina shakakata is medical librarian at the university ofzambia medical library. she is coordinator for thecommunications for better health project and the nationalcoordinator for healthnet. she has managed the medicallibrary since 1986.background and context of the projectabout zambiazambia has an area of 752,600 square kilometers and a population of 8.09million people (1990 census). it has a national average density of 10.8 per squarekilometer. children under 15 years and women of child bearing age (15œ49)constitute almost 75 percent of the population in any given year.the country has a fairly good health service infrastructure and a reasonablecadre of health professionals, at least by standards of the developing world. thehealth system is heavily biased in favor of curative services rather than inpreventive medicine and, even then, it favors urban population over ruralpopulations.health resources and status are influenced by the economic development ofthe country. the consequences of the economic crisis in zambia include amongothers the following: erosion of the health infrastructure; a decline in the quantity and quality of access to health services; an increase in the cases of malnutrition; an inadequate supply of drugs;communications for better health project in zambia47bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. an unsatisfactory rate of infant mortality; poor staff morale due to unfavorable working conditions; and the neglect of health information provision in national programs.the university of zambia (unza)the link between the university of zambia and the ministry of health(moh) is the school of medicine. when the school of medicine was establishedin 1970, it had a book collection which was housed at the then oppenheimercollege of social services. the years that followed the establishment of themedical library saw a steady growth of health information at the library, with abook stock of 25,000 volumes of books and 781 periodical titles on the currentsubscriptions list in 1985 (stocktaking report, 1985). although the proportion ofthe books and periodicals budget which was given to the medical library wasnot rationally divided, the medical library was able to purchase all therecommended books and to pay for the periodicals on the current subscriptionslist in any given year. (see box 1.)the medical library collection was supplemented by generous donationsfrom friends of the university of zambia, mainly from abroad and through giftsand exchange programs within and outside africa. the only technology that wasavailable at the medical library was an audio/visual collection, which wascomposed of slides, microfiche, microfilm, filmstrips, reeltoreel tapes, andtexts. this collection was not easily accessible because the library did not have,and still does not have, the hardware with which to view the collection. thecollection was and is still only usable with the help of the equipment from theunza medical illustrations unit of the school of medicine.the medical library struggled to survive through all the economic turmoilthat zambia faced from 1985 to 1990. health information provision at themedical library suffered much since 1985. the last regular subscriptions toperiodicals was in 1984. the book budgets were last fulfilled at about the sametime. therebox 1 the unza medical librarythe economic conditions that prevailed in the country due to extensivemining activities at the time of the inception of the medical library made itpossible for the unza to be very well supported financially. the unza in turngave 5 percent of its budget to the unza library. as the local book industry wasnot developed and is still not developed, all required medical books andperiodicals were obtained from either the united kingdom or the united states,with less than 5 percent coming from africa and other parts of the world (annualreports, 1970œ1985).communications for better health project in zambia48bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.was near total dependency on donor support to acquire current health literature.the world health organization (who) played a major role to sustainsubscriptions to critical journal titles in the medical library. initially, the totalnumber of periodicals subscribed to by who was 50, which was reduced to 15 in1987 and which has remained at that level to date. the book collections wereslowly becoming redundant as new acquisitions diminished in number year afteryear. the academic and research programs were dependent upon the ingenuity ofthe medical librarians and the goodwill of their partners outside the country. thehost institution did not have the funding required to support the library services.in this situation of real information poverty, genuine financial support wassought to try and alleviate or reduce the lack of information to less destructivelevels. it was not possible to seek assistance incountry because the entire nationexisted in an information poverty trap. neighboring states were in no bettersituation either, except in the case of the university of zimbabwe medicallibrary, which survived the scourge of the rash economies of developingcountries due to late independence.the carnegie corporation of new york, the international developmentresearch centre of canada (idrc), the commonwealth of learning, who, theford foundation, and others have, at one time or another, sponsored meetingsthat brought together african medical librarians and persons working in the areaof science and technology information systems and communication technologiesto discuss access to information and other professional developments. othergroups also provided expert assistance and moral support. these include theamerican association for the advancement of science (aaas), the healthfoundation of new york (thf), satellife of cambridge, office of internationalaffairs of the u.s. national research council, and the african regional centrefor technology (arct). most important of all resources, however, are theindividuals and groups of people who initiated moves to organize these meetings.zambia, like any other developing country, has no time to walkšit must runto keep up with the developments of industrialized countries in all fields. inhealth information provision in particular, the need to focus on the 1978declaration of almaalta, which stated that primary health care was the key toattaining healthforall and the recognition that healthforall could not be attainedwithout a well coordinated health information system, became critical tozambia's aspirations to improve health information provision.project descriptionthe ahila conferences (see box 2) provided the platform for zambia toreview its performance in the provision of health information. the result was thatwhen the first partners offered to help to solve the problems, the medical librarycommunications for better health project in zambia49bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.took the opportunity and worked to use the resources that were extended to it toincrease health information provision. there have been six major developmentssince 1991 offering solutions aimed at getting zambia out of the informationpoverty trap:box 2 the value of professional associationsin certain instances, limitations to accessing health information fromneighboring countries were caused by uncompromising political policies thatwere put in place by the nation towards the preindependent zimbabwe andsouth africa. what were solvable health information problems becameentangled in factors beyond the librarians' boundaries. this situation couldeasily have lead to professional skills redundancy had it not been checked bythe existence of professional meetings at africa regional level under theassociation for health information and libraries in africa (ahila) and themedical library association (mla). installation of a healthnet ground station at the unza computer centre inapril 1991 by satellife and the subsequent installation of a fidonet emailpoint at the medical library. installation of the cdrom technology by the health foundation in 1992. establishment of a zambia national and africa regional african indexmedicus (aim) data base in 1993. initiation of a quarterly publication called the zambia health informationdigest (zhid). installation of an internet connection at the unza computer centre andthe subsequent installation of an internet point at the medical library injanuary 1995. formation of a national aids resource centre (narc) in february 1995(see box 4).all the initiatives tell one story: that zambia wanted to solve her healthinformation poverty problems which dated back to the 1964 preindependenceera. while i have been involved in some way in all of these initiatives and while isee them as very synergistic, for the purpose of this case study i will focus on thecommunications for better health program, which encompasses the cdromand the zhid  projects.one initiative listed above, the african index medicus, is important to bothme and helga patrikios and it has been described in detail on page 45 of thisvolume. another initiative, that of bringing internet connectivity to zambia, iscovered in detail in neil robinson's case study on page 191 of this volume.communications for better health project in zambia50bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project experience and implementationcdrom databasesin 1992, we made major progress in the delivery of health information byinstalling cdrom technologies. the library received a total of 12 cdromdatabases from thf and aaas, some of which have full text articles, on suchsubjects as aids. one cdrom database, called popline, is a donation from thejohn hopkins university, whereas the infectious diseases database was installedby the cab international. the usage of the databases is illustrated in tables 1 and2.please note that even though the aim and infectious diseases databases arenot cdrom databases, their statistics have been included because they aresearchable databases. the popline database was first received after the firstquarter of 1995, hence the low statistics. the statistics on the infectious diseasesdatabase were lower than expected because the contents of the databaseoverlapped with those of the databases that have existed longer in the library.the database comes with coupons for full text articles donated by the cabinternational. some of the databases were a onetime donation, whereas thosethat continued to be received periodically were medline, popline and aids.we update the aim database regularly.the university of florida health sciences center library continued toprovide photocopies of full text articles. tables 4œ8 provide some statistics of thereprints that have been provided with help from thf since the project started in1992. the statistics are disaggregated by type of request, subject, distribution bytable 1 literature search statistics (1994)databaseyearly totalmedline273british medical journal21lancet15new england journal of medicine21aids30paediatrics17morbidity and mortality weekly report1viral hepatitis2year books1american journal of public health12family physician2aim5total annual statistics400communications for better health project in zambia51bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 2 literature search statistics (januaryœjune 1995)database6 months statisticsmedline714british medical journal88lancet69new england journal of medicine7aids95paediatrics13morbidity and mortality weekly report12viral hepatitis45year books11american journal of public health34family physician26aim67popline36infectious diseases48table 3 categories of reprints for medical library (september 1992œapril 1995)category of reprintsnumber of reprintstopic requests from unza med. lib.66special requests from unza med. lib.159clinical information file, unza med. lib.947table 4 reprints by broad subject categorysubjectnumber of reprintscancer66cholera62diabetes53diarrhea82hepatitis63hiv/aids35hypertension91malaria36maternal & child health/nutrition43measles85meningitis52ophthalmology42sexually transmitted diseases53trauma/wounds39tuberculosis92communications for better health project in zambia52bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 5 distribution of reprintsuser categorynumber of reprintsuniversity of zambia586university teaching hospital703health practitioners762table 6 percentage distribution of reprintsuser categorypercentage distributionuniversity of zambia50%university teaching hospital60%health practitioners65%table 7 health practitioners distribution of reprintsgeographical locationnumber of reprintswithin lusaka410outside lusaka352table 8 method of reprint distribution outside of lusakamethodnumber of reprintsprint176email176communications for better health project in zambia53bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.numbers, distribution by percentage, distribution by geographical location,and method of distribution. the total number of reprints received by the medicallibrary by april 1995 was 1,172. another 234 reprints were received in may1995, bringing the total to 1,406 reprints. in terms of distribution of reprints, therewere times when they were distributed multiple times, thereby pushing thestatistics high.the email provided an avenue to request and transmit literature searchrequests. furthermore, both the email and post were used to distribute reprints tousers outside lusaka. our vision is to provide access to the cdrom databasesto health care workers outside the university by using a leased line. the greatestneed for this service is at the periphery health facilities and yet most, if not all, ofthe databases cannot be networked over a wide area because of the copyrightrules that govern them. serious thought should be given to waiving somecopyright regulations to third world countries if information is to be sharedequally among all health care workers.zambia health information digest (zhid)the zhid is a creation of the medical library and the ministry of health(moh), with a grant from thf and ibm international foundation. it is anoffspring of the cdrom technology component of the communications forbetter health project. the first issue was launched on 1 february 1995 at aceremony held at the medical library. its contents include appropriate andrelevant health information designed for all levels of health care workers(presented in the form of abstracts culled from the ovid medline and aimdatabases), articles on the management of common medical conditions, featurearticles on other medical conditions, and institutional profiles.the digest is produced quarterly and circulated to 1200 health facilities andinstitutions throughout the country. the moh plays an important role in thedistribution of the digest. the digest is also distributed on the internet using thezamnet gopher. it is our intention to distribute it locally using the localfidonet email system as well. the launching issue of the digest attracted positivecomments from the local readers and from as far away places as brazzaville,columbia university, and geneva. the hardware on which the digest is beingproduced came from a cooperative grant between thf and ibm internationalfoundation. the launching attracted dignitaries from zambia, the united states,the republic of south africa and received positive media attention.the university of florida health sciences center library provides full textarticles of the ovid medline abstracts that are included in each issue of thedigest. the provision of the full text articles by the university of florida is acontinuation of the aid which is being given to the unza medical library.the cdrom project did not start in a vacuum; rather, it built upon thehealthnet project that had just been introduced to the unza medical library.part of the technologycommunications for better health project in zambia54bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(a 286 olystar computer) had already been installed by satellife. thf added on acdrom player, providing one work station for cdrom activities. this tookplace in july, 1992. the pressure on the one computer, which was used for bothemail and cdrom activities, mounted as more and more people became awareof the improved health information services being provided by the unzamedical library.efforts to get more equipment from donors met with some hitches as wefailed to provide convincing justification for the acquisition of additionalequipment. this did not surprise us because statistics maintenance was poor atthat time. after a lengthy two years of negotiating with donors, thf working incollaboration with the ibm international foundation, donated two 486 ibm fileservers, each with a 540 megabyte hard disk; one laser printer; one dot matrixprinter and color monitors.with the availability of this equipment, we ventured into publishing thezhid. this project went on smoothly because all that was required to be donewas a few lessons in the use of wordperfect 6.0 and how to use the graphics, bothprograms that we had acquired with the arrival of the file servers. the projectproved a great success and is still running strong. the cooperation from theministry of health, thf, and the ibm international foundation motivated us tosuch an extent that we aimed to do everything as correctly as possible.the results, impact, and benefits of the projectthe reaction of the clientele to both the cdrom and the zhid projectswas amazing. initially the library staff took advantage of the visit of dr. leonardrhine, medical librarian at the university of florida health sciences centerlibrary1, to market the cdrom services. in october 1992, he conducted threehalfday seminars on automated literature searching at the library. theparticipants in the seminars were drawn from among medical students, theuniversity teaching hospital (uth) health care workers, and research andteaching staff from both the school of medicine and the university's great eastcampus. the unza medical library and main library staff were also activeparticipants in the seminars.the publicity leaflets for the seminars were put up before the arrival of dr.rhine. from that time onwards, most of the medical library clientele becameaware of the new technology in the library. they were booked for thirty minuteseach to do literature searches, but they complained that time was too short. thetime allocation provided for a maximum of 15 searches a day. some requests forliterature searches arrived by email from the periphery hospitalsševen thoughthe technology was not adequately marketed outside of lusaka. however, myinvolvement in the evaluation of the healthnet project provided an opportunity tointroduce the cdrom activities in the southern province of zambia.the comments from the readers of the digest both from the printed copy andfrom the internet were full of praise for the initiative taken and for the quality andcommunications for better health project in zambia55bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.usefulness of the publication in promoting health information provision. (seebox 3.) some comments were made against the unza medical library forexcluding some departments of the moh and other health institutions. anotherindicator of the success of the digest was reflected by the number of local andinternational researchers who brought their reports to be published in the digest.the impact of the digest on the medical journal of zambia is that the editors havebeen motivated by the progress made on the digest to such an extent that theyhave regrouped and are working out new strategies for reactivating thepublication.box 3 some comments on the inaugural issue ofzhidthe introduction of the zhid is highly welcome and commended in that itwill not only keep health workers abreast with new developments in health butwill also instill the spirit to do some research. (clinical officer in kasama)i was so impressed with your educative material, especially for healthworkers in remote health centers of the country. please keep it up.(environmental health technician, nakonde)i wish to congratulate you for the introduction of zhid. surely it will go along way in changing some attitudes and methods in the manner clients aretreated and thereby improve the health standards of zambian citizens. (healthworker in samfya)i wish to congratulate you most warmly on the first issue of zhid. it is mostimpressive and i particularly like the variety of information included: theinstitutional profile is an excellent idea, which i hope will be picked up by othercountries. (who librarian,geneva)publicity of the zhid was done in grand style with the deputy minister ofhealth, dr. katele kalumba, officiating at the launching ceremony of the digest.the occasion attracted media coverage that lasted more than one week. thelaunching was followed by a workshop on problem solving for better health(psbh), which took place in ndola, the copperbelt provincial capital. theparticipants in the workshop came from all over the country, thereby giving anopportunity for the digest to be introduced across the country. the method ofdisseminating the digest to all health facilities, using the moh, provided yetanother form of publicity. in short, the digest was selfselling.it has not been easy to measure the impact of the cdrom services in theabsence of carrying out an impact assessment survey addressed from the point ofview of the student performance from the time of the introduction of the service.the other way of measuring impact would be to find out the increase in medicalresearch and publishing activities among health care professionals in the schoolof medicine and the uth. however, the post basic nursing student projects havecommunications for better health project in zambia56bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.greatly improved in quality in the past two years. the 1994 projects were evenapplauded by the research and ethics committee of the school of medicine after aseminar at which they were presented to the school. as the unza medicallibrarian, i give yearly lectures to the post basic nursing students on libraryservices and literature search strategies. recently, i started to do the same for theschool of nursing students at the uth.analysis of lessons learnedthe main constraints we faced in implementing the project were the poorstaffing levels at the professional ranks and the lack of appropriately trainedpersons to manage the projects. i, as coordinator of the project, had to learncomputer skills as a matter of urgency in order to get going with the activities. inaddition, the support staff were requested to work with me to move the projectsforward. this onthejob training worked for our library but i would suggest thatit is better to start with the training before implementing the projects.one lesson learned from this experience is that it pays to include supportstaff in traditionally professional projects. we found that many of the medicallibrary staff had a natural instinct for the technology. for instance, the fastestlearner we had was a library attendant. once this person was trained, she thenwent on to train others, including the library users, to do their own cdromsearches.if i were to start this project again, i would probably not do it muchdifferently. the idea that intrigued me most was the need to be able to build onthe existing projects instead of reinventing the wheel. (see box 4.) the otherthing that i found useful was the use of relatively low budgets in implementingall the projects. in some cases, the projects were parasitic in the sense that theyhad no budgets at all, but relied totally on the existence of the other projects. anexample of this is the aim project which has no budget of its own and isdependent on the cdrom project for sustainability.box 4 national aids resource centre (narc)this latest project is still in its infancy. in spite of the fact that the proposal isstill under consideration by donors, some local hiv/aids literature was pulledfrom the unza medical library and unicef databases and put on the zamnetgopher. the tropical disease research centre (tdrc) library has alsoprepared some abstracts that are still to be installed. the narc coordinatingcenter is the unza medical library and the tdrc library is a satellite center.the participating centers are the hiv/aids information producing institutionswhich are on the email. data collection will be done by email, whereas the aidsdatabase will be resident at the unza medical library. the zamnet gopherwill be updated regularly.communications for better health project in zambia57bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.we were also able to build on the electronic communications initiatives ofthe university's computer center. in 1991, through the computer centre, we gothooked to a fidonet system and installed a healthnet satellite ground station. westarted using electronic communications for the following purposes:library partnership programthe first use we made of email was to request literature searches. to do this,we found a partner in the united states šthe university of florida healthsciences center libraryšto carry out the searches on our behalf. satellifefacilitated the partnership. in june 1991, the first request (for information onmeningitis) was sent to florida late one afternoon. by the following morning, wehad received a long list of citations, complete with abstracts. dean kopanomukelabai of the school of medicine at the university of zambia acknowledgedthis giant breakthrough in the provision of health information by inviting me toaddress a meeting of the eastern and southern african chairmen of paediatricsdepartments, in august 1991.healthnet newssatellife introduced an electronic newsletter that we disseminated to healthcare workers linked to the fidonet system. a snap survey on the impact of thehealthnet news in 1993 showed that it was not widely read by users largelybecause of the busy schedules of the health care workers at whom the publicationwas targeted.literature searcheswe used the healthnet communication system to receive and transmitliterature search requests from the health care workers within the country. thisaspect of satellife's information services was slow to be fully used because thehealth care workers were not fully aware of the information facilities that were atthe library. by 1994, satellife paid for a grateful med account to the nationallibrary of medicine with access to toxinet, cancerlit, aids, and alert.the healthnet communication serviceat the national level, the library was linked to the fidonet system but, atglobal level, communication was limited by healthsat to those collaborators whowere hooked to the healthnet communications system. most of thecommunication was centered on literature searches and to a lesser extent on othernonspecific consultations with health care workers and medical librarians.communications for better health project in zambia58bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in january 1995, we received an internet account from zamnet (see neilrobinson's case study in this volume.) this development further enhanced accessto and provision of our health information services. some of the things we areable to do with the internet are listed below:access to health information databasesthrough the internet, the library can access many unrestricted databases,such as the who library database in geneva. because a subscription is neededto access some databases, the medical library still needs some assistance tosupport these charges.access to the zamnet gopherwe have installed the aids bibliography on the zamnet gopher. apointer to zhid was opened on the zambia's worldwide web homepage innovember 1995, and it is accessible to all internet users around the world. wehave plans to have more health information on the internet as more is generated.access to other databasesthe world of information both related and unrelated to health opened to themedical library users with the installation of our internet node. we have accessto multidisciplinary information through the internet.conclusions and recommendationsgood programs have been brought to the medical library and implementedto the best of our ability. what we have been doing is just the beginning of a longroad to providing health information for problem solving. although healthnetbecame a household name in health information transmission, the project failedbecause it failed to attract funding after the pilot phase. there is no more healthinformation being transmitted by healthsat because the ground station was movedfrom zambia to a more needy site.in another vein, the fidonet system which spread all over the country is, insome cases, being replaced by the interactive internet. progress and technologyare playing a major role in the development of a better health informationsystem. neil robinson's case study describes this progression from fidonet tointernet and explains how zamnet is providing service to all levels of users inzambia.although cdrom usage statistics have shown a steady increase since1992, the use of the databases outside lusaka has not improved much. the mostfrequently used databases continue to attract more and more users, while the lesspopular databases continue to be underused. the popline database is proving tobe very popular.communications for better health project in zambia59bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the aim database is regularly consulted, too. the collection of data outsidethe school of medicine and the uth has proved to be slow because of the timeand personnel factors. the first narc hiv/aids bibliographies were culledfrom the aim database. since the database is accessible on the internet, it has awide circulation, but we have not yet devised a method to monitor usage at thenational level. the only statistics available are collected from users who use thedatabase from the library. on average, there are eleven clients who use the aimdatabase per week, and seven of these requests are made by readers of the digest.although only two issues of the digest have been released, the feedback fromthe readers in form of comments and requests for full text articles has been good.the usage and comments on the usefulness of the digest will be monitoredcontinuously through a feedback mechanism built into the publication.the medical library will continue to need support from partners to developthese programs that improve information provision to health care workers. thedevastating effects of the structural adjustment program on the development ofhealth information and literature can only be alleviated through the sort ofassistance we have received and hopefully will continue to receive until thenational economy strengthens. in view of the above concerns, i suggest thefollowing: we need to network the cdrom for greater accessibility to databases byhealth care workers who cannot easily come to the library. we need to subscribe to key cdrom databases not only for the medicallibrary clientele but for other health care workers who depend on us forinformation services. there are eight other health sciences libraries in zambia that should belinked to zambia's internet service. we need to market cdrom databases and other health informationservices outside lusaka. we need to purchase a portable cdrom workstation that we can use fordemonstrations. in order to confer on issues relating to health information provision,zambian medical librarians should meet at least once a year. we need to continue to improve the coverage and frequency of publicationof the zhid. we need to send medical librarians to all ahila meetings where much ofthe professional sharing takes place. we need to subscribe to more databases on the internet, for example,medline.communications for better health project in zambia60bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the issues that haunt the unza medical library hinge on whether healthinformation and literature provision will develop at the same pace as healthprovisionšwhich is attracting reasonable funding from both the government anddonors. or will these efforts collapse soon after the current crop of library staffdisappear from the institution?i would like to wrap up this story with the following: partnership, intelligentuse of available resources, marketing of health information, and willingness not togive up are very important factors in the provision of health information. betterhealth information leads to better health care. lastly, our philosophy has been toaccess informationšnot to own it. collaboration with others, regardless ofgeographical or political boundaries, and acceptance of the charging informationand communication technologies is the way forward.note1. the florida health sciences library has a twinning arrangement with the university ofzambia medical library.communications for better health project in zambia61bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.communications for better health project in zambia62bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.case studies on desktop publishingthe concept of desktop publishing (dtp) synthesizes the capabilities oftypesetting, graphic design, book production, and platemaking in one integrated,cost effective hardware and software configuration. it allows the computer user tocombine text and image files into a single document and then design a page thatlooks like a page in a book or journal. the operator can select different typefacesand type sizes, can format the text in several columns, or can run text aroundgraphic images. the page can then be sent to a laser printer for inexpensive pageproofs or to a typesetting device for final printing.dtp can help to invigorate africa's struggling publishing houses. editorsand publishers can use dtp to convert manuscripts into final form and to locallyproduce textbooks and journals. scientific communities can use dtp to publishand disseminate the results of their research.as these authors show, the skills required to operate this software at aprofessional level are not always easy to learn. the difficulties of obtaining gooddesign, typography, and layout are not at all diminished by desktop publishingsoftware. further, the authors found they needed more than a basic personalcomputer: they also needed highresolution monitors; scanners for the input oftext and images; a mouse (which makes manipulation of the text and graphicsmuch easier); and laser printers. they also required special software for printingchemical formulae and scientific figures. 63bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.most importantly, they demonstrate that a dtp press needs to operate on thesame professional basis as a regular, commercial publisher. these authorsdescribe how they have instituted the peer review process, good accountingpractices, and high standards for timeliness and quality.the authors have used dtp to publish newsletters and journals, scholarlybooks and proceedings, and such materials as flyers, invitations, andannouncements. thus have they increased publishing opportunities for africanscientists and created new and innovative means of disseminating scientific andtechnological information to a broader audience. 64bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.desktop publishing at the university ofzimbabweby dr. xavier f. carelsexavier f. carelse lectures in the department of physics,university of zimbabwe and is in charge of the faculty ofscience dtp facility. he is a graduate of fort hare, southafrica, and has a special interest in the development ofscience and technology education in africa. he has writtentwo books that address problems relating to the constructionand improvisation of science equipment in secondary schoolsin developing countries.background and context of the projecthistorical backgroundafter a period of settler rule that had lasted about 100 years, zimbabweattained national independence and majority rule in 1980. before that date only40 percent of our children entered primary school and usually stayed at school foronly three years. today 70 percent of our children stay at school for at least 11years and graduate after completing the general certificate of education at theordinary level, the examinations for which are set in the united kingdom.education in zimbabwethe increase in the secondary school population, rising over twelvefold from74,000 in 1979 to 871,000 in 1989, is a particular indication of the heightenedaspirations of our citizens since independence. in that same period the primaryschool enrollment rose from 819,000 to 2,103,000. the rate of transfer of childrenfrom grade 7 to form one is now about 76 percent.over the same period the national expenditure on education has risen from$200 million to $500 million. with the total population of zimbabwe beingestimateddesktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe65bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as 12 million, 30 percent of our population are now pursuing fulltime education.with 25 percent of the national budget being spent on education, zimbabwe isbecoming the country in africa with the most highly educated population and thedemand for education is still growing. education in zimbabwe is therefore amultimillion dollar growth industry. this captive market has served to support avariety of services which have benefited from this growth. the largest growth hasbeen in the manufacture of school uniforms and in book sales.book production in zimbabweanother area of information transfer lies, of course, in the supply andavailability of information in the printed form. this includes not only textbooks,but also the form of information transfer that deals with the updating of ourimmediately available information. this is achieved through the publication ofnewspapers, journals, magazines, from which the general public usually benefits.of equal importance in the academic world is the publication of bulletins andnewsletters targeting a specialist group and that disseminate information that has adirect impact on our immediate professional knowledge.zimbabwe has a good publishing infrastructure and is able to produce goodquality books at a very low cost. with the formation of the southern africandevelopment conference (sadc), zimbabwe was chosen to be the publishingcenter of the group and has remained relatively unchallenged in this respect. anappreciable number of books are being written and published for schools and areusually directed at the local primary and lower secondary school syllabi andcurricula, that is, up to the 11yearold age group.a shortage of locally produced books continues to exist at the uppersecondary level with a pupil population of only about 20,000. the syllabi, at thislevel, are drawn up by the cambridge examinations board, for which a verygreat number and variety of books are available overseas. but, because ofrecurring devaluation of the zimbabwe currency, these are becoming increasinglyexpensive. in the last five years, the cost of imported textbooks have increased by afactor of 5, while the cost of locally produced books have risen by a factor of 2.5.there is, therefore, a good case for reducing our dependence on imported textbooks.the situation at university and polytechnic level is even more acute.virtually all undergraduate textbooks are imported and the cost of all such bookshas increased seven or eight times in the same period. although the university ofzimbabwe press (uzp) has been in existence for decades, very few textbooks areproduced in zimbabwe. the publications they produce are usually extendedreports of research findings in the humanities and are adopted as textbooks forspecialized courses. in the science disciplines, the department of biochemistryhas produced some books that were published by the uzp.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe66bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology in zimbabwein 1990, the posts and telecommunications corporation (ptc) launchedzimnet, which is based on the x.25 package switching protocol. many financialconcerns, such as banks (including the post office savings bank), buildingsocieties and insurance companies, are using it on a nationwide basis. in 1991,the university of zimbabwe acquired its first link with the internet via theuninet gateway in grahamstown, south africa and, in 1992, a second linkunder the hostname of mango, microcomputer access for nongovernmentorganizations, was established via esanet, the eastern and southern africannetwork. it is hoped that, before the end of 1995, the university would haveacquired our own gateway to the internet. in fact, such a gateway already exists inthe commercial sector but is too expensive for most academic users.project descriptionorigin and historythe information systems project at the university of zimbabwe has twophases. in the first phase, the faculty of science purchased desktop publishingequipment because we believed it would be a sound investment that, in the longrun, would show benefits in two important areas: the local production of textbooks and the establishment of a facility for publicizing, to the public, theprograms presented in the faculty of science. the second phase, for which fundsare now being sought, concerns the creation of a campus computer network.in 1990, professor c.j. chetsanga, then the dean of science, and nowdirector of the scientific and industrial research and development center,obtained a carnegie corporation grant with which he purchased for the facultythe basics of a powerful desktop publishing system. the purpose of this facility isto encourage the publication of textbooks by the academic staff. the move wasseen as an attempt to address some of the problems outlined above.dr. n. dune, chairman of the department of computer science, whohappened to be on sabbatical leave in the united states at that time, was asked tomake a suggestion for a suitable basic system for our dtp facility. he submitted alist of macintoshbased equipment. this system was deemed to be too expensiveand mr. r. braithwaite, the proprietor of software engineering, portland,oregon, who had spent some time as a guest lecturer in the university'sdepartment of computer science, was invited to recommend an alternativesystem. he presented us with an ibm system based on the intel 80386microprocessor. this provided us with dtp equipment at a remarkably low costand this allowed us to acquire some accessories such as a tape streamer, the fullpage scanner, a surge protector, mathematics and graphics software, and otherfacilities without exceeding our budget. (see box 1.)desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe67bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 ibm versus macintoshin addition to the advantage of having a lower cost, the ibmsystem waspreferred because, in 1989, a decision had been made at the university tostandardize all purchases of computer equipment. it was decided that theuniversity's computer resource committee should only authorize the purchaseof ibmcompatible computers, including clones, and also the bbc micro,because of the impact the latter was making on the educational market at thattime. the bbc micro was a 6502based computer commissioned by the britishbroadcasting corporation for use in a computer education series for television.it had a number of inputoutput ports which made it unique as an educationaltool. this decision was taken to avoid the proliferation of too great a variety ofcomputers at u.z. as great difficulty was being experienced in servicing the widerange of computers that were appearing. thus, at the time that the dtp systemwas being considered, the macintosh was not considered to be a possibleoption. as almost all purchases of new computers already complied with thisdecision, the mac would not have been very useful to the faculty.general and particular objectivesthe main purpose of the new equipment was to assist the academic staff toproduce textbooks or, alternatively, to compile their lecture notes in a form whichcould serve as a textbook. over the last five years, a number of lecturers haveused this facility for either one or the other purpose. the present dean ofscience, a mathematician, was one of the first to produce a textbook using thefaculty of science dtp facility.a second objective was to produce a newsletter to publicize some of theactivities of the faculty such as the research interests of the staff, new degreeprograms that were being offered, the announcement of conferences, workshopsand seminars that were of general or specific interest, and many others. this wasthe first aspect of dtp that was implemented and that eventually served topopularize the service that the facility offered.the dtp equipment has been in use since january 1992, when a newsletter,entitled integrator, was launched, under an editorial board appointed by theboard of the faculty of science. i was invited to be member of this board becauseof my previous experience in computerized typesetting and publishing. a dtpoperator was also appointed and designated for training.the chief success of the program has been in the production of textbooks.although little was accomplished in the first yearšmainly because of lack offamiliarity with the use of the facilitiesšan article that appeared in integrator,volume 1, no. 2, alerted the faculty to its potential. since then, a number ofpublications have been produced using the equipment. though these werecompilations of lecture notes, a few are already in the process of being rewritteninto textbooks.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe68bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.products, technologies, and services deliveredthe hardwarethe system was specified and delivered in 1991 and reflects, in a modestway, the status of personal computers at that time. the heart of the system is a 30mhz 80386based computer, with 8 megabytes of ram, installed in a towercase. it has four disk drives, as follows: drive a is a 1.2 megabyte 5inch floppy drive; drive b is a 360 kilobyte 5inch floppy drive; drive c is a 1.4 megabyte 3inch floppy drive; and drive d is an 80 megabyte hard drive.we felt that two floppy drives, one high density and one double density,were needed to allow for the fact that many university departments do not havecomputers with highdensity drives and an occasional incompatibility occurred.with the present trend towards the exclusive use of high density media, this is nolonger a problem. data security is supported with a tape unit for backingup thecontents of the hard disk. total backup is not usually necessary as it is seldomthat user files will be stored on the hard disk. application files can normally bereloaded if necessary.the user inputoutput devices include a visual display unit (vdu) that is a14inch (35cm) video graphics array (vga) color monitor with the highresolution essential for desktop publishing. a dexxa serial mouse and anenhanced keyboard were also included.the semicommercial, heavyduty hewlettpackard laserjet series iiiprinter prints at the rate of eight pages per minute. it is equipped with hewlettpackard's resolution enhancement feature which gives high quality, professionallyacceptable typesetquality printing of text and graphics. it has 5 megabyte ofinstalled memory, builtin postscript features but, more importantly, it also hasbuiltin a wide range of mathematical and greek symbols used by manyscientists, especially physicists, mathematicians and engineers.the scanning of documents and photographs is undertaken with the chinonmodel n207 ds3000 overhead scanner that is capable of digitizing an a4 sizepage of text and graphics by using a chargecoupled device (ccd) image sensorwith a cameratype flat surface scanning method. it is used for scanning thephotographs and line graphics used in the newsletter.the softwarethe original operating system was msdos, version 4, but this has nowbeen upgraded to version 6. the main environment is microsoft's windows 3.1,which is a very popular gui (graphics user interface) and is rapidly becoming theindustry standard environmental software for ibmcompatible computers.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe69bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microsoft's word for windows, originally version 1.1, and now upgraded toversion 2, was probably the most powerful word processor for the personalcomputer and dwarfed that of almost all dedicated wordprocessing machines. itscapabilities overlapped considerably with some of the sophisticated dtpprograms and inclined us to the view that it would be more than sufficient for thepurpose of producing our newsletter. this program was able to handle tables,graphics and mathematical formulae. it was a simple matter to insert these intothe document file and to position them relative to the text.a fonts software package, adobe type manager, increases the range offonts and symbols available under windows 3. to broaden the scope ofmathematical typesetting, we have several auxiliary programs such as mathedit(described below) and hewlettpackard's type director to assist the esotericuser.the scanner is operated through a graphics program called paintbrush. theoperation is done at various resolutionsš300, 200, 150 or 75 dots per inchšandproduces files with the .pcx extension. a single resolution on the printer isadopted for printing the graphic. for example, 300 dots per inch (dpi) scannedfiles will print out a picture that is the exact size of the original while,correspondingly, a 200 dpi scan would print out with twothirds of the lineardimensions. we are using the latter in the newsletter. in almost all cases we havefound that this resolution is suitable for our purposes and so avoids the need forshrinking the picture before printing.graphics files consume large amounts of storage space. typically, a 200 mmby 150 mm photograph will, at 200 dpi resolution, produce a .pcx (a graphicsfile format) file of 400 kilobytes. because of this large size, these files arenormally stored on the hard disk only, although backups of the .pcx files arekept on 1.2 megabyte floppy disks for our archives. word for windows requiresgraphics in the tagged image file format (tiff). the .pcx files produced bypaintbrush therefore have to be converted to .tif files before they can be loadedinto the newsletter. the above .pcx file would be converted to a .tif file of 800kilobytes. the latter are not normally stored on floppy disks. they are invokedwhen an image of the picture is to be displayed on the screen or when thedocument is to be printed with the picture in place.when a tiff graphic is inserted into a word for windows file, onlyreferences to the graphic are actually inserted. the word file, containingreferences, such as the dimensions, clipping and scaling information of a 600kilobyte tiff file may therefore only occupy 20 kilobyte when saved on disk.the disk holding the tiff file itself must be inserted in the drive if it is necessaryto inspect the graphic onscreen or to print a document containing the references.the desktop publishing equipment includes a variety of quite sophisticatedsoftware accessories specifically directed to the needs of the academic staff of thefaculty of science. a brief description of the facilities is enough to engage theinterest and respect of a serious scientific author.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe70bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pagemakerthis package was rated by byte, the computer magazine, to be the best ofthe crop of dtp programs that appeared in 1991. it is considerably morepowerful as a dtp tool than wordforwindows, which is, first and foremost, aword processor. pagemaker is a tool for preparing a newspaper and has facilitiesfar beyond what we require for a newsletter.matheditas a formulaediting utility this program is heavensent for mathematicians.it incorporates a selection of 220 mathematical symbols and is essential for ourdtp support. wordforwindows handles about 120 mathematical and greeksymbols, which may be enough for some but hopelessly inadequate for others.like word, it displays wysiwyg (what you see is what you get). this is amajor advance over other typesetting programs such as pctex. it producestiff files that can be imported into word.derive, version 2described as a mathematical assistant, derive is used for simplifying,solving, and plotting mathematical expressions. it is capable of handlingderivatives, integrals, vectors, and matrices, as well as algebraic tasks such asfactorization and expansion of expressions.fractoolthe inexpensive but powerful program generates splendid fractals that canbe used for enhancing presentations.cssthis is a timeseries program module that contains a wide range ofdescriptive, modeling, and forecasting methods for both time and frequencydomain models. besides incorporating transformations, modeling, and plottingprogram, it also includes arima, the autoregressive moving average modelfor estimating seasonal and nonseasonal parameters for the autoregressive andmoving average process and for forecasting.project experience and implementationthrough integrator, the dtp has had an impact that was not originallyenvisaged. although it is only produced at sixmonthly intervals, each issuecontains important information on the working and development of the faculty ofscience.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe71bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in most developing countries, the faculty is often underrated as being only ameans of producing science teachers. the articles on careers in science and on theroles of scientists as consultants to industry, to parastatals and to the governmentare used to publicize the faculty and have served to create a new image that isnot often seen in other developing countries.the newsletterthe first editorial committee was appointed by the dean, professorchetsanga. the editorial committee chose the title integrator for the newsletter.they felt that it had a scientific nuance and, at the same time, reflected the spiritof unity within the faculty. the formulation of the contents of the integrator makes an interesting story:without specifying the type of articles required, the editorial committeeinvited the departments to submit one article, relevant to each, that they wouldlike to see published in the first edition of the faculty newsletter. a somewhatdisjointed collection of articles was presented to the committee. there was anarticle on each of the following: the research interests of the chemists; a new research venture by the geologists; a new m.sc. program by the biochemists; a report on a recent colloquium from the biologists; an essay on careers for physicists; and a report on the launching of the new department of statistics.after reading the articles, i realized that the departments had unknowinglylaid down the structure of the newsletter. a newsletter is a continuing exercisewith regular features as well as special oneoff features. the collection of articlesthat we had received reflected the needs that the departments wished to expressand so could be used to reflect the needs of the faculty. it was thereforeappropriate that we should use this as a starting point from which to decide thenature of the articles that we would request in each regular or special feature.the editorial board agreed that the following regular features would berequested from each department in sequence: meet the –. a description of the research interests of individuals in achosen department and of the consultancy services they could offer toindustry or to the parastatals. master of science in –. a description of a postgraduate program offered bythe featured department. careers in –. an article directed at high school pupils and describing thecareer opportunities existing in the featured department.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe72bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. announcements. an announcement of conferences, workshops andseminars due to be held in the faculty of science. student science societies. reports from the students on the sciencesocieties that they operate.special features that any individual, not necessarily from within the faculty,could produce include: new research ventures in the faculty; new resources and developments in the faculty; reports on conferences held in the faculty; reports on international conferences that have a bearing on the faculty andthe university; and reports of donor agencies and sources of funds from which the facultycould benefit.the dtp softwarea general purpose wysiwyg word processor operating in a gui (graphicuser interface) is, in our opinion, highly recommended for a small dtp facility. inaddition to wordforwindows, most typists in zimbabwe are familiar withwordperfect 5.0 or 5.1. such word processing programs may not be very usefulfor the production of newspapers or other materials with more than four columns,but for the purpose of producing textbooks and newsletters, it cannot be excelledby any of the more advanced dtp programs such as pagemaker or ventura.efforts to master pagemaker, which we had also acquired, were abandoned veryearly in this program. it was found that a great deal of time was required for thetraining of the operator and other users.the decision to use wordforwindows version 1.1 almost exclusively forour dtp activity was found to be an excellent choice because of the followingreasons:1. the ease of use once the general windows environment wasunderstood.2. the power and versatility of this program.3. the ability to handle and manipulate the graphics images producedby the scanner, without any additional software.we acquired it in 1993 and it has been the only program that we had usedfor the production of the integrator. other workers preferred wordperfectversion 5.1, which was also installed, and since then wordperfect version 6 hasappeared and seems to have become a strong rival to wordforwindows.nevertheless, it is my opinion that the even newer wordforwindows version 6would prove to an excellent successor to version 2 and i cannot envisage anyforeseeable intention of movingdesktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe73bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.away from this word processor. in truth, there is much evidence that use ofwordforwindows is increasing worldwide while the use of wordperfect mayhave reached a plateau.the layout of the newsletterafter a series of experimental sessions during the training of the dtpoperator, the present layout was chosen as being the most presentable whilekeeping the cost of production down to a minimum. the newsletter consists of 16a4 pages and is printed on a3 paper. the presentation is in three columns,except for the last page which carries the table of contents. for ease of reading8point helvetica print is used but all headlines are in times font of varioussizes. the use of microsoft word art, which comes packaged with wordforwindows version 2 has been used extensively in volume 3 to enhance thepresentation.the scannerin spite of its low cost, this scanner produces quite adequate copies and hasserved very well for the production of the first volumes of integrator. it has alsobeen used by lecturers and research students to reproduce graphs and diagramsfor insertion into their papers. it is still serving us well but, since its purchase,many new scanners have appeared at a reasonable price and with more facilities.we believe that the time has come to upgrade the scanner. for volume 3,published in 1994, we used an apple flatbed scanner belonging to the universitypublications office. this scanner allowed very smooth sizing of the graphicswithout a change in resolution.the reprographic facilitythe hewlett packard laserjet iii has proved to be an excellent choice for aprinter of the master copies. the fact that the printer was made easily accessibleto all users may have been a mistake because it has led to considerable abuse andoveruse and the expense of excessive replacement of toner cartridges. manywould have preferred that its use was strictly monitored and a nominal chargelevied for use, but in retrospect there is evidence that the ''free use" policy played aprincipal role in the instant acceptance of the dtp facility.during the first year of production of integrator, the masters were submittedto the university of zimbabwe reprographic unit. after that initial period, it wasfelt that the production could be streamlined if we had our own reprographicfacility. in 1992 we successfully applied to carnegie corporation of new yorkfor funds for a heavy duty photocopier that could be used for the relatively lowbulk production of the integrator. a konica photocopier was purchased and thishas made the faculty completely independent of the university's reprographicunit and so has reduced the cost of production. volume 2, no 1, january 1993,anddesktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe74bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.subsequent editions of integrator, were produced in this way.box 2 benefits of the integratorthe publicity that we have received through integrator and through them.sc. in applied physics program has opened the door to a number ofconsultancy projects for the lecturers and has served to enhance the reputationof the department in the industrial sector.results, impact, and benefits of the projectonce the dtp facility was in place, the early launching of the integrator was very well conceived. the very first issue contained an article on the dtpproject and the equipment that was available for prospective authors. without theintegrator, it is unlikely that dtp would have been accepted so soon by thefaculty.there can be no doubt that the original purpose of the dtp facility, namely,the production of compiled lecture notes and textbooks, has been realized.compilations of lecture notes have been produced in the departments of physics,chemistry, biochemistry and mathematics. this reflects a general trend in theuniversity and has been confirmed by the director of the university ofzimbabwe press, where a plan to produce more textbooks is already under way,with three books having been approved for publication in july 1995 alone.the dtp facility may be used in the production of masters that can besubmitted to the university reprographic unit for printing. the advantage of thisis gained through the ability of the reprographic unit to use cheaper paper fortheir printing process and also being able to produce large quantities withoutimposing a strain on their equipment. they have a copy printer and other standardprinting equipment. as they are able to produce color layouts, they may beinvited to produce our front and rear pages in color at a later stage in ourdevelopment.benefitsthe increase in publicity that was generated by the integrator for the facultyof science cannot be overstated. (see box 2.) it had an effect among bothstudents and staff. a few examples relating to the department of physics willsuffice to illustrate this point.in the period 1986 to 1989, the intake into the department of physicsdropped progressively from 132 in 1986 to 77 in 1989. this was partly due to thelaunching of the b. tech. program that was heavily scienceoriented and, amongothers, offered two new areas into which schoolleavers with physics gradescould be absorbed, namely, applied physics and electrical technology. thearticle on careers in physics that appeared in the first issue of integrator created anew interest in mainstream physics and our intake has reached and stayed atabout 100 students since then.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe75bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the publication of the questionnaire on the proposed master of science inapplied physics program created a new interest in physics. the response fromindustry and from the graduates was gratifying. in our first year (1993), wereceived over 30 applicants but were only able to accept 8. although we hadintended to accept candidates only in alternate years, we decided to admit 8 newstudents again in 1994. this masters program required candidates to spend 6months attached to an industrial firm in order to become acquainted withindustrial practice in zimbabwe. after this period, the students are required towork on a research project. we invite the firm to suggest a suitable project thatcan be completed with the firm and that will allow the student to continueworking with them. in every case where the firm was approached, a project wasfound.many of the courses that were offered in this program were newly conceivedand it was difficult to find suitable textbooks. one of the first products wasderived from lecture notes on atmospheric physics. the present dean ofscience, a mathematician, was one of the first to produce a textbook using thefaculty of science dtp facility. textbooks on microprocessor applications anda laboratory manual are being planned.analysis of lessons learnedtraining of dtp operatorin 1990, a typist with computer experience was appointed specifically fortraining as a dtp operator. at that time such typists were a rare commodity inzimbabwe and the dtp operator acquired a rather special status. within a yearshe was promoted to the level of a senior secretary and was attached to the dean'soffice. although ostensibly she was still the dtp operator for the integrator, shefound it increasingly difficult to fulfill all the tasks required of her.meanwhile, with her limited assistance, i found myself almost solelyresponsible for the publication of the newsletter. with hindsight, it is clear to seenow that there should have been more than just one person trained for operatingthe typesetting facility and to produce the integrator. that i did not do so was dueto the fact that i had been appointed chairman of the department of physics in1989 and had very little opportunity to run such a training program. it was, infact, easier for me to browbeat other chairpersons into producing the soft copyand, with the assistance of the dtp operator and my own departmental typists, todevote one week of intensive work to the production of the newsletter. what islearned from this experience is that the publisher of the newsletter must besomeone with clout and who has clerical help beyond what was officiallydesignated to the editorial board. i was able to extract information andcooperation from important agencies such as the information office, thereprographic unit, the publications office and the dean's office that may havebeen more difficult for others to obtain.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe76bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computers became more plentiful soon after 1993 when esap, theeconomic structural adjustment program, allowed the relatively free importationof such seemingly luxury items. more typists are now familiar with the use ofcomputers and this has allowed more departments to benefit from the facility.the typists can produce the manuscripts to disks and these can be quickly typesetand included in the newsletter. a training program for at least one typist perdepartment would now be indicated. in this way the articles could have beennear"cameraready" without much intervention by the dtp operator. thedepartments themselves would have benefited through the typists' improvedability to prepare highly attractive documents and manuscripts and also to assistthe research programs in the preparation of cameraready copy for professionaljournals.training of academic usersthe dtp facility proved to be quite popular with the academics who wishedto produce books or compile lecture notes, and with research students who werepreparing their theses or dissertations. the enhanced presentation of graphicalmaterial was particularly favored. within this framework, these users were able toreceive assistance from myself or from the dtp operator. but, on the whole, theytended to acquire the rudiments of typesetting without any difficulty. (seebox 3.)the hardwarewhen the search for a suitable system for dtp was first launched, therewere two choices: use an ibmcompatible system or adopt the more userfriendlymacintosh systems. the most important consideration is cost. we can concedethat the macintosh is seductively userfriendly but this comes at a cost that is notonly financial but also found in its restrictivenessšin most cases only softwarespecific to the mac may be used.although all mac machines today are capable of running dostypeapplications, this additional capability costs extra money. it is significant thatmac users wish to use dos applications but ibm users do not wish to use macapplications on their machines. we were able to purchase an ibm clone for lessthan half thebox 3 need for a training programthe consequence of the deficiency of trained persons was vividly illustratedthis year when a new publication coordinator was appointed while i was onsabbatical leave. as he did not specify that copy had to be received on disk inthe recommended formats, he received hard copy and had to retype everythinghimself. this seriously hindered the continuity of publication of the integrator.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe77bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.price of an equivalent macintosh. the savings enabled us to purchase accessoriessuch as the scanner, additional supplies of toner cartridges, and a wide selectionof software for scientific typesetting which we would not otherwise have beenable to afford. recently the price of macintosh computers has come down butaccessories are still expensive because of the lack of cheaper clone products. forusers in poor countries low cost must take precedence over userfriendliness.for us, the wisdom of purchasing a macintosh was questionable and we arepleased with the decision to use an ibmcompatible computer. indeed, therewere, at that time, dozens of ibm clones in use on the campus and only onemacintosh. our purchase of the latter would have disadvantaged almost everyoneon the campus and thus would have seriously delayed the acceptance, andundermined the usefulness, of the dtp facility.when it was purchased it was, because of its specifications, the mostpowerful computer in the faculty at that time and many wished to use it. todaythere is a proliferation of much more powerful computers in all departments and,sadly, the 80836 computer has become nearly obsolete. if the system waspurchased today, a 32bit computer with an intel 486i or a pentiummicroprocessor would be at top of the shopping list. there are many advantagesof having such powerful computers, the most important of which is theremarkable versatility of graphics and other applications software that isassociated with them. software supported by windows 3.1 or windows 95 nowoffers a degree of sophistication that demands such high quality graphics and it iswell worth the investment.the purchase of a cdrom drive is also recommended because of thelowcost of the software available on it and of the high capacity and reliability ofthis storage medium. the average cdrom holds 600 megabytes of data, theequivalent of over 400 high density 3.5inch disks. quite impressive clipart andfonts are now available on cdrom and this will greatly enhance the appearanceof documents and books.the need for a networkthe daytoday use of the dtp facility is restricted by the fact that is onlyaccessible to one person at a time. if we want it to be more widely used, we mustincorporate networking, which today is the single most important hardwarerelated advantage in computer usage. this will give all dtp users access to allthe desirable components of the network without the need to leave the office.this includes access to the laser printer, the clipart, the word processor, graphicpackages and the typesetting packages.the wouldbe author could stay in the office, surrounded by personal textsand references and, if connection to the internet with world wide web isavailable, to the wealth of information that is now almost freely accessible on thismedium. the dtp facility then becomes one of the other services available onthe network and using it becomes less dependent on special trips to the faculty ofscience dtp room where you may find that someone has already beaten you tothe computer.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe78bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the laser printerone of the principal attractions of the dtp facility was the fact that thelaser printer was used at no charge. there are arguments for and against such freeuse of an expensive piece of equipment but a levy on the use of the laser printerwould have discouraged the use of the dtp equipment as a whole. fortunately,sufficient funds were available to purchase a considerable stock of cartridges.some savings were made by the purchase of recycled cartridges. because of thenow heavy use of the printer, it may now be advisable to impose a levy to offsetthe running costs.the administration of the facility then becomes a task which has to be addedto the other tasks of those guarding it. it was decided in 1992 that the runningcosts of the facility should be shared by the departments in the faculty and thatthe dean, before allocating funds to the "consumable" account of thedepartments, would withhold a levy for the use of the facility. this was readilyagreed to by the departments. the use of the facility thus continued to be "free"to individual users.upgrading the printer facility has mainly taken the form of ensuring thatsoftware drivers for the implementation of a laser printer were available for allapplications. because of the relative isolation of zimbabwe at that time, this wasnot easy for some of the relatively more esoteric applications, but gradually thegoal was achieved. nevertheless after four years of heavy use, it is now time toconsider replacing the printer. at the time of purchase, the hewlett packardlaserjet iii was at the top end of the dtp accessory market. since then therehave been many improvements in the specifications of printers from which wenow have to choose.although laser printers are more reliable and still produce the best qualityoutput, we now have inkjet printers which, simply by changing the inkcartridges, produce hard copy in color. as they generally cost about half the priceof laser printers, it may be advantageous to keep an inkjet printer as a standbyfor special purposes such as the production of covers and brochures which arebest done in color. textbooks are often produced in two colorsšblack and asecond softer color, usually dark orange or dark blue. this improves thereadability of the text and has found wide acceptance in school and freshmantexts. this improvement is recommended for developing countries where themedium of instruction is not necessarily the language of the home and readabilityis important.flat bed scanneralthough the chinon ds3000 overhead scanner was relativelyunsophisticated at the time of purchase, it was, to the best of my knowledge, theonly fullpage scanner available on the campus. the computer sciencedepartment had a video framegrabber which was jealously guarded andunavailable to staff from other departments. this relatively inexpensive scannerwas useful for the insertion of photographs and handdrawn graphics into thedocuments and produced bitmappeddesktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe79bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.files in a variety of formats. after the printer, it was the second most importantaccessory to the dtp system and, though still serving well, it is starting to showits age and limitations against the newer products which are now available ataffordable prices.today we would have purchased a flatbed fullpage scanner with an abilityto shrink and expand the graphics without undermining the resolution. perhaps,for economy, we would still select a black and white scanner, but for enhancedpresentation, a color scanner would be recommended. it would serve well for theproduction of book covers, pamphlets, brochures, and posters. many modernscanners are packaged with ocr (optical character recognition) software withvarious degrees of reliability and usefulness. the scanned image is converted bythe software to a binary file which can be imported into a text editor or a wordprocessor. this is very convenient for editing preprinted matter.upgrading the softwarealthough pagemaker was included in the original purchase and attemptswere made to bring it into use, it soon became clear that it was too powerful anddemanding for our purposes. initially we did feel the need to use it but by 1992,wordprocessors such as wordforwindows and wordperfect had alreadyprovided the power that made them more than adequate for the production ofnewsletters and text books. since the establishment of the facility, we have usedonly wordforwindows as the medium of typesetting. this has proved to bequite sufficient for our needs.most of the departments in the faculty of science have adopted the use ofthis wordprocessor, although many are still using wordperfect version 5.1 orchiwriter version 4.1 because of their ability to run directly under msdos.the microsoft drawing program, paintbrush, supplied with the original setup isalso popular and many use lotus123 for the production of graphs. there seemsto be a sizable lag in the use of more sophisticated programs, such as excel in itsmany versions.there is a need to have a continuous review of the software used for dtp.the original wordforwindows has been upgraded from version 1.1 to version2, and includes word art, a package used to enhance the presentation of theintegrator. the effect of using this package may be seen by comparing the frontpage of integrator vol. 1, no. 1, january 1992, with the front page ofintegrator vol. 3, no. 2, july 1994. we are considering an upgrade to version 6,which has even more advanced features which are useful for dtp. wordperfectversion 6 is now also run in the windows environment. it allows: easy switching to full screen viewing of page. this is useful when wishingto see the full effect of page presentation.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe80bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. autoformatting. this allows a set of styles associated with a template to beassigned instantly to a document. unformatted draft copy can be convertedto a new cameraready from with a single command, instead of applyingeach style paragraph by paragraph. the creation of unequally sized columns. this provide more flexibility inlayout design and more easily allows the incorporation of different sizes ofgraphics.reprographics by copy printerthe integrated system, consisting of the 30 mhz 386 with an 80 megabytehard drive, chinon scanner, hp laser printer, and konica photocopier, workedvery well till this year, 1995. the extent to which the facility is being used hasincreased to a level that was not foreseen five years ago when it was firstconceived. the shortcomings of the system are now beginning to show. thephotocopier is emerging as the weak link in the chain mainly because of theheavy usage to which it is being put, especially with regards to the lecturenotesand other handouts. it is also being used as a standby when other photocopiersin the faculty have broken down.under normal circumstances, a photocopier would be expected to serve forfive years and, as the konica was one of the most reliable and resilient of themachines we had identified, we thought that this would be the case even withheavy use. this has not been true and, in the last six months, it has begun to showthe strain. the officer in charge of the faculty of science reprographic room,now feels that the time has come to move one step higher and to replace thephotocopier with a copy printer. he has identified a suitable machine: therisograph digital printer gr 3750. the machine is available in zimbabwethrough an outlet in south africa. we believe that the addition of this copyprinter to the system would greatly enhance its effectiveness.some time ago it was discovered that photocopiers need more frequentservicing when a certain type of cheap paper is used. this paper is characterizedby the high degree of fluff (loose fibers) generated by the paper. these fibers clogup the gears and other moving parts of the printer. it therefore became imperativethat we use only high quality bond paper for the photocopier and printer. the factthat a copy printer can use cheaper paper for publication is a further incentive forpurchasing one.the photographic librarya good newsletter must be well illustrated, preferably with a number ofphotographs of the faculty staff, both academic and nonacademic. the service ofthe reprographic services photographer was used initially but was found to beexpensive and it was difficult for him to coordinate with the movements of thesubjectsdesktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe81bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he was to photograph. as publisher i knew quite well the type of photographsthat i required for each article. so after the first year of publication, i decided totake my own photographs. during the short period that we have been inexistence, we have acquired a sizable photographic library and so it is generallyeasy to find suitable pictures for use in the newsletter. the scanned images of thephotographs are kept on disk and may be used instantly when required.conclusion and recommendationsconclusions and plans for future developmentthere is no doubt that the dtp facility is fulfilling a need in the faculty ofscience. its use has only been restricted by the fact that we do not have a networkwith multiuser capability. it has served the purpose for which it was purchased,namely, the production of compiled lecture notes and textbooks. a newsletter,integrator, is published at six monthly intervals. our plans for futuredevelopments include: the placing of the dtp facility at the disposal of all staff in a multiuserenvironment such as a network. we have already made much headway onthe campus in this direction so we hope that this goal will be speedilyachieved. the purchase of the following: š a more powerful computer to host the dtp facility; š a high resolution flatbed scanner possibly with the capability of scanningin color; š an ink jet color printer; and š a copy printer with the capability of sorting and collating large volumes.recommendationsthe following recommendations are made in relation to the acquisition of anew facility.the newsletterfor any group who wishes to popularize its dtp facility, a wellproducednewsletter is a mandatory starting point. the readers are immediately made awareof the facilities and possibilities available to the user. you should insist that allarticles for inclusion in the newsletter be submitted on disk with as little previousformatting as is consistent with clarity and readability.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe82bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trainingmany academics are able to master even the most complicated of thecomputer processes quite quickly. this is less easy for clerical staff who certainlyneed to attend a training program with at least 8 hours of handson practice. it isrecommended that a workshop be run annually during the long (summer) vacationto train as many typists as possible in the use of the wordprocessor fortypesetting.personnel for the newsletterthe publications work force should consist of one publisher and an assistantšboth possessing sound computer experience. with practice, many are able tomaster the art of laying out a newsletter if the intricacies of manipulating the textare understood. they should not have to type any articles except their own. theyshould be assisted by a good secretary who is thoroughly trained in the use of thewordprocessor for typesetting applications. the secretary should be able toproduce accurate drafts that have been subjected to thorough spelling checks.planned and regular upgrading of hardware and softwarethere should be built into the proposal for a dtp facility, plans forregularly upgrading the hardware and software. funds should be sought for thereplacement of outdated equipment and application programs well in advance oftheir becoming obsolete. this includes the replacement and upgrading of theword processor, graphics and clipart, and the supplementation of the availablefonts.printer and collatorthe laser printer and the copy printer, if available, would incur almost all ofthe running costs of the facility. it has been found that the free use of the laserprinter could lead to abuse but, in terms of the purpose for which the facility wasacquired, it is probably the best policy. the recurrent cost should be borne by thefaculty of science through levies imposed by the dean. this levy becomes anincentive for the departments to make full use of the facility. attempts to exactlevies direct from individual users will be counterproductive and complicated toadminister and should be discouraged. the benefits to the students and to thefaculty as a whole should always be considered foremost.color presentationsthe use of color may be considered to be a luxuryšwhich it probably isšbut it has its advantages in terms of the quality of the work that would beproduced. if funds can be found, the acquisition of a color scanner and a colorprinter is recommended.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe83bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networkingmany universities in developing countries are working towards theestablishment of a campus computer network. if this is available, the dtpfacility should be made accessible to the network users. if necessary,prohibitions could be made against users from outside the faculty of science, butit is preferred that some financial arrangement could be made with such users.desktop publishing at the university of zimbabwe84bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.desktop publishing at the tanzaniacommission for science and technologyby albina kasangowhen she wrote this case study, albina kasango was thescientific editor at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology (costech), where she was also the assistanteditor of tanzania s&t news. she is currently the editor,publications and publicity officer for the economic andsocial research foundation, an ngo that carries outresearch on social and economic pssues and offers policyoptions to the government, international organizations, andthe public. she is still actively involved in desktop publishing and in producingworks that contribute to scientific literacy.background and context of the projectbackground information on tanzaniatanganyika (now tanzania) attained its independence in 1961. it was thenthat the efforts of ''mwalimu" (teacher) julius kambarage nyerere at the unitednations resulted in the granting of self rule. before that, tanzania had been abritish protectorate and had been under german colonial rule before the secondworld war. after two years of independence, on 26 april 1964, tanganyikaformed a union with zanzibar and became what we now know as tanzania.accordingly, the president of tanganyika became the president of the unitedrepublic of tanzania and the president of zanzibar became the second vicepresident and retained the presidency of zanzibar. the first vicepresident oftanzania was to come from mainland tanzania.tanzania emberked on a socialist path to development in 1976, withpresident nyerere's "azimio la arusha" (arusha declaration). this period sawthe nationalization of the major means of production. banks, post andtelecommunication, and electricitygenerating systems became public property.the early 1990s brought great changes. following the wave ofdemocratization around the world, the fall of the eastern bloc countries, and theend of thedesktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology85bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cold war among the superpowers as the former soviet union collapsed, thepolitical climate changed and the tanzania people felt they too were ready to takethe maturity test. the constitution of the country was amended in 1992 to allowmultiparty politics. today there are 13 registered political parties, with generalelections due in october 1995.tanzania has an estimated population of 26 million, with people comingfrom more than one hundred and twenty ethnic groups or tribes.institutional informationthe tanzania commission for science and technology (costech) wasestablished by parliamentary act no. 7 of 1986. it is a parastatal organizationwhose parent ministry is the ministry for science, technology and highereducation (msthe). being a serviceoriented institution, it runs its activities bygovernment subvention, which it receives through the msthe.costech deals with the popularization, promotion, and coordination ofscience and technology activities in the country. the director general ofcostech recently reiterated the principal functions of the commission(costech) as stated in the enabling act. these are to: formulate policy on the development of science and technology andrecommend its implementation by the government; monitor and coordinate all activities relating to scientific research andtechnology development of all persons or body of persons concerned withsuch activities; acquire, store and disseminate scientific and technology information, andfor that purpose hold or sponsor conferences, symposia, meetings, seminarsor workshops or publish any newspaper, periodical or do any other act orthing designed to promote interest in science and technology development; advise the government on: š priorities in scientific research; š the allocation and utilization of research funds according to prioritiesreferred to above; š regional and international cooperation in scientific research and transferof technology; š matters relating to the training and recruitment of research personnel; š instruction on scientific subjects in educational institutions within theunited republic; š the initiation, formulation and implementation of research policies andprograms; š the establishment and maintenance of national scientific standards; anddesktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology86bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. š science and technology policy. provide researchers with funds for conducting research in areas givenpriority by the government upon the advice of the research anddevelopment (r&d) advisory committees; and provide users with the information to make appropriate choices in the kindof foreign technologies suitable for importation and assimilation.costech is governed by a chairman (a presidential appointee) andcommissioners who are nominated by the minister, with the director general inthe capacity of secretary to the commission. the director general is also apresidential appointee. costech has four directorates: information anddocumentation; research promotion and coordination; centre for thedevelopment and transfer of technology (cdtt); and administration andfinance.the cdtt provides the public with the information and expertise to makethe right, pertinent, or appropriate technological choices when, say, importingmachinery from abroad. the centre, of course maintains close liaison with tradeattachés of diplomatic missions and other relevant personnel in the country andinternational agencies abroad dealing with the same.the directorate of information and documentationšwhere i workedšisactively involved and committed to providing information to all members ofsociety. the directorate of information and documentation costech hasseveral subunits as described below: the documentation centre includes a library collection in the fields ofscience and technology that serves an indiscriminate group of clientele fromthe tanzanian public. the publications unit has the dtp facilities under its jurisdiction andproduces documents for publication. the popularization unit produces radio programs in conjunction with theparent ministry that are in kiswahili and serves to popularize science andtechnology at the grassroots level. the training and communications unit organizes and holds trainingcourses for various groups of the tanzanian community (women scientists,technologists and researchers, librarians); provides electronic mail and faxfacilities to an increasing number of scientists; and also takes care of thecomputer maintenance at the commission.project descriptionorigin and history of dtp at costechthe desktop publishing (dtp) unit is a new phenomenon: costech'sinitial plan was to have a printing press unit, complete with all of the nowoldtechnologiesdesktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology87bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that would have occupied an entire room. but, before we could proceed with thisplan, we were swept up in the printing revolution known as desktop publishing.dtp software became available in costech through the unescofundeddatabase project that aimed at producing a directory of scientists. the dtpequipment and software was "borrowed" from this project when it was not beingused to input data. this marked the beginning of the dtp unit at costech.in 1990, costech secured funds from the international developmentresearch centre (idrc) of canada to produce a directory of scientific personnelin the country. the project, called the tanzania national information system onscience and technology (tanissat), was to be achieved with a databasemanagement system that incorporated the use of dtp software, calledpagemaker. at the same time, there was an urgent need for costech toproduce a newsletter on science and technology in a bid to popularize the samewithin the country.theophilus mlaki, the director for information and documentation, wascharged with this responsibility and, at first, he thought that wordperfect 5.0would suffice. it had all the facilities for producing cameraready copy ready forpublication. the only snag was that wp 5.0 lacked the ability to "cut and paste"photographs and other graphics (from programs other than wp)ša capabilityfound in more sophisticated software. this facility allows the user to usephotographs, emblems, or illustrations from other sources and to place them withthe text. the user can rotate, size, and edit the graphics involved. so costechdecided to use pagemaker on the equipment that was provided by unesco. ofcourse, this was to be done only when the computer was not being used for dataentry. mr. mlaki designed the first newsletter, selected the typefaces and fonts,and wrote most of the articles.initially the dtp unit produced one main publication: the tanzania s&tnews, a newsletter aimed at popularizing science and technology in tanzania.over the years, the number of publications has increased with the expansion ofthe commission and the activities it performs. five years after its inception, thedtp unit has produced cameraready copy for public lectures; the proceedingsof the annual scientific seminars; the act of parliament for costech; threeannual reports; books of abstracts for the medical association of tanzania, theinternational centre for industrial technology and environmental sciences, andthe national fund for the advancement of science and technology (in bothenglish and swahili); and other smaller publications, such as birthday cards andwedding and party invitations.general and particular objectives of dtp at costechthe function of the dtp unit at costech falls squarely under the divisionthat deals with the dissemination, popularization, and storage of scientific andtechnological information. specifically, the project's objectives are to:desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology88bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. produce articles for publication in the daily newspapers in a bid todisseminate technologies or generate interest in the need to changeproduction processes where necessary; publish proceedings of the annual scientific seminar and thus create ameans for our indigenous scientists to draw national and world attention totheir findings and get the acknowledgement they need; disseminate the latest news of national interest on pertinent science andtechnology issues to members of the scientific communities, the nationalassembly, and government to enable them make pertinent choices/decisions; and inform the scientific communities and the general public on the latestdevelopments in the activities of the commissionproject experience and implementationwhen i first moved into costech, i spent long hours sitting alongside mr.mlaki and mr. andrew dachi, costech's computer specialist and thetypesetter. together, we would work on producing what were the overdue backissues of the newsletter. because i was not wellversed in this new line of work, iworked first as a "gopher." mostly, i remember, i would be sent upstairs tocollect the original documents that i had used to compile the articlesšas iinvariably did not have all the pertinent information incorporated into my text.slowly, though, i learned the trade and was even able to typeset the 1993 issue ofthe newsletter unaidedšbut still under mr. dachi's supervision.in 1993, costech embarked on an ambitious project to popularize scienceand technology by holding fora where scientists, technologists, industrialists andmembers of the general public could meet to discuss pertinent issues in the realmof science and technology. the first of these costech scientific public lectureseries was given by keto elitabu mshigeni, professor of botany at the universityof dar es salaam who is on attachment at the university of namibia. his talk wasentitled "the seaweed farming story along the western indian coast: past,present and future." using its dtp facilities, costech has been able toproduce the camera ready version of the lecture.in 1993, costech also secured funds from unesco's intergovernmentalinformatics programme (iip) to conduct a computer training course for tanzanianwomen scientists, technologists and researchers. this was undertaken in a bid toempower women in the workplace and make them more competitive with theirmale counterparts. women graduates were indeed found to possess very fewcomputer skills. out of the 250 course applicants, 42 percent of the women withmasters degrees had no computer knowledge! costech provided the technicalaspect of the training with a few trainers coming from affiliated institutions. andof course the "course manuals" were prepared using the dtp facilities. one suchmanual is for the advanced computer course.desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology89bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 dedicationtypesetting other smaller documents is not hard in itself. most difficultperhaps are the odd hours in which typesetting is not only required but becomes apriority! an emergency invariably arises just as one is about to leave for the dayor, worse, for the weekend. dedication and altruism are required for this job.we have also produced posters, brochures, certificates, and other documentsto advertise the tanzania awards for scientific and technological innovationachievement (tasta). these are given to people and institutions who makediscoveries likely to promote and accelerate the social and economic progress oftanzania.on 1 july 1995, the national fund for the advancement of science andtechnology (nfast) was launched by the honorable dr. salmin amour, thesecond vicepresident of the united republic of tanzania and president ofzanzibar. nfast motivates inventors and innovators as well as the generalpublic. through nfast, we hope that tanzania will make a quantum leap in itsability to apply new technologies, especially in such frontier areas asbiotechnology, solar/biogas energy, new materials technology, and electronics.the nfast program, information brochure, invitation cards, and charity walkcards were produced using the dtp facilities at costech.perhaps our most important product (and the most time consuming!) is thetanzania s&t news, a quarterly newsletter that is mailed to over 500 prominentindividuals and institutions worldwide. in tanzania, the mailing list includesministers, heads of research and development institutions, and the private sector.internationally, the newsletter is mailed to un bodies involved in thedevelopment of science and technology, tanzanian embassies abroad, theamerican library of congress, and others.then there are the annual reports which represent the activities that havebeen undertaken by the commission each year. this report includes the auditedfinancial statements of the commission. these are prepared up to the cameraready version using the dtp facilities available at costech.we also compile articles of interest to the tanzanian science and technologysituation from the annual seminars, international newspapers, or other sources andsend them to the top leadership and the scientific community. some of thesearticles get published by the local newspapers. we have published over 30newspaper articles under this program.finally, there are the "greenwire" files that costech produces fromelectronic mail messages written by an international group of experts onenvironmental concerns. costech staff within the directorate of informationand documentation scan these and select some for dissemination. this ideallyshould be accomplished using email (with costech as the node and otherinstitutions/ bodies being the points). however, due to the fact that not manyinstitutions and scientists are connected to email, these messages are firstdownloaded onto a diskette, printed out, photocopied, and then compiled intofiles that are mailed todesktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology90bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and development institutions affiliated with costech and otherinterested parties known to us.it may have been difficult but now i am reaping some of the fruits of thathard labor. besides, when i did the typesetting myself, at least i was sure that icorrected all the mistakes that i noticed. there is still a need for proofreadersšthere will always be some mistakes if only one person is assigned to the entireproduction cycle. nevertheless, there is one publication that makes me very proudšthe tanzania s&t news of december 1993 marked my début into typesetting.(see box 1.)the results, impacts, and benefits of the projectthe project has received much positive feedback. some of the comments wehave received include the following:a prominent member of parliament said that the tanzania s&t news is"extremely informative and useful."the embassy of tanzania in stockholm wrote and said that it found the"contents interesting and varied."a medical doctor wrote to say how impressed he was with the quality of thearticles in the newsletter.a university professor told me that he especially like the newsletter column onscientific tidbits.a secondary school teacher told us that he finds information that he can use toteach and stimulate his class.a number of local newspaper editors have printed some of our articles.i can say that it is very gratifying when you receive requests from peoplewho want to be included on the mailing list. it is also very rewarding to hear thatnews of the contents in the newsletter is getting around. for example, mr. sambaker, who worked for the cooperative college in moshi and is now a computerconsultant at coopers and lybrand, made a survey on information technologywith funding he received from costech. as part of our usual newscompilation, we included a brief review of his findings in our september 1994issue of tanzania s&t news. later, we heard that he wanted a copy of thatnewsletter because "people had been telling him about it." so we are certain thatthe news we write gets across even though we do not always get direct feedbackfrom the readers.we usually send articles on a weekly basis to one of the local newspapers,including the biweekly express. interestingly, when we are running against ourown deadlines and miss sending the articles, the express editor notes ourabsence and send a message to the effect of "where is this week's article–."obviously, if the readers did not find our articles useful and worth reading, hewould not show such enthusiasm.desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology91bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more recently, we did an article on one of the prominent woman scientistswho, incidentally, was later nominated to be a member of the commission ofcostech. as usual we sent her a single copy of the newsletter. we were happyto get her request for a few more copies.authors of papers accepted for the annual scientific seminars have used ourproducts to obtain promotions in their workplace.we are now certain that there are more readers who appreciate our effortsthan the actual number of letters of appreciation would imply. also since weattempt to write on issues that will interest the target group, we are optimisticthat, in the long run, the long weekends spent producing the newsletters,newspaper articles, press releases proceedings and the like will produce positiveresults.scientific and technological awareness is slowly gaining a footholdšthrough the continued efforts of the commission to keep information flowing tothe leadership of tanzania. the launching of nfast, mentioned above, is proofof this progress. so far, 13 million tanzanian shillings have been pledged tonfast. other pledges and contributions are being collected and we hope to have atotal of 100 million tanzanian shillings (us $ 166,666) by the end of december1995.analysis of lessons learnedthe project has taught me several lessons. first, i know it is important tohave a synergistic group of people working together in dtp (as in any otherworking group) for the best results. this group must be dedicated to theimprovement of the press as there are always long hours of concentration andhard work required to complete a publication. being able to do this kind of workšwriting, editing, proofreading, typesetting, mailingšnecessitates a supportivesupervisor who believes in the staff, gives it room to grow, and also guides itthrough the various steps.i have also learned that, for the best results, the basic tools and personnel areneeded. for instance, if i could start the project over again, i would hire a clerk toassist in typing and addressing/mailing the newsletters so that i could concentrateon the tasks of writing good articles.i would also make sure that the dtp unit had the proper equipment availableto it on a fulltime basis. this includes a dedicated 386 or 486 computer with alaser printer and a scanner for more effective compilation of cameraready copyand for importation of graphics.finally, i would institute a proper training program for dtp staff. i thinkthat people with backgrounds in mass communications, publishing, or linguisticsmight naturally have a better understanding of how a scientific press needs tooperate but, as we have seen in our project, the aptitude for editing, design, andmanagement can come from a variety of disciplines. whatever the backgrounds,however, special training in the use of the dtp hardware and software isessential.desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology92bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendationsseeing that information is the determinant of which nations succeed andwhich do not, i think those african countries that see the importance ofcooperation should do all they can to elevate their scientific and technologicalinformation (research and development) projects and activities to the highestpossible level. a network of sti systems in tanzania, africa, and indeed theworld should gradually be built through cooperative ventures (learning from eachother through other case study followup projects).jacques delors, the former president of the european union, has said thatwithout confidence, no people can be united to work for a common cause. so thefirst objective should be to build people's confidence. and how does one do thatexactly? by helping people to help themselves so that they do not "live onhandouts" and by giving people a sound education and letting them make theirown (rational) decisions. this may take longer to achieve but gives the bestresults in the long run.acknowledgementsi am very grateful to theophilus mlaki for all his support and guidance–and his demand for excellence! also at costech, i would like to thank mr.yonazi, senior scientific officer and the desk officer in charge of tanissat,who has been very understanding when i use his equipment. i have worn hispatience rather thin as there are so many documents to produce.i am also grateful to my husband and children for their understanding everytime i came home late or worked on sundays.desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology93bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.desktop publishing at the tanzania commission for science andtechnology94bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe science pressby agnes katamaagnes katama is manager of icipe science press andproject leader of the environmental publishing network(environet)ša network linking seven institutions in theeastern africa region. she is also a volunteer lecturer forwomen undergraduate students at the university of nairobi,where she coordinates programs for genderequity. her mainfocus of research in book production is on market orientationwithin the scholarly publishing world and on the search foralternative human resource formulae to enhance cost efficiency. she is ajournalist by profession. she has been appointed coordinator of the africanforum for children's literacy in science and technology, an activity of therockefeller foundation.background and context of the projectthe international centre of insect physiology and ecology (icipe) wasestablished in kenya's capital, nairobi, in 1970. it was given the twin mandateto:a) undertake basic research in integrated control methodologies forarthropod pest management andb) to strengthen, through training and collaboration, the scientific andtechnological capacities of developing countries.in 1988, icipe created the icipe science press (isp), as its own, internalpublishing house. i joined isp in 1991 as the marketing and informationexecutive; i am now the manager of isp. in march 1992, icipe undertook athorough study of the literature and realized that there was little or nocoordination of the development of selfsustaining and significant scholarlypublishing ventures inenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress95bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.africa. there was limited uptodate information on establishing wellmanagedsubscription services or on the mailing and marketing of environmentrelatedpublications.also in 1992, i carried out a study for the association of africanuniversities in which i investigated the merits and the demerits of themanagement and organization regarding the marketing of scholarly publishingactivities in western and central africa. i recommended the creation of aspecialized subregional publishing network in order to meet local needs in acoherent fashion.since both studies identified such pressing needs for the publication andmarketing of scholarly works, the isp decided to pool its resources with those ofother institutions to create the environmental publishing network(environet).the purpose of environet, which was founded in 1993, is to developmeans for the more efficient dissemination of research findings. for instance,many scholarly works can be redesigned into effective university course workmaterial. icipe's own authorship had traditionally covered environmentrelatedissues and the enriching combination of publishable material from theenvironet participating institutions made it possible for us to launch otherpublications in areas such as desertification, food security, and crop sciences.environet also facilitated the publishing of printworthy material from peerresearch institutions, the sharing of information resources, and the quest forformulae to effectively commercialize the printed results according to marketrules.a key contributor to the design and implementation of the first phase of theproject was the international development research centre (idrc) in canada.idrc has played a significant role in the development and strengthening ofscholarly publishing throughout the african region. recently, in partnership withthe association of african universities, the council for the development ofeconomic and social research in africa (codesria), and several researchinstitutions in the region, it created opportunities for interinstitutionalcooperation, the sharing of resources, and dissemination of vital information. italso provided funding to establish environet.project descriptioni am the environet project leader. environet is housed at the icipescience press offices in nairobi. since isp had already proven to be a selffinancing publishing operation, environet benefited from staff expertise inthis area and its location at isp fostered cooperation between environet andicipe science press. there is a very symbiotic relationship betweenenvironet and isp.the first phase of the project was initiated in june 1994 as an 18monthexperiment. its main objectives are to create a credible, marketoriented, andselfsustaining network for the provision of information on environmentalpublishing activities and to train adequate human resources in the areas of bookproduction, management, and marketing. specifically, the first phase of theproject was established in order to:environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress96bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. create a network of publishers and research institutions specialized inenvironmental matters with an adequate institutional framework; conduct a marketing study with the aim of garnering support for innovativemethods of selfsustaining scholarly publishing; develop a database comprising an author and subject roster onenvironmental materials published in the region. this will include thedevelopment of linkages with other organizations pursuing similar goals;and foster the capacitybuilding potential of participating institutions, especiallyin the area of training and publications marketing.phase i has concentrated on establishing lasting selfsustaining methods ofmanaging the funds available for this activity. a key concern of the project is toidentify collaborating institutions and activities whose needs are similar enoughto seek common methods to ensure efficient production, distribution, andmarketing capabilities. phase ii, to be launched in june 1996, will focus on theestablishment of a wellmanaged and efficient publishing and informationcenter.the establishment of a training program was a key accomplishment of phase iand this program is described in more detail later in this case study. the trainingof environet members benefited directly from the publishing systems andservices used by icipe science press. for example, isp uses an apple macintoshsystem for its desktop publishing (dtp). the software we use includes alduspagemaker, microsoft word, adobe illustrator, and excel. these are the samepackages we use to train environet members and the ones trainees will use ontheir own work stations, which the network provides.participating institutionsenvironet seeks to revitalize the authorship capability among a selectednumber of research institutions in eastern and southern africa, while stimulatinga healthy diversity of environment related publications. the participatinginstitutions are:idrcinternational development research centre, nairobiicipethe international centre of insect physiology and ecology, nairobiacssafrican crop science society, kampalaossreaorganization for social science research in eastern africa, addis ababaicrafinternational centre for research in agroforestry, nairobielcithe environmental liaison centre international, nairobiitfcthe institute for tropical forestry conservation, mbarara university,ugandaenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress97bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 finding a business balancewe still need to strike a fair balance between the purely businessdrivenconsiderations on the one hand and, on the other, our academic commitment toattaining the goals for which the project was initially designed. we still need tomake environmental information readily and easily available and affordable toour tertiary educative and research constituencies.our main source of publishable material is the research results obtained fromall collaborating, international, and regional organizations with related aims. ispwas selected to host this experiment because of its current ability to selffinanceall its activities. having achieved financial autonomy, the next logical stepforward is to present an upmarket strategy to wean the publishing program offthe donor support needed at its inception. this will truly be the mainachievement of the project. (see box 1.)the selfsustainability of isp has taken four years to design and implement.naturally, there were the real advantages in having beautiful premises on thescience campus of the university of nairobi. furthermore, the first director oficipe, professor thomas odhiambo, allowed flexibility of cost recoverymechanisms with the concerted support of the financial system of the wholeinstitution. he encouraged me to formulate and consolidate the measures neededto allow isp to recover costs and, ultimately, to break even.the sale of our expertise has been the key element of our sustainability. isphas a policy of 10 percent returns on all consultanciesšwhether in cash or intimešand staff are encouraged to open out to the other institutions in the area.indeed, our first contacts with the other members of the network have been as aresult of our help in starting up the publications unit. in the case of the africancrop science society, isp published the first issues and coordinated a colorfullaunch of their journal in kampala. these are assignments that are carefullybudgeted and afford isp substantial benefit.another area of expertise has been the publishing of conference proceedingson behalf of institutions in the region. a powerful marketing edge has been theability of isp to see these important assignments to completion within the year.recently, isp has been commissioned to edit (myself), design (isp team), andlayout papers for a major meeting on equity and social considerations related toclimate change. with assignments such as these, isp has been able to move intohigh quality publishing for a consolidated group of institutional clients. needlessto say, the possibility of having attachment students (described below) greatlycuts down on the cost of initial startup of the different assignments since theseneed considerable negotiation, supply of information, and other staffintensiveinputs.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress98bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the marketability of the published material, as well as the services madeavailable at the start of the projectštraining, workshop coordination, hightechnology computer graphics, and so onšare being used to generateindependent funding that can then be plowed back into publishing or relatedactivities. interestingly, during this 18month launch period, we have made thebest use of our new desktop publishing facilities by fulfilling donorfundedassignments from collaborating institutions or by completing direct consultanciesfrom the donors themselves.project experience and implementationthe project and its implementation schedule were beset with multipleproblems. the worst of these was the restructuring of icipe, the host institution,which lasted a full six months. during this time i had neither the necessaryresources nor the time to dedicate to the project.to analyze the positive and the negative points of our projectimplementation after the first ten months, we made use of a management tool,called swot. swot helps identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities,and threats facing a project. we placed particular emphasis on the dtp trainingcomponent since, to date, it is the only one that has been completed as proposedat the outset.we used the information received from the swot analysis to evaluateproject's impact on the users, the host organization, and the collaboratinginstitutions. it also brought to light the aspects of the project that were not welldone or that could have been done better. it therefore gives us a basis for thefurther development of the project. the results of the swot analysis are givenbelow.strengths environet phase 1 has established a training ground for future trainees.four professionals have been trained and this training has served asvaluable blueprint material to involve the trainable officers in importantinformation generating institutions. local and international collaboration with scientific and environmentalorganizations has provided a reference base from which environet hasspread its initiative since it is getting recognition among interested andupcoming projects. all staff and trainers have been encouraged and challenged through theproject to engage in administrative tasks. computer knowledge andexposure acquired by the trainees from different organizations serve asgateways to promoting skills present at the project. this in itself hasboosted the credibility and name of isp at both a local and an internationallevel.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress99bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.weaknesses trainingšthis fourmonth course included elements of theory classes andpractical computer training. we altered the course after the trainees hadarrived and fell short in properly formalizing the time tables outlining theactivities. trips and visitsšwe should have foreseen the need to plan trips, socialactivities, and talks by various guests. evaluationšwe should have conducted an ongoing activity evaluation tokeep track of the quality of the entire training component. for instance, wecould have sent questionnaires to trainees, the board of directors andtrainers before, after, and during the training. finance / icipe headquartersšwe faced heavy bureaucratic constraints. interactionšthe project leader, trainees, and consultants faced limited anddifficult interaction and interpersonal communication due to external andinternal pressures surrounding the restructuring exercise. trainees' had limited participation in and attendance at the training becausetheir publishing projects had not been discussed and distributed in advance. we should have documented complaints and disappointments to improveinterparty communication for subsequent courses.opportunities we could train trainers and colleagues from collaborating institutions in theuse of the dtp equipment. we can train icipe and other research staff atthe project premises through the help of a full time computer instructor.our existing expertise in scientific writing and editing can also be sharedwith network members and others. due to the gradual credibility status achieved by the project, an increasingnumber of institutions wish to belong to and support the project. increasing the number of trainees attending each subsequent dtp coursewill increase the desired costefficiency level for each institution and willhelp the project participants generate their own revenue. the greatest hindrance to the sale of scholarly titles is the relative lack ofinformation, reviews, and followup on behalf of individual andinstitutional authors. we could formulate further courses on marketing,pricing, and dissemination strategies. email is promoting the status of environet and in itself provides a basefor marketing various publications. access to the internet is desirable andcould help improve the flow of news about african scholarly activity. ofparticular interest are possible author/subject indices, book reviews, andauthor profiles. such guides will include the accomplishments of experts inthe areas of environment and natural science and would help libraries andothers keep current bibliographies of published and unpublished literaturewritten by africans.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress100bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. email has much potential as a method for curbing the costs associated withediting, peer review, and author changes. electronic publishing of journals,proceedings of meetings, and bulletins is another possibility that we mustexplore. the results we achieve in environet can be replicated by ispto benefit other nonscientific institutions in the isp tertio program.1 isp has initiated and finalized the work plans for enviroburos which,though not a part of environet, will be supervised by isp ascommercially running document production centers at the service of theenvironmental and conservation communities. to ensure financialviability, we have increased our intake capacity by the creation of thesebureaus. we are now carefully documenting the results of the pilot studyand will use this to rationalize the replication of these all over thecontinent.threats the heavy dependence and linkage to the icipe headquarters slackens workprogress. red tape and personal office setups are an obstacle to flexiblemarketoriented responses necessary for the project's smooth running in thefinancial and administrative spheres. unless we undertake an organized evaluation, the project may receive anegative image leading to a reduction in regional supporters andinternational collaborators.the results, impact, and benefits of the projectthe main activities at icipe science press include discovering newmarketing angles for scholarly publishing, training publishing staff, and creating anetwork of collaborators to the benefit of effective scholarly material beingproduced. the environet project is just over oneyear old and i will discusssome of the results in this section.the experimental marketing of the books to be produced within the networkhas not yet taken place because the member institutions do not yet have suitabletitles ready. the publishing of manuscripts supplied by isp is now under way,however. some of the titles that have been discovered and whose authors are nowbeing guided include manuscripts ranging from conservation and biodiversity tothe keeping of commercial insects.for the marketing of products and services, environet has made use ofbookfairs and forums that bring together publishers as well as persons orinstitutions involved in the development and distribution of environment relatedliterature.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress101bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.several institutions have made inquiries on the possibility of collaborating inthis venture. i have been asked to speak at numerous symposia and conferences.benefits of the projectthe benefits of the project include:a) enhanced project management as a service to icipe as well as toseveral institutions with similar aims and objectives;b) infrastructure enhancement for the publishing division of the isp;c) human resource development for both trainees and women universitystudents on attachment;d) training manuals for successive courses to be hosted for the dtp ofscientific manuscripts;e) published material; andf) email catalogs of grey literature to be accessed online.the university students attachment programme (usap)the usap is in many ways an integral part of environet because it hashelped contribute to its success. this program was first established as a means ofhelping the isp program break even. since its inception, we have made the studyand consolidation of usap and other innovative, upmarketing strategies apriority aspect in management, time, and resources allocation. i will, thus, takesome time to describe the details of this attachment program. we plan to helppublishing houses in the region create similar programs to cut down on theprohibitive overhead costs of running a publishing house.the usap is one of my ideas to make administrative work more costeffective. some of isp's services are only possible because of this attachmentprogram of university women. yes, but why women? women count for only oneof every six of the university population. job seeking for women can beagonizing, given the strict requirement of prior working experience. it was torespond to this need in the student community that usap was born. (see box 2.)box 2 training program for womenusap is a women empowerment project that i helped form in 1993 toserve the dual purpose of training on the job while reducing the number ofpermanent administrative staff of isp. this program takes, for a duration rarelyexceeding six months, university students who are on vacation.operationwe select university students from diverse faculties who can contribute tothe general working of the press. they are then attached to the various ispdepartmentsenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress102bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.after intensive onthejob training by the proceeding group of usapers. thestudents are involved in marketing, soliciting, distribution, production liaison,mailing, and subscription activities. we have prepared comprehensive proceduralmanuals to help smooth the flow of work. students work free of any supervision,although i am available for guidance. weekly meetings allow feedback on tasksassigned to each person.professional development classes are offered to all usapers. usaporganizes its own activities to help other students participate in professionalenrichment activities. so far, the major outlet has been to annual rural promotionprojects. they have proved to be very resourceful and often prepare theeducational material on their own.usap benefitsthere have been many benefits of the usap. women in management(wim) and women in science (wis) are two new projects geared toward theprofessional promotion of undergraduates. both projects fall under the usapumbrella. these grew out of the great diversity of training and orientation needsof the various usapers. we saw a clear need to help students develop in theirown fields of specialization. there exists an eagerness to attend extracurricularprofessional sessions since these always offer increased job prospects.women in management was formed for students who hope to specialize incommerce and business administration. women in science is for students lookingfor careers in the sciences. in addition to university students, these projects alsotarget students in middle level colleges and young professionals.the usap alumnievery three months, there is a new usap group at isp. a total of over 60women have benefited directly from the handson training program, while up to250 have benefited from offshoot activities. bulletins and regular gettogether ofthe usap alumni are two major methods of exchanging ideas and giving newinformation and feedback on tasks accomplished. also since many women obtaingood jobs on completion of their undergraduate studies, there is the rewardingopportunity of listening to their expectations and desire to excel.future prospects: the usap resource centre (urc)the establishment of a urc will be a major step forward. we areapproaching donors to help equip a resource centre that will link women fromcountries in the region. given that these students are already trained and areresourceful, such a center could help in the provision of support for this activityas its popularity spreads among collaborating institutions. these activities includethe preparation of educational material for rural promotion projects, coordinationof usap professionalenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress103bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.classes, and planning the activities of wim and wis. we are fast forming linkswith other university students in the world in order to facilitate bettercommunication. a first stop will be makerere university, kampala, ugandawhere a wim program has already been simulated.analysis of lessons learnedi know that icipe itself has contributed to the success of isp and theenvironet project. unlike many international research institutions, icipe hasencouraged and permitted creative system design that stretches beyond isp'straditional mandate. experimenting with different costrecovery mechanisms andbeing innovative in the use of staff has allowed isp to attain selfsufficiency.beyond this broad lesson, we have learned a number of specific things.for example, following their program, the trainees reported to the boardmembers. the issues they raised in their joint report were also discussed aticipe's own environet training postmortem meeting with icipe's seniormost staff. the resolutions taken by icipe as a result are discussed below.training organizationthe administration of the training clearly demonstrated shortcomings. mostof these emanated from a lack of foresight as to the viability of such an activity,when both isp and headquarters staff were working in a low efficiency mode. aswe discovered, training should never have started during the restructuring of thehost institution. in the future, any training carried out will be entrusted to thetraining division of icipe, while all technical aspects will be the responsibility ofisp. icipe's training division will then take charge of the preliminary notificationand will establish the training needs of all participants and the correct modusoperandi during the program. this will lead to a closer working relationshipbetween myself, the head of training at icipe, and the environet boardmembers.finances, trainee per diem, and travelthe trainees should know, prior to the start of training, the details of theirtravel arrangements, allowances, and the full nature of their program, includingtime off, recreation, other travel opportunities, and so on. we are in the processof circulating such rules and regulations to the board for its approval.organizationthe restructuring of icipe has moved icipe science press and all of itsvarious projects from the management to the research arm of the institution. thiswill ensure that the project's own research content, objectives, and goals are beingenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress104bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.evaluated as a research assignment and that they continue to fit within thebroader picture of icipe's research mandate and interests.environet  training objectivesthe training program was overly ambitious and there existed a clearmismatch between targeted achievement and real attainment. smoothcommunication was either difficult or less effective than desired. the resultingworking atmosphere was sometimes tense both between the institution and theproject, as well as among the project management and trainees.advocacya number of institutions and professionals in the relevant fields have showninterest in participating in the project and in learning more about plans forexpanded collaboration and professional capacity building. furthermore, theprofessionals trained in the project will need additional monitoring, support, andnetworking. a simple one sheet newsletter is being sent out to all interestedparties and collaborating institutions of the project. emphasis on clarity ofreporting is paramount to establishing links as the project faces the challenges offundraising for its successive phases.electronic publishingelectronic publishing is now the focus of my efforts as well as those of thecollaborating institutions. the links have now been set up. environet willhave a dedicated telephone line and switchboard independent from the isp mainlines. email facilities are now available for trainees' needs. we have designed ahome page on the internet via the university of edinburgh and we have installedsystems for online publishing and documentation transfer. startup funding is areal problem since the initial hooking up is the most costly in terms of design andequipment.evaluationthe project has been evaluated by an expert selected by idrc with specificterms of reference, as is critical within the framework of sustainability of theproposed activities.author's rosteran important component of the research in environet is the compilationof a marketing pool. this will consist of a database of two types:environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress105bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a. books in press and in print. in conjunction with the library ofcongress, the african publishers network (apnet), and others, thisproject will study ways to harmonize information on authors andtitles to meet a northsouth online demand. this research is vital andcould be a great service to the region since most existing databasesare not online. i have started discussions with interested parties so asto harmonize input from the beginning. i estimate that we will startthis project in about three months.b. grey literature. environet's mandate is to publicize existing greyliterature by the continent's specialized authors. availability ofinformation about market, slant, and constituency are the mainstay ofthe project and we are seeking funds for serious research of this sort.publicationsenvironet is to publish or cover the cost (including the marketing) offive publications. although originally to be prepared by the trainees while in thetraining program, only two of the institutions had ready material. also it was notpossible to complete these given the lack of time. authors for the fivemanuscripts are now being guided. the possibility of their marketing via theonline system is a critical aspect of the research component.environet phase iienvironet will have to compete for scarce funding for its successivestages and group financing of activities will be the foreseeable scenario. despitethe difficult launch period during the restructuring of the host institution, there isconsiderable interest within the region in the activities and the objectives of theproject. a number of institutions have asked to be affiliated with it particularlygiven the specificity of its training. this clearly presents financial challenges.through considerable donor contact, i am now coordinating fundraising for thesecond phase.conclusions and recommendationsenvironet phase i now comes to a close to pave the way forenvironet phase ii. in phase ii we hope to seek funding for the expansion ofthe information and publishing center. through the center, isp will be able tosource work from various organizations in the region and publish it for them. wewill continue to publish material included within the broad paradigm ofenvironmental studies analysis.the mainstay of the project will continue to be the satisfaction ofinformation related demands in the region. via the environet informationcenter, isp will continue to assist in the marketing of scholarly publications andto study the factorsenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress106bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that continue to determine real publication development for the university andother tertiary readers.querying the information center will be possible via the email facilities ofthe user nodes, even though providing connectivity and access is probably thesingle most expensive activity that the project has identified. quick access toexisting information on particular areas of interest could be a marketable serviceto offer the northern scholar at a differential costing and pricing. the profit willthen fall as a subsidy for the southern researcher.training will be another important aspect of the second phase. a criticalmass of information providers will be built upon the already existing loosenetwork of the environet family of institutions. by the end of 1997, 20 primeresearch and development organizations will benefit from this training and willthus become information disseminators in their own right.the environet hub will try to speed up the publication process. what isnow apparent is that the scholarly world will not publish in africa unless thereevolves a real commitment to sharing the cost of the manuscript processing. weare proposing that authors be able to submit manuscripts via the network to ispwhere general editors help assemble the document. thus the usually frustratingreview process could be facilitated by putting the reviewers online with isp.authors will only need to go to a network point to approve manuscripts. likewisethe service of forwarding manuscripts to foreign journals could be handled for agradually growing constituency.the usap project, now officially featured in icipe's annual reports, hasno doubt presented exciting findings in the world of information packaging in theregion. we will properly quantify their role and the service they can market tocollaborating institutions. the importance of reducing overhead is critical to thesurvival of a scholarly publishing press. to add to the exposure these studentswill derive from their association with isp, first as undergraduates and later ascolleagues in collaborating institutions, we now propose to set up exchangeprograms where these women will gain personally from interaction with workplaces and information packaging concerns in the more developed parts of theworld. these attachments will be coordinated by environet to ensure thatundergraduates acquire relevant work experience to the region's needs. thisproject is worthy of enhancing and its experience used as a pilot for gender equityconcerns, particularly regarding the concern of a greater female representation inscience and technology.isp has often seen the need to expand its collection points within the region.thus we came up with the idea of the enviroburos. the concept, which had to benurtured and promoted among the noncommercial environment that typifies thescholarly publishing world, is now evolving. these will be marketorientedinformation packaging units in strategic cities in the region. their marketing andprocedures will derive from isp's own rich experience in beating the costefficiency crunch. they will be put under the care of the members of theenvironetenvironmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress107bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.board. they will serve moreover as further arms for the publishing of worthygrey literature.today, we can consider the creation of an audiovisual laboratory because thecosts are falling so rapidly. publishing in africa must keep abreast oftechnological advances elsewhere. we propose to create a pool of resourcesavailable for the use of the collaborating institutions to enable the documentationof research findings and events by video. a facility of this nature could easilyreside in isp given its ample premises within the university campus. also therunning of such a project is justifiable and easier to fund when the positiveimpact will be felt by so many users.environet proposes to provide to a wide public the results of theindexing of grey literature. the publishing of all material on cdrom is now aneventuality that isp would like to spearhead. of particular interest is the archivingof information on discs. this, though clearly important, will require carefulplanning by a number of interested donors and partners, since the task calls forsubstantial funding.the launch of the project has had its own teething problems and thechallenge ahead entails parallel commitment from all. as regional initiativesprogress, the task is now at hand to safely conduct environet past its infancyinto the dynamics of growth.note1. tertio is a series that isp launched in 1993 for nonscientific and technical readersšit includesmostly social science monographs. one tertio publication, entitled africa development's lastfrontier,  by sadig rasheed, will have a considerable impact for the interdisciplinary scholarlypublishing system continentwide. one main title is being published under the tertio programevery year.acknowledgementsas project leader, i would particularly wish to thank the four trainees in thepioneer course, who mastered publication development skills offered byenvironet. their final report will go a long way to help chart out a moreefficient plan for the successive training/orientation sessions the project may hostin the future. special commendation from the senior management of icipe goesto the idrc programme officer, dr. habib sy. through his active and knowingguidance the project has now become an experiment the positive results of whichare awaited by a significant number of future collaborators and informationfacilitators the world over.environmental publishing networkšenvironet at icipe sciencepress108bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovations in desktop publishing at theafrican academy of sciences, 1989œ1992by dr. alex r. tindimubonaalex tindimubona is now chairman of astexšthe africanscience and technology exchangešbased in kampala,uganda. from 1989 to 1992, he was program officer andassociate editor at the african academy of sciences innairobi. there, he was involved in introducing desktoppublishing in support of scientific communication. at astex,he continues to promote science and technology fordevelopment and is now working on the networking of africanscientists. dr. tindimubona has a phd in quantum chemistry and previouslytaught at the university of nairobi .background and context of the projectthis case study describes the introduction of desktop publishing (dtp) atthe african academy of sciences (aas), which was a pioneer in using suchtechnology for scholarly publishing in africa. the aas is a continentwide,nongovernmental organization of senior scientists, science managers, and policyexperts dedicated to the promotion of science and technology for development inafrica. it is the brainchild of 22 leading african scientists who met in trieste,italy in july 1985 at the third world academy of sciences. a task force underthe chairmanship of professor thomas r. odhiambo of kenya presented theconstitution of the aas within six months. in december 1985, it was ratified at asecond meeting in trieste and the academy was born with 33 founding fellows.it began operation at its headquarters at the international center for insectphysiology and ecology (icipe) in nairobi, in june 1986.the aas is an honorific society that promotes excellence in science andtechnology by recognizing outstanding individual accomplishments throughelection to the membership (fellowship) of the academy. admitting new fellowsat the rate of about ten per year, the membership now stands at just over 100. ithas also developed a series of prizes to reward excellence, the most notable beingthe aas/cibageigy prize for agricultural biosciences.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992109bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 external leadership of african scienceuntil the founding of the aas, the leadership for organization andmanagement of science in africa lay in externallybased institutions such as theunited nations family (unesco, uneca, unido, etc.) or in the formercolonial powers, which worked through african government bureaucracies, suchas the french orstom; the british commonwealth science council; or theunited states agency for international development. thus, final decisions weretaken in paris, london, or washington, d.c. african scientists had not yetorganized themselves into a community that could articulate its potential andneeds, or its usefulness to society. science was still marginalized.from the beginning, the aas decided to be an active, practical organizationwhose members would address the daunting problems of the continent. for theaas was formed at a time of deep crisis for africa: the continent faced majorfamines, external debts, declining economies, social conflicts, and a growingquestioning of the political leadership. (see box 1.)the aas vowed to take the lead in reversing africa's decline throughscienceled development. it decided to tackle the problems that transcendnational and ideological boundaries: drought, desertification, and food deficit.finally, its members rallied around the theme of ''bridging the gap between thescientists, industrialists, and policy makers in africa." the aas chose a coreprogram covering four areas: mobilization and strengthening of the african scientific community; publication and dissemination of scientific materials; research, development, and public policy; and capacity building in science and technology.early on, the aas realized that publications would be a major instrumentfor building the african scientific community, for making it aware of itself andits mission, and for interaction with its constituency. this constituency was verywell defined: it included the scientific community itself, the policy makers, theentrepreneurs, and the general public. the publication program thus started assoon as the first staff member, professor peter anyang' nyong'o, came on boardin july 1987 as head of programs. using outside typesetters, he immediatelystarted publishing whydah, the quarterly newsletter of the aas and working onthe first book, hope born out of despair. he also helped develop the publicationstrategy of aas: they would publish a newsletter, a journal, books andmonographs, as well as other products. the publishing arm of the aas was calledacademy science publishers, or asp.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992110bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project descriptionthe asp initially took on desktop publishing to underpin the publication ofthe aas's discovery and innovation (d&i), which was a quarterly,approximately 100 page per issue, peerreviewed, multidisciplinary journal ofresearch and policy discourse. the feasibility study performed prior toestablishing the journal involved over 80 scholars, scientists, and professionalconsultants from africa, europe, and america and unearthed many problemsfacing publishing in africa. the study found that of the 70,000 or so journalspublished worldwide, only about 150 were from africa. many of these were ofdubious quality, frequency, and duration. the main problems were prioritized aslack of resources, but more significantly, there were managerial problems, suchas the: low professional capacity in editing, typesetting, printing, marketing, anddistribution; and management of the intellectual processes: peer review, contentqualityassurance, timeliness; and inclusion in the world's secondary (abstracting,indexing, and citation) literature.many african scientists were worried about publishing their best work in an"obscure journal" whose results might not be seen by their peers. this mightpossibly result in duplication of research or, worse, competitors might claim theygot the results first. there were also doubts in some foreign quarters as towhether africa was doing enough highcalibre science to support such anadvanced journal. the leadership of the aas, who had much experience on theafrican scene, insisted that the time was ripe for such a journal. all in all, thestudy came up with conflicting predictions that could only be tested in the fieldthrough praxis.it is a tribute to the resilience, persistence, vision, and managerial acumen ofthe leadership of the aas that the journal not only started, but has survived andhas become a regular, well recognized beacon of scholarly publishing in africa.the tribute equally goes to the donors of the journal, particularly the carnegiecorporation of new york and the kuwait foundation for the advancement ofscience. but thirdly, and significantly, the tribute must be shared by atechnological innovationšdesktop publishingšwhich is at the base of thesuccess of this journal and indeed of the aas's entire program of publication anddissemination of scientific materials.in may 1988, professor turner t. isoun arrived from nigeria to take hispost as the editor of discovery and innovation, plus other aas publications. onassuming duty, he immediately took steps to ensure the acquisition of goodquality manuscripts for consideration for publication in the journal. he developedand sent out announcements of the new journal, instructions to contributors, andpersonal invitations to contribute articles to key scientists inside and outsideafrica (including all fellows of aas). he was rewarded with an encouragingresponse toinnovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992111bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.his campaign. over 100 scientists indicated a willingness to contribute articlesand, by the time he produced the first issue in march 1989, he already had over60 papers undergoing the peer review processšenough to fill the first four issuesof d&i.project experience and implementationthe feasibility study had recommended the introduction of desktoppublishing for the journal. accordingly, the aas acquired a macintosh iicicomputer, with a laser printer and backup dot matrix printer. it had advancedword processing (microsoft word) and dtp (aldus pagemaker) software. theaas already had three ibmcompatible personal computers with dotmatrixprinters that were used mainly for word processing. a database managementprogram (dbase iii) was used for the project on profiles and databank of africanscientists and scientific institutions . the aas newsletter, whydah, had beenpublished since 1987, using outside typesetting service. three books and otherseveral other products of the aas had also been published using outsideservices.the new equipment was ready when the next editorial staff member joinedin october 1988. gillian ngola had broad experience in publishing and quicklybecame proficient on the equipment, mainly using her familiarity with theprinting terminology that had been incorporated into the dtp software (e.g.,fonts and point sizes, bromides, cameraready copy, etc.). arriving in january1989, as an assistant program officer, i brought my experience as a physicalscientist familiar with computers, science writing, and publication generally. ibegan to troubleshoot simple problems, conduct inhouse training on computerliteracy, undertake technical editing of scientific articles, and plan for expansionon the dtp path. i actively participated in the thrill and agony of putting togetherthe first issue of d&i. when it finally came out in its purple splendor in march1989, we celebrated!two major issues were identified and dealt with at that time. one was thewhole area of typesetting mathematical expressions, which was extremely tediouswith the conventional programs then available. it was eventually solved to someextent with the expressionist software, a shareware program supplied by miriambalaban of israel. the second was a more fundamental one, dealing withrefereeing of papers through a peer review process. the system of peer reviewdesigned for d&i was extremely innovative, rigorous, and uncompromisingregarding what would be accepted for publication. it was based on the principleof pure peer review as applied by the best journals of the world.as 1989 ended, it was clear that d&i was succeeding beyond theexpectations of its initiators. we had managed to bring out four issues of highquality material, every issue on time (in the month shown on the cover). we hadreceived some 314 manuscripts and had processed enough of these to keep twoissues ahead in terms of articles ready for production. also, we had received 236paid subscriptions.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992112bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovations related to computers were becoming very useful, for instance: some authors were submitting their articles on diskette, thus obviatingerrorprone reentering of text; we had the manuscript tracking system computerized; and we had introduced and mastered a mathematical typesetting software(expressionist) that improved our handling of physical science papers.after one year of operation, we could better understand and deal with ourbusiness environment. the information technology environment within whichdtp grew at the aas was auspicious in some respects, but terrible in others,though each of these facets had to be recognized and managed by doing. nairobi,and particularly the icipe campus at which the aas was housed until 1992, wasfull of microcomputers, but not dtp. a good proportion of the secretaries couldoperate a word processor but had not been trained in the more complicatedaspects of page layout or importing graphic files. technical support was availablebut insufficient, especially when it came time to dealing with hardware problems.in terms of scientific content for our publications, the supply was good, asnearly all scientific and technical disciplines were well represented in nairobišinprofessional societies, universities, libraries, government agencies, researchinstitutions, international organizations, and ngos. the aas, through its projecton profiles and databank of african scientists and scientific institutions, thefellowship of the academy, and the network of african scientific organizations(naso), was already in touch with much expertise africawide and indeedworldwide. (see box 2.) icipe itself represented a multidisciplinary scientificand technological milieu. its scientific programs and activities kept the aasreplete with new visitors, contacts, information, and advice. nairobi was (andstill is) the hub of trade, communication, and commerce for eastern and centralafrica and attracts much equipment and trade information. telecommunicationwithin nairobi and outside is easy, but not cheap. thus the asp editor had nomajor problem originating publications ready for the printers. he could mobilizepeerreview and technical editing, and consult other experts and libraries forscientific and technicalbox 2 complementary projectsthe peer review process reinforced the aas's desire to develop a deep andbroad knowledge of the african scientific community. this is why the profilesand databank of african scientists and scientific institutions project was souseful. often the d&i editor came to my office and said: "alex, could you look inyour database and find me an expert to review this paperšpreferably not fromthe following country(s)." most of the time i would succeed, and also take theopportunity to add the authors to the database, if they qualified.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992113bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.publishing minutiae (e.g., the current convention for depicting vectors andmatrices in print).the printing industry in nairobi responded well and turned out to be up tothe task of printing a sophisticated publication like discovery and innovationšatreasonable prices and with acceptable timing. although most printing hadpreviously been taken outside (mostly to london), this was traced to the coloniallegacy of kenya and the perceived editorial shortcomings of african editors.thus, it was actually editorial expertise that was sought. once that editorialconfidence was builtšand the asp/dtp did a lot to build it in nairobištherewas no looking back. in other words, while the environment affected aas, aasdid much to affect the sti environment too!the one clear negative aspect of the sti environment for the internationalscholarly publisher in kenya was the prohibitively expensive internationalpostage demanded by the governmentrun kenya posts and telecommunicationscorporation (kptc). high prices forced the aas to ship its publications, inbulk, to a cheaper distributor in the united kingdom or amsterdam. while savingus money this also led to horrible delays in fulfillment of subscriptions andorders. telephone and fax, also managed by the kptc, were at least four timeshigher than in neighboring uganda. the other barrier in kenya was the lack offull liberalization of foreign exchange markets (unlike uganda) and high duty oncomputer equipment.departure of professor isounthe first major challenge to the dtp program at the african academy ofscience came in early 1990 when professor isoun returned to nigeria. he retainedhis post as nonresident editor and the office in nairobi was reorganized. i wasappointed associate editor and was to assist him in ensuring the editorial quality,scientific content, and general sustainability of the journal. specifically, i was todeal with: the editorial acceptance process: referee selection and manuscript trafficmonitoring; technical editing for scientific content, especially in the physical sciences;and overall program development for aas publications.i did this along with my duties as assistant program officer in charge ofseveral other projects. (see box 3.) mrs. ngola, in turn, took on moreresponsibility for managing the journal's technical editing, production,publication, and marketing. we were lucky in october 1989 to hire, as a graduatesecretary, mrs. nancy amulyoto, who grew to be invaluable in running themanuscript tracking system and generally running the office. she was the defacto assistant to theinnovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992114bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.editor while mrs. ngola became, in essence, the production editor.box 3 profiles of african scientistsi was asked to publish profiles of african scientists, from my computerizeddatabank. i was initially appalled because i thought it a retrogressive step to gofrom electronic to paperbased data. later, it dawned on me that most of theworld was still "paperbound" and could not access our data anyway. butcomputers would still help, via dtp. there followed one of my most nightmarishexercisesšconverting my ibm dbase files into microsoft word files ready fordtp on a macintosh! we published the book, complete with photographs, inmarch 1990. it had about 400 entries. the book was an immediate hit, andgenerated a lot of interest and heated discussions, particularly by those who hadbeen left out. the photos were included because, apparently, there were somepeople who still doubted that there actually are african scientists. this book putthose doubts to rest. the second edition, revised and expanded, was publishedin march 1991, with over 600 entries.the peer review process at the aasi want to provide some detailed information about the peer review systemthat we used at asp. if a journal is to be taken seriously by the internationalscientific community, it must follow a rigorous peer review process. the systemestablished for the peer review of discovery and innovation was among the firstin africa.after preliminary assessment of a paper by the editor, we mailed copies totwo or three independent referees. we first removed any information about theauthoršname, country of origin, and current institutionšso that the reviewerwould not be unduly influenced by such particulars. we looked for reviewers whowere not from the same country as the authors. in order to continuouslyrecalibrate our standards, we also chose reviewers from outside africa.depending on referees' comments, the editor would:1) accept for publication;2) send referees' comments (anonymously) back to author for revision/response;3) send copy to other referee(s) for further opinion; or4) reject and return the manuscript to author.the revised manuscript could be accepted or sent back to referees. clearlythe peer review process often resulted in extended cycles of interaction betweenauthors and referees, mediated by the editor. though expensive and timeconsuminginnovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992115bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(given africa's poor postal communications), we found this process extremelyimportant in safeguarding the quality, credibility, and integrity of the journal.never during the first four years of publishing d&i did the aas receive anyfeedback challenging the intellectual content of the journal. indeed, potentiallyembarrassing submissions were caught before damaging our reputation. some ofthe exchanges generated a lot of heat. we also learned that the matter ofconfidentiality is often a managerial formality to protect the concerned parties:active experts worth their salt can usually guess the identity of the author or atleast the institution from which a given paper originated. as long as this formalityis respected by all, however, the process can obviate any suspicions of bias,plagiarism, blockage, and unfair competition in the scientific community.another unique feature of the d&i peer review system was that it was purelyvoluntary. we correctly believed that if our journal was excellent, then reviewerswould find it an honor to be associated with it and contribute to its success.as 1990 ended, it was clear that d&i was well established. we had fullymastered the intricacies of originating and producing a high quality, peerreviewed journal on african soil. however, d&i was now pushing the humanresources to the limit, particularly at the postproduction, business end:marketing, distribution, subscription fulfillment, and so on. this became thefocus of our struggle: to convince our donors to support the hiring of a marketingofficer. this was finally accomplished in june 1992. with this position filled, theaas controlled all the basic functions of dtp, and asp became, at last, a full(but still small) dtpbased publishing house.other publicationsas soon as asp proved the viability of dtp for scholarly publishing inafrica with the release of d&i in march 1989, the managers of aas wereemboldened to widen the dtp scope to include books, monographs, and reports.the editorial office already had four manuscripts on hand, coming out of otheraas programs or through outside collaboration. these quickly became pioneerdtp books under the asp imprint. their titles were: science for development in africa; soil and water management in africa; directory of scholarly journals published in africa; and regional integration in africa: an unfinished agenda.by november 1989, we had produced the african academy of sciences'strategic plan 1989œ1992, much acclaimed for its design excellence and qualityproduction in green, cream and gold, which became a major selling point amongthe aas's donors and clientele. production of equally welldesigned annualreports became a tradition at this time.in 1992, another milestone was passed when whydah, the aas newsletter,innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992116bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.was finally produced inhouse by dtp. this was a major achievement, because itwas accomplished through internal capacity building, without expanding thestaff. our administrative secretary, miss margaret anaminyi, taught herself dtpbasically by watching and doing over the years, until she challenged us to let herdo it all. her pioneering effort allowed us to produce the newsletter moreefficiently. she also spread the skills and confidence she gained to the other staffmembers and other aas projects. this caused a quantum leap in the efficiencyof our secretariat and the quality of our products as we became almost 100percent computerliterate.as 1992 ended, problems remained at the postproduction, business end butthese were being addressed by the new marketing officer. the biggest problemthreatening the dtp operation was that many of its pioneering staff began toleave for a variety of reasons. after professor isoun left in mid1990, wemanaged to cover for his absence through sheer energy and hard work. butwhen, at the end of 1991, professor nyong'o left to join the multiparty politics ofkenya, the pressure became unbearable. at the same time, i was making plans toreturn home to uganda and decided to stay only one more year as head ofprograms and associate editor. under this pressure, we still managed to produceall of our serials on time every time in 1992, but the book publishing sloweddown.in the meantime, it appears that the impetus for dynamic use of dtp hasbeen picked up by the icipe science press, which is covered by ms. agneskatama's case study (included in this volume). her study shows the developmentof the marketoriented, potentially sustainable strategy that we were planning atthe aas but had not yet begun to develop and implement.results, impacts, and benefits of the projectby the end of 1992, dtp was well established at the aas. the result wasthat all programs could confidently produce cameraready copy: books, journals,newsletters, brochures, and reports on time and to consistently high levels ofquality. our flagship publication, d&i, had broken all records by coming outregularly, on time, for four volumes (16 issues).its high quality content, favorably reviewed in nature, helped us breakthrough a thick barrier into the international science citation system. it wasabstracted and indexed in the secondary literature by chemical abstracts andcurrent contents. it was also carried in the catalogue of the african bookcollective in london, signalling its entry into worldwide promotion, marketing,and distribution. the number of papers submitted had risen to 780. discovery andinnovation was quickly establishing itself as the principal forum for scholarlyand policy discourse in africa.asp books and periodicals were displayed at international conferences andbook fairs worldwide, and could be found in many libraries. our books werehitting the market at a prolific rate, with 11 titles in our catalogue, plus thousandsof brochures, pamphlets, flyers, catalogs, indexes, and promotional materials.academyinnovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992117bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.science publishers became one of the fastest growing scholarly publishinghouses on the african scene. a new aas staff member confessed that he hadbeen misled before joining, by the number of publications reaching hisinstitution, into thinking that aas was a large organization with a hundredemployees. he found about ten. we worked hard, and we worked smart, mostlythrough dtp. (see box 4.)the aas is pinning great hopes on asp to become the main pillar of itsquest for selfreliance and reduced donor dependence.impacts of dtp rapidly spread throughout the organization. the dotmatrixprinter was abandoned suddenly for the laser when our director started refusingto sign nonlaser printed letters. suddenly, everyone wanted a macintosh withlaser printer. timeliness, quality, and financial prudence became aasmanagement goals. dtp could ensure delivery of the required results most of thetime.aas's pioneering spirit created a mini freelance industry in dtp, mainlycomposed of expatriates who were unemployed because of kenya's strictemployment regulations. they set up dtp facilities in their houses and servicedthe highpressure demands of the aas, through their spouses and friends. miriamisoun worked in this way to publish science for development in africa, taking agreat weight off gill ngola's shoulders; she also stepped in for an issue or two ofd&i when mrs. ngola was away. laura tindimubona designed almost all thebooks, the strategic plan, and annual reports. she used dtp to publishinventions of african scientists, which was printed by icipe science press in1992. these entrepreneurs were soon joined by others, including icipesecretaries and graduate students at the university of nairobi. and so dtp spreadin nairobi.here are some other examples of the impact of the desktop publishingprogram at the aas: one industrialist saw a new food formulation reported in an aaspublication and started a new production line in his factory; an article from d&i was repackaged for the popular media and got carriedby several news agencies in africa; i won the 1992 unesco swraj paul award for work on development of ascience culture in africa, an article first published as a guest editorial ind&i in 1990;box 4 impact of asp a colleague visited a foreign organization based in nairobi with themandate of collecting and disseminating african literature. he askedthem whether they had any books on science in africa. they said,"sure." so he said: "can i see some so as to acquire them for theaas library?" they brought out the books they had, and lo andbehold, they were all from the aas.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992118bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. my analysis of the characteristics of the african scientific community,published in the profiles book, led to a better understanding of the same andhelped in design of new aas programs, such as the education of girls andwomen; and experts who received papers to referee for d&i ended up submitting papersor getting involved in other aas projects.finally, i believe that d&i and other aas publications went a long way inbuilding the african scientific community, and perhaps, ultimately, an africanscience. any journal is an expression of the scientific community that surroundsit. the famous "internationally recognized" journals that the african scientistswere clamoring to publish in, e.g., journal of the american chemical society (jacs), are actually quite parochial in their core, because they have to berelevant to the needs and aspirations of american chemistry. for these reasons,african papers reporting on african problems would not be easily deemedrelevant to such journals. d&i, if it could overcome the problems it faced, couldbe such a mouthpiece, and yet be internationally recognized. this program in turnhas had a great impact in making the aas a highly visible authoritative leader ofscience in africa.analysis of lessons learnedthe main lesson we learned is that dtp should not be confused with simplytypesetting or design on a computeršwhich is what most laymen think. it shouldbe understood as publishing, first and foremost: this means managing the entireprocess or chain by which raw manuscripts are transformed and delivered to theconsumer in the most appropriate fashion. this entails managing the origination,printing, marketing, and distributionšand ideally doing all of this profitably andin a selfsustaining way. the computer can play a role anywhere along this chain.seen in this way, dtp as most people see it, is only a small part of the entireprocess. in our time, the aas certainly mastered the origination process and wedepended heavily on the mature printing industry of nairobi, but we had yet tocome to grips with the postproduction or business end. there is still lots of roomfor innovation and capacity building in these areas in africa. otherwise, why dowe still have so few reliable, sustainable scholarly journals in africa? the keyaspect we mastered was the technology of dtpšat a time when few others hadmuch experience with its application.another key to our rapid expansion in this period is traceable not only to theinternal training of secretaries but to the more fundamental trick of strategicrecruitment of a cadre of several young universitytrained graduate secretaries.they had the basic knowledge, skills, and aptitude to scale the heights demandedby the high standards set by the aas in all its work. tribute must be paid to thiscadre forinnovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992119bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many of the achievements of dtp at asp. most of them have since grownprofessionally to even higher levels and many are training their other colleagues.marketing and distribution of scholarly materials in africa is still tough, andmore training and capacity building is needed in this area. but the imminentcreation of an african market, since south africa became free, evidenced bymore free movement and the vibrant book fairs at nairobi and harare, may allimprove matters in the near future.in scholarly publishing, it pays to have a good, marketable product to workon. the aas itself, its mission of excellence, its fellows, and programs could besold to a good extent, inside and, more particularly, outside africa. we had noproblem getting materials to work on. but spotting and working on these tookinterest, vision, talent, and devotion.conclusions and recommendationsthis report has highlighted the experiences of an emerging scientificorganization whose dynamism and leadership was spearheaded by dtp. in theperiod 1989œ1992, we initiated and firmly established dtp at the africanacademy of sciences through a series of creative innovations. the aas can nowembark on the postpublication activities such as promotion, marketing, anddistribution. the results today (1995) give cause for looking at the future withconfidence.at the end of the reported period, asp was also looking to consolidate andexpand its scholarly publishing business. consolidation means putting in placeall the basic parts (people, funds, and equipment) of the publication chain, so as tomake it marketdriven and selfsustaining. this process has continued. the aspcan expand into tertiary level textbooks and other scholarly materials, whilemaintaining the journal and newsletter. this door remains open for asp, sincethe market is still underserved. other prospects lay in strengthening the role ofthe fellows and their ownership of the academy.the commitment of the donors, especially the carnegie corporation of newyork and the kuwait foundation for the advancement of science, was crucial at atime when we had to build up the credibility to attract a revenue base fromsubscriptions and advertisements. they had the vision and patience to nurture,over a long period, what was clearly a promising idea, while keeping the pressurehigh for quick maturity and independence. the challenge was how to support thebasic parts of the process so that donor withdrawal would not lead to collapse andthus wasted effort. clearly, more quantitative and diverse funding and promotionare needed to sustain scholarly publishing and we look to any innovations in thisregard. the challenge to africa's supporters remains.innovations in desktop publishing at the african academy ofsciences, 1989œ1992120bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.case studies on electronic networkingperhaps no information technology generates as much interest asnetworking. bringing electronic networking and internet capability to a countryopens avenues of communications that create hundreds of other opportunities.computerbased communications provides a means to bridge time and distance tofacilitate interpersonal communication. people who have the need or desire tocommunicate about a particular subject can do so without being either physicallypresent in the same location (as in a conventional meeting), or even available atthe same time (as in a telephone conference call or a video teleconference).electronic communication is in everyday use in many organizations inafrica; however, getting it into place in a new environment poses manychallenges. complex economic, social, political, and legal factors affect the useof the technology and present barriers to its successful implementation. thetelecommunications systems in many african countries are suffering fromdeteriorating equipment and inadequate investment. telecommunications costsare high in relation to other costs, and participation in some computerbasedcommunication activities can require scarce foreign exchange.still progress is being made. in the last year or two several african countrieshave gained full internet connectivity. others are creating local networks andadding users one by one until they build a user base large enough to sustain aninternet connection. in the meantime, the users and the system operators arelearning valuable skills.the case studies in this section describe the difficult processes that fivesystem operators have gone through in order to build the networking capability in121bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.their countries. these five projects are interconnected since the project managerswere introduced to the technology by many of the same people and through manyof the same megaprojects. their individual stories are unique, however, becauseeach author overcame different technological, managerial, and infrastructuralconstraints.as one author wrote, networking tends to sell itself. the more users youhave online, the more users you have waiting to be connected. so, almost oneuser at a time, these authors are helping to build africa's information highway.122bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic networking for the researchcommunity in ethopiaby lishan adamlishan adam has a b.sc. in electrical engineering and am.sc. in computer information systems. he is workingtowards his ph.d at the university of sheffield, unitedkingdom. he has worked in the information field for the lastsix years, focusing mainly on technology for accessinginformation, which includes electronic communicationnetworks. currently, he is the coordinator for the capacitybuilding for electronic communications in africa (cabeca)project. his research interests include electroniccommunications for grassroots institutions, networking technologies, andtechniques for building qualitative information systems and networks.background and context of the projectthis case study describes the challenges faced in setting up a researchcommunication network in ethiopia. it covers the activities i undertook and theconstraints i faced while expanding electronic connectivity to a researchcommunity. it also discusses the lessons i learned in the process.ethiopia is located in the horn of africa and shares borders with sudan,kenya, somalia, eritrea, and djibouti. addis ababa, the capital city, is oftencalled ''a city for africa" because it hosts two major organizations: the unitednations economic commission for africa (uneca) and the organization ofafrican unity (oau). uneca is the african regional arm of the united nationseconomic and social council. uneca has established and sponsors a number ofafrican institutions to promote all aspects of socioeconomic development of theregion.the pan african development information system (padis), one suchregional institution under uneca, was created to build both information andnetworking capability in african countries. padis was instrumental in setting upa national electronic network in ethiopia and in connecting members of theresearch community to each other locally and with colleagues worldwide.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia123bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 underuse of equipmenta recent survey conducted prior to linking colleges outside of the capital citywith the network showed that one college received a few modems in 1993 anddid not know what to do with them. the modems were locked up in cupboardsfor two years!there are only a few advanced research institutions and two majoruniversities in ethiopia. addis ababa university, the country's largest university,administers most of the colleges. the agriculture university of alemaya, inharar province 500 kilometers east of addis ababa, is the next largest researchcenter. health research is undertaken by the medical faculty of addis ababauniversity and at two other research colleges in gondor and jimma. the countryhas several teacher training schools and research centers.the level of scientific and technological information (sti) and infrastructurein these research centers varies. some colleges lack the most essential resources,such as paper and ink. others use computers and connect to the local electronicnetworking host. the need for sti and communication is great, especially bycolleges outside of addis ababa.the current sti environment in ethiopiaethiopia is the second poorest country in africa, having been devastated bylonglasting war, drought, and mismanagement. the national sti environment isgenerally weak, reflecting the poor economic situation in the country. thetransition1 economy is too weak to support the population, which is growing at anannual rate of 3.1 percent, with the fertility rate mounting to 7.5 percent. the stienvironment has suffered from the poor economic performance during the lasttwenty years.all sti centers, including university libraries, have been unable to expandand keep up with demands. there were hardly any books coming to the countryduring the previous socialist government. according to the head of the addisababa university libraries "most collections are those of the 1960s." those werethe "golden years" of library collection developmentšwhen resources were madeavailable to support new acquisitions.most colleges are not equipped with computers and other informationtechnology tools. the more remote the college from the capital city, the less it isexposed to computing technology. (see box 1.) underuse of existing equipmentdue to lack of training and low quality of maintenance is also common. lack ofknowledge about different hardware contributes to the underuse of computeraccessories.computer equipment is generally expensive. a nonerror correcting, 2400bps modem that costs $ 40.00 in the united states costs the equivalent of $ 200 inethiopia. the local price of accessories is between 400 percent to 1500 percentmore than the original cost. a bureaucracy for clearing equipment throughcustomselectronic networking for the research community in ethopia124bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exasperates most possibilities of getting it through mail order or from friendsresiding in foreign countries.one additional problem, unique to the country, is related to the use ofethiopian script. ethiopia is one of the oldest countries using its own script. theshortage of good, easytouse software that is adaptable to local script is a majorproblem. generic nativelanguage software interfaces that allow easier storageand retrieval of textual information in local languages and scripts are not welldeveloped. modern tools, such as windows [byte, 1994], that have features forprocessing data in all languages simultaneously are not readily available inethiopia.a lack of good training schools and colleges in computing technology hascreated a chronic shortage of trained personnel in advanced networking, althoughaddis ababa university now offers courses in computer applications and systemdesign. due to the lack of incentives and of an enabling environment, one seldomfinds dedicated computer "gurus." the culture for competition and independenteffort to solve complex computing problems is not well developed.several small computer companies were set up during the transition periodbut they have not become a source of objective advice in computing technology.most companies focused on generating quick income through computerapplications training. qualitative and advanced services in networking and localarea network (lan) management are not available at these companies. due to thelack of a good professional background, techniques such as applicationdevelopment, system integration, and networking are not practiced.the telecommunication sector is another underdeveloped area in thecountry. national telecommunication service in ethiopia is owned by thegovernment. analog telephone2, digital leased lines, and radio links to rural areasare major services of the national operator. there is no modern communicationtechnology. rural telecommunications is still operator assisted. packet switchingand isdn (integrated services digital network) are under consideration.a three to five year queue is usually the case for individual households thatwish to install a telephone. business and international organizations may gettelephone lines within one to three months when lines are available. someinstitutions have to wait for months to get direct lines.the above national sti environment dictated the type of networktechnologies we chose to use, as well as the pace at which we could install andapply them. policy, regulatory, management, and cultural problems were by farthe most challengingševen when compared to the technical bottlenecks faced insetting up electronic mail links to the research community. all the same,electronic networking in ethiopia was started during one of the most rigidgovernments in africa.3project descriptionnetworking activity in the country began under a project funded byinternational development research centre (idrc) entitled "computernetworking in africa." the aim of the project was to assess the viability ofnetworking betweenelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia125bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.african institutions. the specific objectives of the project in ethiopia wereto: improve the exchange of scientific information within ethiopia byestablishing a working, efficient, and reliable electronic network that bringscontact with other networks locally, regionally, and internationally; develop human resources in electronic networking through training,transfer of skills, and university teaching; develop corps of skilled users in the country through training, troubleshooting, and ongoing technical support; establish a national scientific network that supports all levels oftechnologies (fidonet, uucp, and tcp/ip, which stands for transmissioncontrol protocol/internet protocol and connotes a full, interactive internetconnection) for various categories of colleges and users under differentsituations; and set up an internet link through development of the user base that justifiesthe cost of a tcp/ip connection.project experience and implementationthe first activity of the project in ethiopia was initiated in september 1991,when the ethiopian science and technology commission, which coordinates thenational sti networks, participated in the first african workshop on low costnetworking. the workshop provided training on low cost communicationstechnology and charted connectivity strategies among research institutions inafrica and those in ethiopia. subsequently other academic institutions(universities, colleges and faculties) began to link to the main national host.4to date the main national host serves over 1,000 users drawn from ngos,research institutions, government, business, and others. researchers evolved fromnetwork"hesitant" to power users. for example, a connection was made to thechemistry department of addis ababa university at the beginning of 1993. atthat time, a professor said openly "this is a waste of time and of computerresources." in 1995, the department became the top user of the national hub and acenter for network support to addis ababa university users.network usage and development activity at the university intensified inoctober 1993, immediately after a workshop was organized for participantsdrawn from various departments of the addis ababa university. the workshopcreated conditions for setting up a steering committee to promote networkingwithin the university. the steering committee evolved from a few actors to a fullfledged universitywide networking group. it established a networking committeeto promote networking in the country and develop connectivity to the internet.the research community became the second largest user of the nationalnetwork (see table 1.) it constitutes 14 percent of padis installed sites and 26.2percent of total local users.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia126bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 1 composition of padisnet users (april 5 1995)user categorynumber ofinstalledsitespercent oftotal sitesaveragenumber ofuserstotalnumber ofuserspercentresearch andacademic3914727326.2ngo9132.7436435government1144444.2business165.753484.6individuals4817.252969.1international7225.9321620.7media10.4220.2total2781001043100source: padisnet registration forms.in addition to developing a sound user base that would eventually justify theupgrade to a full internet connection, one of the major activities of the project atthe beginning involved experimenting with a mix of technologies to select thehardware that was most appropriate for working with poor telephone lines. weconducted the experiments using a mix of technologies to arrive at appropriatesolutions. we evaluated the following four connection techniques during theprocess: long distance dialin to unix hosts in north america; uucp6 link through a leased line by running a gateway software; packetradio connection to health institutions; and fidonet7 based mail connection to internet using gnfido gateway inlondon.our first attempt to link researchers in the country used long distance dialinto unix hosts in canada and the united states. access to large academicnetworks such as bitnet was the main interest at the time. a direct dialin to aunix server at carleton university in canada was made every day to collect andsend messages to the research community. rudimentary terminal accessprograms such as procomm were used to link to the carleton server. this turnedout to be one of the most frustrating means of making connections as the linesbroke at almost every trial. successful connections were so rare that theconnection was discontinued after a few months. the cost of telecommunicationsmounted every month. the cost was made up of: long distance telephone charges; low speed connections (successful connections were at 300 bps); and additional procedures required as a result of long distance dialing and linebreaks (i.e., transferring files several times after line breaks; loginprocedures to packet switching network in the u.s.).electronic networking for the research community in ethopia127bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paying enormous bills every month for long distance connections forcedpadisnet to switch to a more cost effective site. while exploring sites, a linkusing the united nations alternate voice and data (avd) leased line to theinstitute of global communications (igc) became cheaper and more attractive.the igc link enabled us to convert local fidonet messages into uucp formatbefore leaving the padis host via a gateway software. this created conditionsfor developing local expertise in running gateway software and in experimentingwith uucp packets. however, since the line was devoted to un communications(voice and fax), it became slow and inadequate for data communications.padisnet was given only a 15 minute window to send and receive uucpmessages. this was an inconvenience and resulted in the final suspension of theconnection after ten months of operation.another technology used for sti connectivity in ethiopia was a healthnetlink. padis helped to establish this link and to secure its ground station license.the healthnet ground station, which links to a low earthorbiting (leo) satelliteoperated by satellife, was licensed in april 1994šafter 18 months ofnegotiation with the national telecommunications operator. the ground stationwas installed at a teaching hospital, one of the largest in the country. thisconnection was not used as effectively as hoped due to the following difficulties: unreliable power supply. fluctuation in electric current at the site of theground station led the system to crash from time to time. very complex software. a homewritten fidonet software madeconfiguration difficult. lack of documentation and troubleshooting toolsheightened the problem. synchronization of systems. the healthnet system is composed of areceiver, transmitter, modem, antenna, microcomputer, satellite, andsoftware. failure in one or more of these systems resulted in a completecrash of the node from time to time. lack of an overall plan for user support. the national healthnet node didnot come up with a plan for introducing the technology, connectivity, orregular user support. low bandwidth. the uplink and downlink speed of the modem and satellitepass time was limited. with growing user demand for bandwidthintensivedocuments, such as reports with graphics or images, the system becameinadequate. marketing. the failure to develop an expansion plan and lack of marketingof the services limited its use in the country.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia128bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a direct fidonet connection to the association for progressivecommunications (see description on page 189) in london using public telephonelines remained the most attractive of all the above techniques. this connection iscurrently our main link to the global networks and provides all storeandforwardinternet services. due to a lack of knowledge about the potential of storeandforward technology, researchers mainly use the email and bulletin board servicesof the linkage. some students and a few researchers are exploring other potentialservices such as: searching the padis database using email query; accessing the hornet bulletin board system (bbs); batch internet services such as ftp, gopher, and archie through mail; and conferences and fidonet echo mail.the hornet bbs is perhaps the most unique application of low costtechnology in ethiopia for information exchange. hornet offers an introduction tothe potentials of electronic information systems and provides a reservoir ofbackground information and discussion on the horn of africa. [parker, 1994] thebulletin board offers: fidonet conferences (or echoes) to as wide an audience as possible, with noonsite software setup necessary; a mechanism to exchange information and skills among users of the padissystem; and a central store of information, files, help, useful internet addresses, and soon.simplicity and minimum hardware requirements on the users' side make thebbs more popular. prompted by this offering, a number of research institutions,including the addis ababa university and the ethiopian science and technologycommission, are setting up a scientific bulletin board system. local bulletinboard systems connected to information reservoirs, such as databases and tools oncdrom, are found to be the most useful tools for sti networking under thelocal infrastructure.during the last two years, increasing user demands for real timeconnections, the need for joining the global information infrastructure (gii), andcongestion of the host telephone line forced the national node to look for a bettertechnology. at the time of this writing, the node is exploring full internetconnectivity and/or other intermediate solutions. the effort to get a full internet(tcp/ip) connectivity is hampered by three major problems: high cost of leased lines; institutional and national constraints; andelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia129bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. financial resources to cover implementation and running costs.leased line coststhe national telecom operator provides leased lines at a very high tariff.table 2 shows approximate monthly charges for international leased lines to theunited states and south africa.8table 2 cost of leased line from ethiopia to selected countriestype of circuitcountrycost/month19.2 kbits analogusa$4,70019.2 kbits analogsouth africa$6,20064 kbits digitalusa$11,70064 kbits digitalsouth africa$15,500source: action plan document of a committee for bringing internet to ethiopia (bite).national infrastructure and political constraintsthe low level of infrastructure as well as policyspecific problems continueto hamper the progress of setting up full connectivity to global networks inethiopia. changing the attitude of the government and of the pt&t (the nationaltelecommunication provider) remains one of the most challenging tasks. some ofthe national infrastructure and political constraints we face include: competition and unwillingness of the national telecom operator to endorseoperation of national cooperative or private nodes; low participation of government institutions in overall networkimplementation; lack of knowledge of electronic communication by government officialsthat results in delays to approve research network (see box 2); education structure and low value accorded to information management,transmission, exchange and use; and lack of a critical mass of trained unix experts or "gurus."despite the above problems, the project continued to work towardsimproving network access to researchers. the bottomup approach for building anetwork (starting from users, soliciting institutional support, and thenapproaching the government) helped us bypass an often difficult bureaucraticstructure in the country.eventually, the increase in the availability of local "hand holders" andtroubleshooters encouraged expansion of the network. the local troubleshooterscreatedelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia130bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional champions and then the institutional champions helped users getaround configuration problems. in time, we motivated others to get connected.box 2 healthnet in ethiopiaoften government policies work against the introduction of newtechnologies. lack of understanding can lead to delays and other frustrations.for example, it was a painful process to secure a healthnet ground stationlicense for ethiopia. the process took over 18 months. simply clearing theground station equipment from customs took over a month. an engineer fromsatellife, who could have been used for training and setup, ended up runningbetween the national telecom operator's office and the ministry of health. thelicense was approved with a traffic compensation fee of $350 per month. theground station, which was donated as national asset to aid in the transmissionof health information, was instead treated as a cnn hub. the word "groundstation" was found to be misleading for technicians who did not bother to knowwhat a packet radio connection to low earth orbit satellite was. the trafficcompensation fee was waived six months later.reliability of the network has also contributed towards the diffusion ofnetworking technology in ethiopia. network reliability is a function of goodsystems operators (sysops) running the node, advanced computing technologytools, and reliable telecommunication infrastructure. padis' effort to make thesystem reliable by hiring additional system operators9 and acquiring the latesttechnologies favored the situation.other factors that contribute to further network expansion include: the availability of dedicated local champions and the availability of simple network learning tools, such as the hornet bulletinboard system.padis management played a major role in leading and supportingnetworking in the country. the availability of information10 at padis providedincentive for several users to seek connection to the network. padis made itsresources available via the network to satisfy users who wanted to go beyondelectronic mail.individual willingnessšespecially from top government officialsštoembrace existing technology and their demand for better services are perhaps themajor motivating factors for expansion to a full tcp/ip. influenced by theirformer contacts (usually at universities or ngos in developed countries)researchers who are not connected demand quicker and better connectivity.contact requirements and realization of benefits of networking compelled severalusers to demand email services even under difficult circumstances. what are themajor benefits that prompted researchers to look for electronic networking?electronic networking for the research community in ethopia131bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.results, impact, and benefits of the projectreduced communication coststhe most outstanding benefit of electronic networking to the researchcommunity in ethiopia was that of bringing a new tool for reducing highcommunications costs. ethiopia is a country with one of the lowest pay scales inthe world. the following vital figures shows the situation.professor or researcher salary per month$162.00cost of:1 page fax to uk7.205 page fax to uk16.103 minute telephone call to uk8.205 minute telephone call to uk13.70electronic networking brought a considerable amount of communicationscost savings compared to fax, telex, telephone, and courier service. though emailcosts are complex and difficult to quantify, we do know that networking offers afar cheaper option to all existing transmission media. (see table 3.) thefollowing tables and computations show a considerable comparative advantage ofemail over a faxšwithout involving costs of other elements such as hardware, ortraining.using compression tools, such as pkzip, an average document can becompressed 2.5 times. the amount of bytes per minute after compression wouldbe:compression factor 2.5total bytes per minute 2.5 x 103342 = 258357high speed modems, with good error correction, synchronized to thereceiving modem, can also increase the amount of bytes transmitted per minute.using 28.8 kbps modem the amount of bytes per minute would be: bytes perminute of 28.8 kbps modem (1.5 x 285357 = 387535)using the above figures, we can calculate the cost per kilobyte of differentmeans of communication.table 3 raw data used in computationdate and timenumber of bytes transferredtime takenbytes/minute10 july at 6:00565,5835:25104,73711 july at 6:00728,4106:53105,87311 july at 1:00353,4963:30100,99811 july at 5:24562,2565:24104,121source: log files of the padisnet host july 1995.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia132bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in addition to the reduction of communications costs, email made thefollowing contributions to the research community in ethiopia [adam, 1994]: it facilitated the organization of international seminars, joint authorship, andthe execution of joint projects that otherwise would have been expensiveand time consuming. according to the director of the institute of ethiopianstudies, dr. bahru zewde, ''global conferences in ethiopia and those onethiopia in 1994 were cost effective and successful because of emailconnections." it inspired the introduction of standard computing operating systems suchas unix. recently the school of information science for africa (sisa)purchased a unix server as a networking backbone. the mathematicsdepartment of addis ababa university received a unix computer inconnection with its networking effort from ethiopians residing in northamerica. deans and department chairs were forced to plan to "wire" theiroffices and create local area networks (lans) to cope with an increasingdemand from researchers to have independent accounts on work stations. it facilitated a switch from the hierarchical model of organizationalprocedures to the informal interaction among researchers in the country andthose worldwide. user feedback indicates that delays in signing regularcorrespondence were eliminated upon arrival of email. (see table 4.)email also brought about the reunification of the research communities inethiopia with those elsewhere. it improved family and informal ties betweenethiopians residing overseas and those at home.11improved training optionselectronic networking facilitated the availability of more national andinstitutional trainers. it created the expansion of knowledge on the use andbenefits oftable 4 cost comparison between fax message and electronic mail betweenaddis ababa and londonmediumaverage kilobytes/perminutecost/kbcost ration to a faxfax12400.181:1email using 14.4modem2370.00931:19email using 28.8modem133550.00621:29electronic networking for the research community in ethopia133bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking and tcp/ip connectivity. the methodology used in trainingcontributed to improved skills in the country. the national host uses the followingtechniques to train users.introductionusers are introduced to key features of networking. this covers basics oflocal networking, what it involves, cost, and types of services.site configuration and trainingsite training is meant to connect researchers to the network. it involvesconfiguring the hardware, setting up telephone lines, providing handson trainingon system usage, and training in basics of troubleshooting.ongoing assistancethe host provides continuous online assistance to improve users skills indealing with different utilities and to work on improved and cost efficienttechniques.workshopthis is used both as marketing tool for the national node and for advancedtraining. experience indicated that initial introductory workshops overload userswith new concepts. successful workshops could only be held after usage of thenetworks. advanced workshops were found to be useful in promotingconnectivity.improved skillsanother considerable impact of the network was an increase andimprovement of the skills at the main national node. we developed skills inmanaging networks, dealing with administrative problems, developing techniquesto respond to users' problems, managing system malfunctions, developing toolsand guidelines, and gathering data. the experience we gained was immense.improved access from rural areasthe spread of the network to the rural area is one of the most significantachievements of the project. despite technical problems, such as unreliableconnections and more focus on the capital city, a number of users were able tolink to the padisnet from outside of addis ababa. ngos with field officesoutside of the capital found networking a convenient tool for sending logisticalinformation and data on field situations.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia134bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.doctors with no telephone connections were able to use networking.medical doctors from medicins sans frontiers, headquartered in belgium, whowere working 800 kilometers from addis ababa were able to send messages anddata to their correspondents all over the world. lacking telephones at their fieldsite, they send messages via small airplane to addis ababa for uploading to theirhost to resend to padis. all international messages received are sent back by thesame plane the following day. other mobile field researchers from the samelocation were able to link their modems to the nearest city where phones areavailable.a number of colleges outside of addis ababa are discovering the value ofnetworking. they face double isolationšfrom both the developed world and thecountry's capital where most of the activities and decisions take place. everythingin the country is hierarchical and centralized. decisions at higher levels (at thecapital) take a long time to reach institutions in remote areas. networking canreduce the isolation and make communication more efficient.connectivity to the rural areas facilitated the coordination of resources andthe diffusion of technology. connectivity at the mekelle college (710 kilometersfrom addis) recently stimulated the establishment of a lan for connectingindividual professors to the global network. a project run by the ethiopianscience and technology commission to link over thirtysix colleges outside ofthe capital stimulated further international cooperation between the colleges andother universities worldwide. the commission intends to "wire" all colleges andhigh schools in the country while working on a full tcp/ip connection at thecapital.analysis of lessons learnedlesson 1the resources required for achieving access to knowledge and widernational coverage are a fraction of the benefits gained by building networks.coordinating activities at a national level assists in realizing cost effectivenessand efficiency. networks can subsidize themselves. lack of an infrastructureshould not be seen as a major bottleneck to networking.there are two major goals of electronic networking of the researchcommunity: wider coverage of users by reaching many scientists, researchers, studentsetc.; and improving access to knowledge by bringing global information resourcescloser to the scientific community.attaining these two goals needed institutional and infrastructure readinessfrom the outset. when these two goals were first proposed to managers and policyelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia135bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.makers their initial reaction was that "there are no resources" and "we can not doit under our telecommunications situation"!lesson 2training is the main element in infrastructure development. do not starttraining on dos based networking at universities, start with unix, which ibelieve to be the multiuser system of choice for networking universities.wider national coverage requires local infrastructure development. localinfrastructure means not only the physical setup of machines and software, butalso building a sense of awareness and increasing the participation of users.training should cover a wide range of groups at different levels and shouldintroduce all standard technologies such as unix to the academic communityfrom the very beginning. starting training in the dos environment limitsuniversities' capacity to move quickly on to sophisticated techniques. using dosfor networking universities instead of unix is like using typewriters instead ofword processing. good documentation saves time.lesson 3build as many local area networks as possible. a lan is a building blockfor internet connectivity.capacity building in universities requires setting up of a universitywide networkfor interconnecting many lans, serving individual departments, libraries, andadministrative offices, and offering the connections to the internet throughgateways. lans are building blocks for good research networks.lesson 4good network management practices should begin when the number ofusers is very small. good network administration can prevent user and donorfrustration.the professional management and administration of a network should begin assoon as you have two users. a wellrun network needs a good billing structure,well developed methods for gathering data on the type and nature of users, andmechanisms to backup log files, document problems, and track progress. putthese systems in place before the number of users grows to an unmanageablesize.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia136bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lesson 5networks should be interactive on both an inbound and outbound basis.interactive sysops are the best assets of good networks. inbound interaction withlocal users and outbound links to other networkers worldwide assist in sharingknowledge, resources, and time. documenting tips and passing them on to usershelps networks to expand.lesson 6using software with simpler user interface is important.one of the major components in infrastructure building is the provision ofsimple tools to users. users should get uncomplicated tools. using software withgood user interfaces reduces frustration and improves users' interests innetworks. the community of macintosh users should not be neglected.lesson 7do not focus only on global information sources. assist in building localcapacity in sti exchange.improved knowledge access can be achieved by creating a collaborativeatmosphere within a country and by connecting to global networks. nationalsti sources should be strengthened to enable local exchange of information andcollaboration. networking should be built with maximum participation of localsti providers and users.lesson 8do not promote the concept of subsidy. promote the concept of "pay a smallamount to keep your network healthy."networks should sustain themselves. incomegenerating should start at thebeginning. users should be told to pay for services. subsidizing researchers isimportant; researchers should, however, know the costs and participate in payingfor services from the beginning. the payment could come from universitybudgets or projects.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia137bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusion and recommendationsscientific and technological information in africa needs to be strengthened.african input to global information resources emerges from the local stiinstitutions. databases and low cost networks will ultimately serve africaninformation needs. this is especially true for local loops wheretelecommunications and other infrastructure continue to be problematic. theinternational link itself is also inadequate. except in south africa, the othereleven african countries with internet connectivity have a maximum speed of(usually) 19.2 kbps. reaching the global community and providing african stito global users need efforts in strengthening the local capabilities both innetworking and in information generation, management and dissemination, whileupgrading the bandwidth for international connectivity.quality, reliability, and sustainability of african sti and networks isbecoming another critical focus. surveys and experience indicate that databaseson sti lack good quality and are mostly unreliable. database and informationsystems development in the region need to build quality tools and strategies forsustainability of african sti databases. the quality and sustainability of low costelectronic networks serving sti in africa should also be improved.electronic communication will become a major tool for distributing globalinformation to africa. this does not mean african researchers need and canafford full tcp/ip connectivity. the key questions become: is the african stienvironment ready for full internet connectivity? will communication be twoway (from africa to developed world and vice versa)? what will be the overallimplications of internet for a few in the capital cities versus those who areisolated due to a poor infrastructure and who need to break the isolation?the answers to these questions remain a challenge to sti providers inafrica. african sti institutions need internet connectivity. internet connectivitymeans full participation of local providers and sti institutions in informationgeneration and usage on the global networks. the current trend in most africancountries focuses on internet "proximity": bringing internet closer to the userswith no expansion plans for wider connectivity using low bandwidth links.encouraging sti institutions to participate in information exchange will becomethe next challenge after bringing an internet link to a country.the situation in ethiopia, which is often similar to that in other countries inafrica, indicates that careful analysis of the national sti environment should bemade to design the most appropriate solution to improve overall research capacityin a country.efforts should begin by building the capacity of national science andtechnology institutions, such as research institutions, colleges, and small stiservice providers. they should be encouraged and trained to manage informationand use global information sources. interim innovative services, such asconnections to major databases or internet services via local bulletin boardsystems, should beelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia138bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.available. users should be made fully aware of the services available to themeven through existing lowcost, storeandforward technologies.one of the major tasks facing african sti networks is a lack of knowledgeof what is happening in the same region, the same country, or even the sameinstitution. we should develop directories, dissemination tools, and guides onsti networking efforts. we should disseminate via our networks sti metainformation (information on scientific and technology information). without asolid regional sti base, connectivity alone cannot serve its purpose.notes1. ethiopia's longest crisis and war years were between 1974 and 1991. during the transitionperiod (1991œ1995) the government attempted to eliminate centralized and rigid policies to makefavorable conditions for economic growth.2. international telephone linkage to major cities in the world is relatively good. users canconnect with up to 28 kbps to london without difficulty. a 300 to 900 cps connection can beachieved using errorcorrecting modems. it is often easier to telephone internationally than acrossregional cities. the call from addis to mekelle is often compared to that of addis to london.cost of international communication is also high. the tariff was raised by 75% in may 1994.3. the ethiopian socialist government which had fallen apart in 1991 promoted strict policies oncommunications. modems were not allowed due to reasons related to national security. anymove towards opening up communication was looked upon as a "war against socialism."4. the national host was set up at padis and the network is called padisnet. it is open to allcategories of users on a feeforuse basis.5. since april 1995, the number of installed sites has increased by an average of 5 per week,thereby nearly doubling since that time.6. uucp is a unix based storeandforward technology. developments were fast and based oninternational cooperation between programmers. it is a suitable start up technology for theacademic community.7. fidonet is a storeandforward networking technology by which computers poll each other toexchange email and conference messages. ability to work over poor telephone lines and softwarethat enables offline working make fidonet attractive to ngos and african institutions withsmall budgets.8. leased line costs to south africa are almost 1.5 times those of links to the united states. thereis double hop to reach south africa.9. in june 1995, padis used an internšan ethiopian phd student from columbia universityšto look at universitywide networking and to improve the reliability of local systems.10. the padis information system consists of bibliographic databases on african socioeconomicdevelopment, databases on african experts, ongoing research projects in africa, researchinstitutions in africa, and other numerous complementary and specific databases on africa.11. the author received numerous requests from ethiopians studying abroad to link to theirfamilies at home. families separated during the war and those who fled economic problems arebeginning to use networking to reunite with their families. ethiopian researchers abroad whodiscovered the existence of the linkage are connecting back with their former teachers andinstitutions.12. fax costs vary based on text type. graphics can be 100k or more. regular fax message canbe 10 to 70k in size. an average size was taken for this calculation.13. a 28.8 kbps was taken to be 1.5 times faster than a 14.4 kbps modem.electronic networking for the research community in ethopia139bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliographyadam, lishan. (1994) sustainable academic networking in africa: system operator's perspective,paper published by american association for advancement of science, accra, ghana.beyond windows: globalization of windows. byte june 1994, pp. 177œ183.international association of university (1991) university based critical mass system for informationtechnology.national research council (1991) status of scientific and technological information systems andservices in selected african countries. national academy press, washington, d.c.parker, ben. (1994) the hornet: the horn of africa's electronic information exchange. addisababa, ethiopiaelectronic networking for the research community in ethopia140bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking in west africaby moussa fallmoussa fall is network manager for endadakar node indakar, senegal. he also works for the cabeca project andthrough that project has installed electronic mail nodes inmorocco, chad, and mali. he has plans for working inmauritania, the gambia, guinea, guineabissau, niger,togo, and benin. he was an administrative assistant at endabefore getting into the networking field in 1991. he asks thathis case study be dedicated to "pape, gone so early, and totouti and the whole tribe for their help and support.""networking means connecting people to people and people to information;it does not mean connecting computers to computers."wendy d. whitešgrowing the internet in africa,internet society news, 1994, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 28.background and context of the projecti work for an organization called environment and development action inthe third world (enda). it was founded in 1972 in order to: work with grassroots groups on the basis of their needs and objectives; contribute to the search for alternative development possibilities at all levelsas well as to the various kinds of training programs that will make thisdevelopment possible; and contribute to intellectuals' and trained personnel's involvement in the settingup and implementation of development programs in the service of thelargest number of people possible.enda has also had a leading role in various global networks dedicated tohabitat, energy, street youth, pesticides, and other issues that have anenvironmentalnetworking in west africa141bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.component. enda works in all parts of the third world but the headquarters,where i work, is in dakar, senegal, in west africa. senegal is a francophonecountry.since 1975, my role at enda, among other administrative tasks, hasconsisted of organizing seminars, conferences, and training sessions. theseoutreach tasks have helped to put me in contact with many people and i believethat i started networking from there.i first met doug rigby1 in 1991, at an interdoc meeting in epe(netherlands), at which there was an introduction to electronic networking. hespent considerable time talking to me about fidonet technology and the ngonetproject. (see box 1.) back in dakar, i pushed my boss to get an email accountwith a european private email provider. we accessed this account through thesenegalese ptt x.25 and we extensively used it for email and for the faxservice.project descriptionin june 1992, the ngonet project organized a one week workshop in dakarto introduce fidonet to the nongovernmental organization (ngo) community.doug rigby was the organizer and, of course, i was among the participants. toencourage ngo networking, the project donated one pc 386 for the node andfour modems. enda was chosen to host the node because of its commitment toimmediately acquire a dedicated phone line and to allow me to give part of mytime to the networking project.box 1 the ngonet projectthe ngonet project was instrumental in bringing networking to africa. itstarted as a project of the environment liaison centre international (elci) innairobi where a fidonet bulletin board system had been set up to provide aconduit for electronic mail traffic in the region and to ngos worldwide. this wasdone using a highspeed modem to make daily calls to the greennet fidonet(gnfido) gateway in london.the project was based on a survey that found that there were significantnumbers of nongovernmental organizations that had computers but were notusing them for electronic mail. to provide ngos with the cheapest access,emphasis was placed on establishing a series of hosts with high speed modemsdistributed throughout africa. these then provided ngos with local support anda local call to connect to the global electronic network. four prototype hostswere set up, one for each region of africa  elci in nairobi, mango in harare,enda in dakar, and endaarabe in tunis.networking in west africa142bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.here, i have to confess that i had no dos skillsšenda only used macs.but, because i was really interested in this new technology, i bought books ondos and computing in general and started learning. when you are verymotivated you can ''move mountains"–for three months, the four ngos that had received training and modemsstarted communicating just among themselves. there was no international traffic!then, in august 1992, the network received another donation from the ngonetprojectša high speed modem (telebit trailblazer 2500)šwhich made us readyto connect to the rest of the world.fidonetša grassroots networkmy introduction to fidonet was so important that i should take time here todescribe this form of networking in more detail. fidonet is a grassroots electroniccommunications community that has been hard at work for over a decadedevising ever cheaper and increasingly sophisticated tools to serve its needsthrough dialup, storeandforward, and modembased connections. fidonettechnology has proven to be a powerful doityourself tool for establishing initialfootholds into the world of electronic communications. it offers users anaffordable option even if they lack institutional affiliations, financial resources,or are located in a country where the nearest electronic communications linkrequires an expensive dialup call over international phone lines.because fidonet technology emerged in an environment where individualsoperated each system independently and covered their own costs for phone callsand equipment, it had to be very flexible, decentralized, and designed to operateinexpensively with standard modems and microcomputers connected overordinary phone lines. the "handshaking" and file transfer protocols built into allfidonetcompatible software incorporate compression, error correction, and errorrecovery capabilities that squeeze as much data as possible into the shortesttransmission time that the hardware will allow. instead of using packetswitching, these independent systems establish gateways with larger,international electronic mail systems using high speed modems. at regularintervals, the independent systems dial into the larger systems to swap incomingand outgoing messages. this approach keeps down the cost of international callswithout requiring sophisticated computer equipment.fidonet messages are sent along a hierarchy. at the top are five very broadgeographic zones. africa is zone number 5. the zones are divided into regions,then into hosts, then into hubs, and then into nodes. just like all the levels abovethem in the chain, nodes offer local email, pass new messages to and from thehub, and collect messages to and from the pointšthe lowest level of the fidonethierarchy. point operators have systems that are configured with all the softwarenecessary to call (or poll) the node and upload and download messages and fileswhenever it is convenient. the computer can do all the work automatically,making the callsnetworking in west africa143bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.into the central system at a time when the lines may have less traffic or the costsmay be lower.box 2 internet navigational toolstelnet  telnet, the internet standard protocol for remote terminalconnections, is used for logging into and searching other computers connectedto the internet. ftp  ftp stands for file transfer protocol and allows users toexchange files between their workstations and remote computers connected tothe internet.gopher  gopher, a software program for browsing and informationretrieval, provides a menudriven interface that shows what is available on aserver. the user burrows through a set of "nested" menus to get closer andcloser to a specific topic. gopher collects information scattered across manycomputers and presents it on the same menu.veronica  veronica is an indexer that can query every gopher on thegopher system to search for a keyword or phrase in a menu title. it then givesthe address of all the menus with those key words.wais  wais, wide area information server, searches the full text of adocument to look for specified key words. wais accepts commands in plainenglish, processes them at the user level, and relays the processed informationfrom the user to the selected databases.world wide web (www)  www is a tool for working with collectionsof data, or databases. it is a hypertext based system that provides access to avariety of files and information. hypertext allows a user doing research on onedocument to jump to a related item in another document through hypertextlinks. in www, each document contains highlighted items for which additionalinformation is available. the additional information is contained in anotherdocument that is displayed when the user selects the highlighted item. withappropriate software, such as netscape, the user can view not just text butpictures, sound files, and video.fidonet is a communications technology that many consider to be lessadvanced and, therefore, less useful than other technologies. it does not offer allof the sophistication that other, more costly systems do. however, as you haveelectronic mail capabilities, you can access important internet tools like filetransfer protocol (ftp), gophermail, world wide web (www), veronica,widearea information servers (wais), and listservsševen if you do not getthe results immediately as in a direct internet connection. (see box 2.) fidonettechnology has limited expansion capabilities, insofar as it will always remain astoreandforward, modembased network. it lacks the capability for onlineinformation retrieval, database searches, remotelogin, and remoteexecutionthat other systems offer. however, while the expansion of more advancedcomputer networking technologies is often constrained by prohibitively highcosts and inadequate telecommunications infrastructure, fidonet technology isnot.networking in west africa144bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the association for progressive communications (apc), a global networkdedicated to ngos, was involved in the ngonet project.2 the apc was ournatural partner. through the apc londonbased member, greenest, we connectthrough their fidonet gateway (gnfido) to the rest of the world. gnfido serves as agateway for small fidonet hosts not only from africa, but also from asia andlatin america.through this system we have been able to use email, download conferences,and use the greennet fax service, which costs very little compared to thenational ptt charges. the computer conferences received were on varioustopics: environment, development, health, aids, and so on. we also followed theunited nations environment programme's preparatory conferences and the ngodiscussions regarding these conferences. enda now runs a private conferencefor its own use, linking its various offices around the world.project experience and implementationhow users are trainedusers are trained either on an individual or group basis. after only one hour,the trainees are able to send messages and check their mailboxes. usually trainingis done gradually. it is better to have three sessions of one hour each than just onesession of three hours. during the second session, users are shown how to encodefiles to be sent and how to decode the received ones. the last session teaches themhow to subscribe to conferences, how to contribute to a conference, and how toquit a conference.because the point software we use is userfriendly, after the trainingsessions, users need very little help. this they can request by sending a messageto the postmaster who will respond to them as simply as possible.for organizations using desktop computers, training is organized on site. forindividuals or organizations using laptops, we ask them to come to the endaoffices where things will be easier in case there is a problem.development of the network and perspectivesaccessing our network is relatively cheap3 . since the host is a nonprofit,nongovernmental organization, it does not intend to make a profit fromproviding networking services.our active users are our best advertisers! they help us "sell" the benefits ofnetworking. presently the endadak node has over 110 usersšcoming fromnational and international organizations, individuals, government agencies,universities, and even the private sector. our users come not only from senegal,but also from other neighboring countries, including the gambia, mali, andburkina faso. the demand is increasing locally and also in all the neighboringcountries.networking in west africa145bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.connecting problemsduring the period of aprilmayjune 1995, we experienced problems in ourconnections with gnfido in london. the senegalese phone system was notworking properly and users complained that their mail had not been delivered intime. we tried several modems and, paradoxically, the modem with the worstreputation behaved better than all those of a supposed higher quality. now thesituation is better and we are presently using a zyxel modem.regional networkingin 1994, i was a consultant to the united nations environment programme,global environment facility project, which consisted of linking national teamsdoing research on greenhouse gases in senegal, the gambia, morocco, uganda,tanzania, nigeria, and kenya. my part of the work consisted of developingteaching tools for national teams in senegal, gambia, and morocco. i also didsystem installation, provided training, and helped link these teams to theconference set up for them. they were thus able to exchange data on theirresearch, exchange views on methodology and software used, and shareexperiences. it should be noted that this conference was bilingual and i did mostof the translation into french.since 1994, i have also been involved in the padis/idrc cabecaproject (see box 3), which tries to give access to countries where there is noconnectivity at all or where the existing infrastructure is too expensive for thengo community to afford. an agreement between the enda executivesecretary and nancy hafkin, who is the head of padis and the cabecaproject, allowed me to work full time in electronic networking.this agreement was easier to reach than might be expected. i should pointout here that first our two institutions shared a common goal: to give electronicaccess to communities at the grassroots level. this facilitated the collaboration. ishould also note that nancy hafkin's devotion to african networking and herconfidence in this continent and its human resources made this institutionalcollaboration possible.through the cabeca project, i installed nodes in rabat, in chad, and inmali. another cabeca goal is to train node operators who will themselvesbecome trainers.in the cabeca project, we are trying to implement a regional network thatis badly needed in francophone west africa. among these countries thetelephone exchange is relatively good and the costs are relatively low. the idea isto have a regional hubšendadakšwhich will be the focal point for theregion, through which all regional mail shall be routed. with this infrastructure,there is no need for mail addressed to the neighboring countries to be routedthrough european gateways. putting our resources together will make regionalnetworking more efficient and will reduce our costs for international traffic. webelieve that once thisnetworking in west africa146bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure is set up, the region will be a zone for intensive informationexchange. organizations in the region have a great deal of information to share,the countries have the same language, the same currency, participate in the sameeconomic organizations, and often are in the same ecological zone. commoninterests and experiences should encourage the growth of networking in westafrica.box 3 capacity building for electroniccommunication in africafunded by a grant from the canadian international development researchcentre (idrc), the project on capacity building for electronic communication inafrica (cabeca) builds on the experience gained over the last four years from anumber of idrcfunded electronic networking projects in africa. a publiccorporation created by the parliament of canada to support research designedto adapt science and technology to the needs of developing countries, idrc hastaken the lead in financing african electronic networking initiatives with the aimof demonstrating that the technology for deploying electronic connectionsthroughout africa is readily available and can be implemented at relatively lowcost, taking into account the economic, social and political difficulties the regionfaces. the cabeca project design attempts to address the problems of theafrican region that have isolated it from the international networkingphenomenon.cabeca's overall objective is to provide technical assistance to bringabout sustainable computerbased networking in africa, at an affordable cost,accessible to a wide variety of users from both the private and public sectors. tobuild african capacity for computer networking, it will train a corps of systemsoperators who can train others in their area and offer continuing support tofledgling users to ensure the sustainability of national nodes with connections tointernational networks. the project's aim is to offer inexpensive and easy accessto local and international information services on systems run by local operatorsand sustained by revenue from users. they will be able to exchange electronicmail worldwide at a fraction of the cost of fax or telex; they will also have accessto conference mail, file transfer and databases. efforts will be made to facilitateafrican connectivity to the expanding range of internet information services.some international organizations understand this very well and arediscussing with us how to connect their projects or field offices to this low costinfrastructure. we are presently discussing with healthnet the best way to forsenegal and other countries in the region to collaborate with this project.methodology for sensitizingin each country visited under the cabeca project, we organized a halfdayworkshop to sensitize ngos and individuals to electronic networking. someworkshops,networking in west africa147bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such as the one in chad, brought together as many as 35 people. after apreliminary introduction to the technology, using a phone simulator i alwayscarry with me, we split participants into three groups, each one sitting around acomputer. that way, each group can prepare one or two messages addressed tothe other two groups and then, through modems and the phone simulator,exchange mail. they can see how fast the message can go and also the otherpossibilities of the system.after this handson training, all groups get together for a final discussion onhow this technology can serve the national community, the advantages comparedto technologies such as fax or even conventional mail. we always focus first onhow this technology can serve information sharing and exchange within thecountry before opening up to regional and international networks.here we must not forget the context in which we work in many africancountries: there are poor phone lines and electrical shortages and outages. insome of these countries, you can get a dialtone only after working hours. insome others, it is even worse, as not only do you have to wait a long time for adial tone but, once you get it, you are not sure your international call willsucceed. in one of these countries you can dial directly only to france!difficulties in sensitizingthere are people who are allergic to new technologies. in one of thecountries i visited for sensitizing purposes, the government computingdepartment is now attached to a national service. during our meetings, the headof that service had been completely against the introduction of this newtechnology, despite the fact that minister and all his colleagues agreed that theircountry should be part of the process. they all wanted to join the growingnetworks and reap benefits from them. yet, the head of the service was able toblock progress. every month, his office sends data concerning the country totheir subscribers who pay for the information. the documents are sent by regularmail. after many demonstrations and taking into consideration the volume ofinformation sent monthly to north america and europe, that person still retainshis original positionšwhich makes his colleagues quite unhappy.results, impact, and benefits of the projectsome of our users told us that they were able to get rid of the internationalline they used to send faxes after they discovered our fax service. now their faxmachine is mainly receiving faxes from their correspondents who do not haveemail and this has dramatically reduced their communications costs.ngos have been changing their way of communicatingšespecially withtheir northern partners. they are not only sending faxes but they send and receiveemailnetworking in west africa148bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.messages and files. some of them have been subscribing to listservs while theothers, because of language problems, wait for the opportunity to have access toconferences in french.box 4 using email to solve problemsin burkinafaso, there is a daily newspaper that is issued at noon every dayexcept sunday. the editor told us that to send an issue to a town located 400hundred kilometers from the capital city they have to transport it via "bush taxi."due to lack of road infrastructure, the newspaper can be sold only the followingmorning. using email technology, the newspaper can be transferred very easilyand very quickly through the phone system, printed on the spot, and issued atthe same time as the capital city.ngos have also benefited from the technology by being better able toparticipate in the preparations for such events as the united nations environmentconference. through the ngo forum, even small and isolated organizations canbe heard. enda itself, during the un environment conference, issued a dailynewspaper in french giving accounts and comments on what was happening. thenewspaper was uploaded to dakar and issued in both places on the same day. thenewspaper was broadly diffused among ngos in africa via networkingtechnology. (for another example of the benefits of email, see box 4.)analysis of lessons learned sacrifices are necessary to begin a network. you must be prepared to worklong hours, spend your own money, visit users who have problems thathave nothing to do with the electronic communications system, and fixhardware and software problems. if you give people your home phone number, then you will be disturbed foranything. you also need to be patient with people. you may find people with laptopswho will take minutes to write a single word. for strategic purposes, you will sometimes have to give free accounts. fidonet is a simple technology to master for ngos which do not have theresources and the time to invest in too sophisticated technologies. presentlythis is an appropriate technology for some african countries taking intoaccount the situation described above.fidonet has been criticized for its limitations, but for people who areinterested in email only and fax services, this is no doubt often the best choice. inspite of all what is said, it works–networking in west africa149bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendationshere is probably the best recollection i have from networking. two yearsago, i was surprised to find a message in my mail box saying:"i have beensearching the internet for an electronic address in africa and found yours forsenegal. my name is–, i am living in – of the usa and i am 12 years old." for awhile this young boy and myself have corresponded.this would surprise any africanšas we have not yet reached this level ofcomputer use in africa. taxes continue to make computers unaffordable forindividual use. and because of this we have a very low level of computerliteracy.one should note also that almost all ngos use computers only for wordprocessing, which really shows lack of computer skills.when you try to convince ngos or individuals who have access tocomputers to join the network, they are afraid of investing a lot of time learningsomething new. those who do not have access to computers do not understandthe necessity to invest money in a new technology of which they are afraid.at this level, those who are connected are only interested in email andsending faxes. this is understandable as communication costs are very expensivein our countries.notes1. dough rigby came to nairobi in 1989 to work at the environment liaison centerinternational (elci), which served as the node for several networking projects. while there, mr.rigby did much to extend networking technologies, principles, and training throughout africa.many local systems operators credit their current enthusiasm and success to mr. rigby.2. the apc has contributed much to african networking. for more information about thisorganization see page 189 in this volume.3. the following rates are applied: installation us$ 20.00; monthly fee us$ 5.00; charge perkilobyte sent us$ 0.10; charge per kilobyte received us$ 0.10.networking in west africa150bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgementsi am deeply grateful to jacques bugnicourt, enda's executive secretary forhis generosity and his open mind. he understood very quickly how crucial thistechnology was for his own organization and for the ngo community. andwithout his personal commitment and his encouragement, i would not have beenable to work in this field.to abou thiam, from enda, who first mentioned email to me.thanks to doug rigby for the role he played in electronic communicationsin africa. he is the one who introduced the technology to me and to manyafrican system operators.thanks also to wonderful friends and colleagues who played and continueplaying a crucial role in african networking: bob barad, karen banks, mikejensen, cesare dieni, youba sokona and ann heidenreich.thank you also to the very good friends in the apc networks.networking in west africa151bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking in west africa152bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background summary satellife andhealthnetsatellife is an international notforprofit organization whose mission is toimprove communications and the exchange of information in the fields of publichealth, medicine, and the environment. it is an initiative of the internationalphysicians for the prevention of nuclear war, recipient of the 1985 nobel peaceprize. not wanting to see space become a battleground, dr. bernard lown,ippnw cofounder and copresident, suggested the creation of a satellitebasedglobal health communications system as a means of demonstrating that space canunite rather than further divide humankind.satellife works in developing countries where libraries, hospitals and otherorganizations often lack adequate funds or foreign currency to subscribe tomedical journals or to maintain ongoing subscriptions. where communicationsfacilities are intermittent, of poor quality, or expensive, the use of direct "realtime" voice or fax connections can be inefficient and frustrating. health workerscan become isolated from one another because of the high cost of telephone calls,fax services, and travel. even with today's improved networks, communication inremote and rural areas is still difficult or impossible, and always extremelyexpensive. satellife has thus put much of its efforts into providing and improvingaccess to "storeandforward" message systems.healthnet, administered by satellife, is an information service thatconnects health care workers around the world. using the most affordable andappropriate technology, healthnet offers electronic mail and conferences as wellas access to several electronic journals and publications. it also provides access todatabasesbackground summary satellife and healthnet153bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and experts. satellife initiated the library partnership program to facilitateaccess to medical literature for libraries in the developing world. finally, for itsinternet users, healthnet offers pointers to useful health mailing lists, worldwideweb homepages, gopher and ftp sites on the internet. healthnet is currentlyoperational in the following african countries: botswana, burkina faso,cameroon, eritrea, ethiopia, gambia, ghana, kenya, malawi, mali,mozambique, south africa, sudan, tanzania, uganda, and zimbabwe.satellife began by linking medical education centers in africa with medicallibraries and other centers in the united states, canada, and europe via a lowearth orbiting (leo) satellite. the satellite was expected to be an essential part ofthe solution to the communications problems in developing countries but, sinceits launch, modern telephone switch equipment has been installed in many citiesin africa, providing good international connections. because of rapidly evolvingtechnologies, dialed telephone circuits and errorcorrecting modems are often amore economical and efficient solution for international transfer of electronicdata in developing countries than the leo satellite.fidonetbased networks were in widespread use in africa in the late 1980sand satellife joined the many ngos supporting fidonet use there. fidonetprovides an economical alternative to internet email systems. the evolution ofhealthnet has produced a large network of fidonet nodes. the network is stillgrowing rapidly, although much of its growth is in the ''points" connected tonetwork nodes rather than nodes themselves. satellife is committed to supportingthis lowcost access system along with advanced internet services so that servicescan be brought as close as possible to the enduser.since 1993 satellife has operated the internet domain "healthnet.org" tosupport access by its member networks. while the cost barriers to providinginternational permanent leased lines are still prohibitive for most public healthand medical education programs in the developing world, there are now severalcases in which full internet access is a realistic alternative to storeandforwardnetworks. satellife is helping its member networks take advantage of thesecircumstances as they arise.the healthnet satellite system offers internet message services to anyremote area where the local telecommunication infrastructure is poor orinefficient. the ground equipment needed to contact the satellite consists of anibmpc compatible computer, a terminal node controller (tnc), a satelliteradio, and antennas. at this stage, satellife is field testing a new radio designthat merges the satellite radio and the tnc in one single box that can be portable.advances in satellite technology, opportunities in radio technology, and thegrowth of internet connectivity to africa, all mean that satellife will becomeincreasingly diverse and complex. the only practical approach to handling thiscomplexitybackground summary satellife and healthnet154bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.is to base the system on a powerful software environment called unix. in thepast two years, linux, a public domain software for unix on personalcomputers, has become a stable and respected (and very low cost) alternative tocommercial unix system software. satellife is working to bring together manydifferent networking technologies (including full internet, satellite packet radio,and fidonet) into an automated system based on linux. its own engineering taskwill be to provide software to simplify the control and monitoring of this packageso that the amount of training required is kept to a minimum.this new network node technology will offer many new options in networkservices and will make healthnet more useful and attractive to users of standardinternet mail systems. using whatever technologies are available satellife and itshealthnet service network will continue to address the twin problems of an acuteshortage of current health information and of the severe isolation of africanhealth care workers from their colleagues.background summary satellife and healthnet155bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background summary satellife and healthnet156bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mukla: evolution of a homegrownnetwork in ugandaby charles musisicharles musisi is network manager of mukla (makerereuniversity in kampala) and pioneer of electronic networkingin uganda. he has an electrical engineering background. hehas shared his networking expertise with colleagues inkenya, tanzania, nigeria, and ghana.background and context of theprojectthis paper tells the story of the establishment of the mukla electronicnetwork in uganda. there is much in the establishment and growth of anelectronic network that can be learned from our experiences. mukla is anexample of a sustainable network bred from a homegrown desire to network. isay this because: our primary emphasis is on selfsustainability; we are now in our fourth year of operation, with an increasing base ofusers, expanding facilities, and a financially viable operation; starting from a university and grassroots ngo base, we now haveestablished strong working relationships with various levels of governmentand other sections of the community; we are internationally connected to the internet, the association forprogressive communications networks, united nations organizations,major commercial networks, and facilities around the world; and all of this was accomplished with very little donor funding and nogovernment grants whatsoever to commence operations. a small team ofdedicated individuals in a unique government institution is running a soundbusinessbased electronic mail service.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda157bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the need to communicate across distances on vital issues is far from new.an everincreasing range of technologies has been applied to this need, fromrudimentary tools before the age of transport to the constantly emerging suite ofsophisticated services offered by the information age.the esanet projectthe mukla node began with the eastern and southern africa networking(esanet) project. inspired by the communication needs mentioned above, theidrcfunded esanet research project was aimed at investigating variousmicrocomputerbased methodologies for communications. the countries of thefive participating institutions are all members of the preferential tradeagreement (pta) region. the participating institutions themselves were theinstitutes of computer science at the university of nairobi and makerereuniversity, and the computing centers at the university of dar es salaam, theuniversity of zambia, and the university of zimbabwe. the longterm goals ofthe esanet project are given in box 1 below; the specific objectives ofesanet were to: experiment with alternative techniques for data communications betweenthe five nodes in five countries; evaluate the technical, economic, sociological, and management aspects ofthe communication network experiments; disseminate information to the research community within the region aboutthe development and the results of the project with a view to increasing theawareness of possibilities, stimulating new and wider applications, andinviting feedback on related topics; andbox 1 longterm goals of esanet the long term goals of the esanet project were to:ł strengthen local, provincial, national and international capacity tocollect and use multisectoral information in decisionmakingprocesses and to enhance capacities to collect and analyze data andinformation for decisionmaking; develop or strengthen local, provincial, national and internationalmeans of ensuring that planning for sustainable development in allsectors is based on timely, reliable and usable information; and make relevant information accessible in the form and at the timerequired to facilitate its use.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda158bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. make recommendations to the research community (users andtelecommunications authorities in the region) on costeffective datacommunication modalities, and appropriate network models and policiesfor specific environments and applications.the introduction of electronic networking to the wider community inuganda began in may 1991 as a natural spinoff from the esanet project.mukla was mandated to provide email services to nongovernmentalorganizations (ngos) within the ngonetafrica project, which is describedmore fully in fall's case study on page 142. we also sought collaboration with thehealthnet project whose aim was to facilitate communication among healthprofessionals within the african region and with their peers elsewhere. (seeinformation on page 153.) while the mode of communication chosen byhealthnet was a storeandforward, lowearth orbiting satellite (leo) withtracking ground stations, the regional interconnection of the esanet andngonet nodes was to be across regular, dialup telephones lines using fidonettechnology.activities of esaneta startup meeting for esanet in november 1990 brought togetherrepresentatives from all the participating institutions, as well as those fromidrc, satellife, and the nirv centre/web of canada. the startup workshopfocused on identifying suitable methods of communication and on drawing uppreliminary lists of hardware and software requirements. we decided that theproject would support a series of workshops in the different participatingcountries.at a design workshop held in may 1991, in harare, zimbabwe we formallyadopted fidonet technology as the technology of implementation. our review ofthe status of licensing of the healthnet ground station revealed only zambia atthe time had obtained a license. other highlights of that meeting includedconfirmation of lists of requirements by different nodes and the topology ofregional mail traffic exchange. the nodes in uganda and tanzania were to routetheir regional traffic and international traffic via nairobi, while zambia wouldpoll (or generate a computer call to) harare, which would in turn poll nairobi forregional mail.the university of zambia (unza) hosted an experimentation and reviewworkshop in november 1992. our aim then was to enhance internode telephonecalls (polling) and review the progress of the project to date. at the time of thereview workshop, we observed that some interesting trends had clearly emergedand we realized that the assumption upon which the topology had been drawnwas evidently unattainable. for instance, the interregional polling in east africawas not possible due to several factors: delayed arrival of equipment purchasedfrom overseas suppliers; wrong power specification supplied; or poor telephonelines atmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda159bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the node on an old analog exchange. hence, while activity was well under way inuganda by february 1991 and a little later in tanzania, the mukla node onlybecame operational in august 1992.mango, the ngo network in zimbabwe, was an established fidonetbulletin board by the time the esanet project began and so only needed tointegrate the esanet activity early in 1991. unza was also fully operationalearly in 1991 but routed its regional and international traffic through rhodesuniversity in south africa. interregional polling between these two was neverreliably successful owing to poor interconnecting telephone infrastructurebetween zambia and zimbabwe. all of the esanet participating institutionsand bodies met in september 1993 at an evaluation and closeup workshop held inuganda.project descriptionas it happened, doug rigby, a networking consultant at the environmentalliaison center in nairobi but also working for the ngonetafrica project, visitedkampala in february 1991. i was then a final year student of engineering atmakerere university but on forced vacation as a result of student riots that causedthe closure of the campus.my meeting with rigby was helped by the student riots as much as by myvolunteer work at an environmental ngo, called jeep, a grassroots networkorganization. jeep staff asked me to meet rigby at the entebbe airport. this wasperhaps my longest wait at an airport for any visitor coming from abroadšas thescheduled flight, i later learned, had been a phantom one. all the same, ipersevered until he arrived on a late evening plane and took the 35 kilometerjourney back with him to kampala. after hearing his stories enroute, i neverregretted the long wait and i slept that night dreaming about this intriguing newconcept of electronic mail! the following week was to usher in many moreexciting ideas that have led, as it turns out, to a new and unforeseen career.with rigby, we went through the drills of fidonet: installing a modem;communication software for end users; and even basic dos commands. the teamof trainees had now grown to five: the then three folks from the institute ofcomputer sciences; one representative from the developmental network ofvoluntary associations (deniva), an umbrella network body for local andindigenous ngos in uganda; and myself. a windup workshop of rigby's missionbrought together the first batch of potential users from different organizations.among them were people from care (the relief agency), the centre for basicresearch, the makerere medical school, a handful of deniva members, jeepitself, the makerere university's vice chancellor, and other independentparticipants.while i may not have been the most conspicuous participant, i hadapparently caught the eye of some people and i was chosen as the person to carrythe mantle of making it work.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda160bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project experience and implementationthe critical yearsi quickly realized that my new role would have to be accommodated withinmy academic life when campus reopened. that i did by working at the node afterclasses, not an easy thing to do for an engineering student. the next thing wasthat i had to do to this work as a volunteer. there would be no pay at first. i stillremember those first meetings with prospective usersšenvironment groups,missionaries, and other ngos. this was new to all of us. even as i crawled underdesks to connect modems to telephones, and even as i made test polls to nairobi,not one of us was sure that we were not going to get enormous telephone bills. iwasn't all that sure that i would be able to pay the actual telephone bills, even ifthey were not enormous! (see box 2.)box 2 seeing is believingi really thought everyone would be so excited that they would just put insome money and we would be up and going in no time. not so, i learned. therewas a lot more to doš and the hardest lesson of all was that, until i could provethat this thing saved money, there was no chance of it getting off the ground.the harder electronic networking seemed the more determined i was toprove that it worked. it was the best thing i could have done. the process taughtme a great deal, refined my thoughts considerably, and led me into contact withmany people whose expertise i would need if this was going to succeed.originally, i had planned to set up a nonprofit network for ngos to runparallel to mukla. that might have been ideal but, with my unfinishedengineering degree in the way and a lack of clear institutional support from thengo community, this seemed a formidable task. i labored to convince thedirector at the ics that there was more to be gained in merging esanet withngonet activities than there was in operating them separately.shortly after the university reopened, however, we reached agreement andinstalled the esanet equipment and procured a dedicated telephone line. themukla node got under way and the real fun began! at the end of our first yearof operation, we had nearly 50 users, quite a remarkable achievement and a goodomen for an exciting future. we were beginning to fulfill many people's dreamsfor use of this media. at this point, i stood as the systems operator (sysop) andmanager of an evergrowing network. i was confident that i had established asound management structure to introduce cost recovery. the director's secretarywould handle billing and accounting while i concentrated on software andhardware developments as well as other technical matters.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda161bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3 help from some friendsthere are many funny stories from those first few months. i grappled withthe establishment of a node facility for which there were no textbooks  only aconcept and some guiding hands from friends abroad. invaluable help andsupport handily came in from doug rigby at elci, mike jensen at worknet insouth africa, karen banks at greennet, and later bob barad in washington. ihad considerably underestimated the technical complexity of what we weredoing.project synergythe esanet project, with its idea of electronic networking at the instituteof computer science, took second place to the higher profile and better fundedunesco intergovernmental informatics project (iip). the iip was aimed atsensitizing decision makers in government and other sectors of society on the useof informatics tools in decision making and management. the attention paid tothe iip reduced highlevel interference in the daytoday running of mukla.electronic networking nevertheless benefited from the many iip workshopsorganized where email was always on display.as the rush to sign on to mukla grew, so too did the pressure on thehardwarešthen a 386 sx, 2 ram 80 megabyte hard drive personal computer.so, by july 1992, with the user base standing at well over 150, the node personalcomputer was upgraded to a 486dx 33 mhz, 8 ram and 170 megabyte harddisk from the iip project consignment.challengesat this level of expansion, mukla posed a real management challenge.with technical capacity to handle new installations and user supportoverstretched, we made a decision to get more members of the teaching staffinvolved. one person was put in charge of documentation and promotions, while atechnical assistant was assigned to help me. (see box 3.)billing and accounting were firmly put in the hands of an accounts clerk whoalso doubled as the director's secretary. i believe that the stability of our networkcaught the attention of other regional networking projects, based mainly innairobi, and that they borrowed ideas from our experience. we then had over 10groups or users dialingin on long distance trunk phone calls from nairobi andother parts of kenya.around this time i was drafted into a number of regional initiatives. i, forinstance, participated in the design and implementation of the unep/globalenvironment facility (gef) greenhouse gases project to link up researchers insixmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda162bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.african countries, namely: uganda, tanzania, nigeria, senegal, morocco and thegambia. i was also hired as an independent consultant for the cabeca projectto setup and train systems operators in uganda, nigeria, and ghana. (seecabeca box on page 147)between the unep/gef and the cabeca project i have established a totalof nine nodes in the above mentioned countries. i have also trained a score of incountry technical support people and have installed several enduser sites foraccess to email and the internet. i have also set up email access for the un'sworld food programme (wfp) offices in dar es salaam, mombasa, andkampala. only recently i was on mission to war torn burundi on an internationalalert of london mission. there, i set up email so that the un's specialrepresentative to burundi could access information and participate in discussionsaimed at better informing the world and also the warring factions in conflictresolution.present situationfrom around mid1993 to the present, we began routing mukla'sinternational traffic through the greennet's gnfido node in london via four dailypolls. this link works satisfactorily well, though disruptions in the past oftenoccurred due to factors such as adverse weather conditions. lately, theunreliability of the gnfido node can be attributed to overstressed hardwarefacilities coupled with lack of support staff.as of january 1995, mukla had an installed user base of over 300 sites.the majority of these are around kampala but there are about 15 sites in entebbe(35 km from kampala), five in jinja (80 km east), three in mbale (150 km east,close to the kenya border), three in mbarara (220 km southwest), and three inkabale (400 km southwest, close to the rwanda, tanzania, and zaire borders).the upcountry installations all have to make long distance calls to kampala.it therefore became imperative to set up local access points in these towns.in february 1995, a node was established in entebbe at the uganda virusresearch institute with equipment supplied by the healthnet project. similarnodes are planned for mbarara, kabale, mbale and jinja during the first half of1996.even now a few users call in from nairobi, though the majority of regionaltraffic flows to mukla via sasa communications system. this company, basedin nairobi, is an initiative of the east africa internet association. (see box 4.)recent developmentsthroughout 1995, i consulted for a commercial enterprise (starcom) to helpestablish a full internet (ip) link for the uganda market. in august 1995, anothercompany (infomail) opened full ip access from ugandašthus becoming the firstsite in east africa and the horn of africa region to give full access to theinternet, including facilities such as world wide web. starcom becameoperational in novembermukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda163bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1995. it is noteworthy that both these companies implemented internationalaccess using very small aperture terminal (vsat) satellite technology inpreference to the overpriced and unreliable digital leased lines from the ugandaposts and telecommunication corporation (up&tc).box 4 the east african internet associationthe east african internet association (eaia) is a notforprofit group formedin april 1995, seeking to promote and expand cooperative electroniccommunications and internetworking in the east african region. its membersinclude the majority of electronic service providers, serving at least 3,000 users,in the following countries: eritrea, ethiopia, kenya, tanzania and uganda.partner networks abroad are also members, as are a number of interestedindividuals. membership is open to all interested parties for a nominal fee. theassociation is in the process of being officially registered in each country.eaia's aims of cooperative internetworking in africa are also supported by:capacity building in electronic communication in africa (cabeca, uneconomic commission for africa), greennet (london), un environmentprogramme (kenya), un world food programme (kenya), rio/orstom(france), web (canada), wolfnet communications (london) and sangonet(south africa).discussions take place on a private internet mailing list.as seen from the information in appendix a, the electronic network marketin uganda is now fully liberalized with not less than five providers with servicesranging from email access to full internet. however, the usage charges remainhigh. the charges given are accurate as of january 1996.results, impacts, and benefits of the projectbeyond emailwhile the bulk of our traffic on mukla remains electronic mail, there is anew trend towards user participation in electronic conferences. mukla at themoment carries over 50 different conferences mostly from the internet and apcnetworks, with a few specifically regional or local ones. perhaps the most notableamong these is a discussion list on ugandarelated issues and news, appropriatelycalled ugandanet. through this conference, over 600 ugandans from all over theworld link with each other on a daily basis to interact with lively discussions onvarious topics ranging from the constitutional process, to entertainment, to sportsand news.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda164bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.perhaps responsible for the bulk of growth in the beginning was the email/fax service that mukla provided. users are able to send, at the price of email,faxes to destinations all over the world. its popularity was mainly due to theexorbitant international charges levied by uganda post & telecommunication.sectoral involvementuniversityelectronic mail has had a particular attraction for research activities to manyresearchers. students are also increasingly getting to use email. about 25 percentof mukla traffic is for university related activities.nongovernmental organizationsthese form the single largest group of mukla users accounting for over 40percent.governmentthe involvement of government in any major way has not come yet,although from the early days government departments were interested in what wewere doing and, in 1992, we were approached by many government bodies forconnectivity. presently, however, only isolated projects within governmentdepartments are connected, usually for very specific reasons, such as easy accessto a donor office abroad. we have been approached by the ministry of foreignaffairs to explore possibilities for linking ugandan embassies, especially inparticularly hardtoreach places like zaire and rwanda.business sectorthis perhaps remains a weak and underrepresented section of the network.nevertheless, from the early days, business users concerned with sustainabledevelopment issues began to join us.othersthere are many other individuals and independent groups that muklaknows are interested in electronic networking. we have yet to tap this group.financethough mukla benefited from the esanet research fund as seedcapital, cost recovery was instituted at an early stage to supplement this. as ofnow, and at completion of the esanet project, mukla is fully selffinancingthrough feesmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda165bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.levied on users. a check is put on users via shadow billing whereby an itemizedbill for all users is prepared at the end of the billing quarter to check on excessiveuse and possible abuse of our lenient terms. there is no additional charge for thefax facility though strict monitoring is done for each of categories above. whenexcessive use is noticed, the user is upgraded to the higher billing group.resultsthe esanet project introduced the idea of electronic mail communicationto researchers and other users at makerere university campusšthough the focusof the project was then on experimenting with various computerbasedcommunication technologies and working out the technical bugs involved withpoor telephone lines, erratic management of the telephone longdistance dialingsystem, and hardware and software equipment.as of september 1993, most of these problems had been ironed out. theelectronic mail system using the gnfido system has reached a level of reliabilitythat surpasses that of fax machines. a costeffectiveness analysis was carried outat the end of the esanet project and this provided the evidence needed to provethat this venture could be sustainable, given the proper setting and management.the esanet project established that microcomputerbased electroniccommunication was a viable, sustainable technology and appropriate to thecontext of the region in which it has operated. there is a proven demand forelectronic communication, both regionally and internationally. following are therecommendations from the esanet project:to the research community, we recommended that: relevant institutions be encouraged to consolidate and expand their userbase. we should undertake more research into improving and expandingtechnologies used. manpower requirements for this activity be consolidated into theestablishment of the institutions concerned. appropriate mechanisms be established for operational cost recovery andinstitutional funding to cover system operation and expansion. cognizance be taken of the everimproving nature of electroniccommunication worldwide and relevant upgrading be considered.to the telecommunication authorities, we requested: further investment be made in improving regional telecommunication linksto enhance electronic viability of using national telecommunicationinfrastructure for modem related activitiesmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda166bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. special tariffs be applied to the academic and research communities forpacket switching and leased line facilities thus enabling greater access tocomputer based communications regionally and internationally. liberalization of user terminal equipment connected to nationaltelecommunication networks be encouraged. pragmatic policies be established with regard to licensing of alternativecommunication methodologies such as packet radio and low earth orbitsatellite.to the donor community, we recommended that: in view of the fact that national communication networks are anindispensable component of national development, providing as they do foran efficient and effective information delivery system in diverse sectors,continued funding be made available for establishing infrastructure relatedto computerbased communications for capacity building in order tofacilitate transfer of technology.to regional governments, we recommended that: they recognize the importance of national and regional networks for allaspects of development and for human resource and manpowerinteractions. the final meeting of the esanet project paid tribute to theinvaluable contribution that idrc had made through this project infurthering the case of electronic communication within academic, health,and other related communities. we accordingly asked idrc to: š ensure that esanet nodes be covered in any forthcoming regionalelectronic network support programs. š share the findings of this project with other donor and developmentagencies. š be receptive to future requests from esanet community to consolidateand expand what has been achieved so far.analysis of lessons learnedthe esanet project provided the participating institutions the opportunityto experiment with regional and international microcomputerbasedcommunication. the aim of the experimentation was to establish the viability ofthe regional computer networking for data communication from the technical andmanagement perspectives. we acquired data and experience from theexperimentation phase of the project using fidonet and packet satellitetechnologies. based on this experience and data, we made the following specificobservation on hardware, software, connectivity, network management andresearch activities.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda167bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hardwarefor modems, we have observed that: 9600 baud or higher modems (e.g., telebit worldblazer) perform better forinternational connections, while 2400 baud modems (e.g., gvc 2400) aresufficient for local connections. external modems perform better and are easier to handle than internals. modem power supply should be 240v ac. modems should be hayes compatible.for the node computer, we recommend a machine with the followingspecifications: 386 or higher, a minimum of 4 megabytes ram, 120 megabyte hard drive minimum (max 12 ms cached), dual floppy, fast serial ports, 220 v ac supply, and ups with stabilizer.there is always a need to have a backup computer.softwarewe used the following software packages in most of the our nodeoperations: frontdoor 2.1+ š mailer gecho š conference mail processor msgtrack š mail tracker, redir š mail redirection gus, echovol š for conference tracking, ac š for accounting and billingconnectivitywe observed that gnfido, rhodes university, or worknet polling intoesanet nodes was cheaper and easier than direct polling between esanetnodes. this has been the case for regional as well as international traffic. we thusdisproved the earlier assumption on which the interconnectivity topology hadbeen based.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda168bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.user basewe also observed that: a massive effort was required to develop and support a user base. weneeded advertising, workshops, and maintenance visits. there was a need to clarify to the users what installation and support implyand discourage frivolous requests.network managementto sustain the network it is important to: train system operators and establish official positions for system operatorsat various universities and put into place efficient and cost effective cost recovery mechanisms.some fidonet management tools are available in basic node software.additional software was developed during the project period to supplement thesebasic tools. examples are: ac (accounting) from the zimbabwe node andmtmon and hismon (monitoring) from the zambia node. however there isstill need to develop more tools. whereas there was sufficient documentation forpoint operation (the lowest level of the fidonet hierarchy), there was need todevelop more documentation for node operation. nodes are the individualsystems that belong to fidonet. they are responsible for passing mail between thepoints and the next hierarchical level of fidonetšthe hub.research and developmentwe need to encourage technical innovations to improve the system and wecan use student resources for such projects. technical innovations are required inthe following areas: terminal node controller (tnc) the packet satellite upload program (pg) modems and modem testing/evaluation mailer interfacesbeyond the esanet project: future developments atmuklawhile the interest in using electronic mail among researchers is strong, thetechnical capacity to meet this demand remains severely constrained due to lackof adequate funding. additional funding is needed both for the personnelinvolved inmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda169bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.its spread and for the purchase of hardware upgrades for the present installation.although a number of groups and individuals have expressed interest in using andlearning more about electronic mail, there are no adequate pedagogical materialsnor the funding to have technical experts available to advise on both hardwareand software problems as well as to do the installation and training.given the lessons learned from the experimentation phase, with the outlinedconstraints, it is imperative that mukla seek to improve its institutionalcapacity to effectively spearhead a development plan. we will seek support forrecruiting trainers whose job will be to build on the achievements to date andenhance the existing network amongst all these groups. we will also seek supportto update the hardware at the existing nodes and to create a pool of modems toserve as seed investments in new areas where electronic communication is to beintroduced.specific goals should be towards: upgrading the hardware and software at the mukla node to full internetstatus via leased line; developing appropriate educational materials and formats for workshopsand shortcourses; providing technical assistance and training; and facilitating communication via email amongst users within the country andregion.there are two sets of activities to look at in the process. the first wouldinvolve the acquisition of the necessary funding and identification and purchaseof the necessary hardware for a full ip connection. simultaneously, we wouldprepare training materials for the use of electronic mail, instruction on bothhardware specification and troubleshooting, and handson training with thesoftware. the second set of activities will include the provision of regular andongoing technical support to users. this will be necessary both to iron outtechnical problems encountered in the daily operations of the electronic mail, aswell as to sensitize and train new users.new nodeswe expect that the user base will have grown to an estimated 2000 installedsites by the end of 1996. it is time now to consider new nodes to improve servicesin areas outside of kampala. some possible sites for expansion of mukla aregiven below.entebbe is a major seat of government ministries and headquarters to manyinternational united nations bodies and ngos. it is ripe to have a nodeestablished that could serve as hub to all users in and around entebbe. this nodewould periodically poll mukla to transfer national, regional and internationaltraffic.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda170bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there is potential for up to 150 installed sites within one year; this wouldalso relieve the pressure on mukla.kabale located about 400 km from kampala has good potential to play anode role for rwanda, burundi, and some parts of western tanzania that fallwithin the kagera basin. kabale is the gateway to these countries that havetraditionally used the northern corridor transafrica highway to link them to thekenyan seaport of mombasa. there is an automatic exchange that is part of alarge telecommunications project linking the countries that comprise the kagerabasin organization (kbo): burundi, rwanda, tanzania and uganda. with 3,000lines, the exchange is the most modern to be installed in uganda. the kboregional telecommunications project consists of a microwave transmission systeminterconnecting the four countries. it is aimed at the promotion and developmentof agriculture, forestry resources, and telecommunications links between memberstates that share the river kagera.goals of expansionthe nodes in entebbe and kabale, together with a series of trainingworkshops for users in jinja and mbale, would constitute the first phase of theexpansion program.existing national and international mechanisms of information processingand exchange, and of related technical assistance, would be strengthened toensure effective and equitable availability of information generated at the local,provincial, national, and international levels, subject to national sovereignty andrelevant intellectual property rights.national capacities would be strengthened, as would capacities withingovernments, nongovernmental organizations and the private sector, ininformation handling and communication, particularly within the east africanregion.improved servicesmukla would offer its clientele the full benefit of a wide range of internetservices. electronic mail and conferencing, public and private access to internetmail and other worldwide networks might be provided via partnership with theassociation for progressive communications. mukla can also provideconsultancy services on network establishment for organizations and governmentdepartments.future needs and possibilitiesone of the difficulties we face as we prepare for future developments is toclarify the role of what is essentially a well meaning private enterprise with theresponsibilities in this area of various tiers of government and public in uganda.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda171bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the question of appropriate ownership structures for networks like ours isquite complex. our decision to operate as a private company was indicated at thetime of our birth. the people are sufficiently interested to devote time andfinancial energy to the project and do not have any particular philosophicalattachment to a mode of operation.however the structure has served us well amidst the politics of governmentsand ngos. we have always regarded ourselves as the carriers of informationrelated to these issues, rather than as a policy body or an arbiter of truth and bestpractice. in the early days, this structure and philosophy allowed us to engendercooperation between ngos who did not see eyetoeye on all issues. in laterdays, the same stance has allowed us to assist cooperation between tiers ofgovernment and government departments, which have been known to jealouslyguard their own interests rather than cooperate. and, more importantly, we havemanaged to remain credible with both government and its more radicalopponents. it is probably our strongest point, that we can operate independent ofthe political will of any tier of government or its funding priorities.the future holds many specific problems to addressšquestions ofcooperation, questions of standards, and questions of access to information willhave to be addressed. much work will have to be done towards these ends by bothourselves and government bodies.regional interconnectivitythere will be immense savings by sharing costs and collaborating with otherregional providers. the east african internet association (eaia) effort could beone way to foster further regional interconnectivity. (see box 4 on page 164 formore information about eaia.)conclusions and recommendationsmy experience suggests that there is far more to establishing a successfulnetwork than purchasing and learning the technology. indeed, technologyexpenses have been a minor part of our budget. outlined below are some basicprinciples i believe are essential in establishing viable networks.user friendlinessexperience indicates that the issue of user friendliness is one where thereshould be no compromise. simplicity of interface is crucial; however, simplerinterfaces, those that use graphics, for example, also require more computingpower. it is important to have machines with adequate power, memory, and speedto perform the necessary tasks. this is where a full needs analysis is necessary.the simplest looking interface may not do the job; nor will old or obsoleteequipment provide enough sophistication to run programs such as windows.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda172bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.adherence to standardsthe only trade off in user friendliness that might occur would be in the areaof adherence to standards. here, important standards have to be considered ifcontact with global networks and global relevance of data collected are concerns.promotion and educationthe most common mistake we can make in large scale electronic messaginginstallations is believing that somehow the system will ''introduce itself." not so!you can only successfully train the converted. the network has to be activelypromoted. its benefits have to be known before people will use it. its applicationsto work areas and advantages have to be received with enthusiasm. without this,the basic aims will not be achieved.trainingequally, training is an absolute must for a successful implementation. linksshould be made to existing training organizations. training materials must beavailable for any software used. (see box 5.)product championsthe concept of a "product champion" is often mentioned in sales literature.it essentially refers to enthusiasts who promote concepts and products willinglybecause they believe in them. all networks need them. product championssometimes create problems for organizations with their overenthusiasm and arerarely popular with administrators. but they are totally necessary and need to beidentified and supported.adequate fundingan underfunded initiative that fails can delay a concept such as sustainabledevelopment networks in a country by a decade or more, and a few failures canbox 5 training needsa typical mistake made in electronic messaging implementations is tospend all available funds on hardware, bandwidth, and software developmentand find that no funds are available for training. this has been noted in manyuniversities where typically less than 13 percent of academics actually usesystems. it's not surprising they are presented with very basic interfaces, nohelp desk, no manuals, and only the very brave and technicallyinclined actuallymake it.mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda173bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ruin the concept altogether. it is far too easy to attempt to stretch available fundstoo far and to leave behind a string of underdeveloped projects with little chanceof success. it is also far too easy to get carried away by enthusiasm and to start aproject without sensible financial plans to ensure viability.appropriate ownership patternsthis is a difficult question for which there is no immediate formula. anappropriate ownership pattern has to be one which will not restrict theparticipation of any governmental or nongovernmental body whose cooperationis needed.plans for financial sustainabilityunless the venture is to be a continual financial burden to fundingorganizations, a realistic business plan has to be adopted to ensure that thenetwork is self sustaining within a given period (perhaps 2œ4 years).managerial, sales and technical expertisešin that order!the need for managerial expertise must be obvious, as is the need fortechnical expertise. what is less obvious is the need for sales expertise. even if afacility is not expected to raise revenue, it surely is expected to engender use andthat's a sales job.in conclusion, i would state that the world is not a series of isolatedecosystems bearing no relationship to one another and capable of resolving theirown problems. national sovereignty does not rule the atmosphere, nor theoceans, nor indeed the rivers that meander happily across borders with no care tothe politics of the government of the day. global cooperation is vital, and accessto the experiences and knowledge of others is essential if we are to solve theproblems facing us.indeed, this paper is written in the belief that what we have achieved andlearned in uganda is valuable, and may be of assistance to people in othercountries wishing to establish similar facilities. we would be happy to assist andadvise based on our experiences here.appendixšinternet/email providers in uganda1. mukla institute of computer schoolmakerere university, p.o. box 7062, kampalainfo@mukla.gn.apc.orgcontact: charles musisi, network managerservices offered: electronic mail, listservs, apc conferences/usenet,faxingmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda174bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.usage chargesstudents$ 10a monthly individual/small ngo$ 30a monthly corporate rate$ 50big corporate/international$1002. starlight communications (u) ltd (starcom)sheraton complex, 14th floor, ternan ave., p.o. box 10524, kampalastaff@starcom.co.ugcontact: kiggundu mukasa, internet managerservices offered: email and email fax, world wide web, telnet, ftpusage charges:email only (unlimited usage)$ 30shell account$ 50slip/ppp account$100full ipnegotiable3. infomail (u) ltd plot 2 clement hill rd. p.o. box 11465, kampalainfo@imul.comcontact: m.m. otyek, managerservices offered: email, world wide web, telnet, ftpusage charges:monthlydurationsetupovertimebasic$ 503 hours$50$20premium$1208 hours$50$20big corporate$25020 hours$120$15very big corporate$50050 hours$120$104. transmail ltd blacklines house, suite 2b4, p.o. box 7482, kampalamawanda@tmail.gn.apc.orgcontact: patrick mawanda, managerservices offered: email, electronic fax, mail broadcasting, conferencingusage charges:traffic not exceeding 420kb$50/monthtraffic not exceeding 910kb$100/monthmukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda175bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5. infomanet4th floor impala house, p.o. box 8945, kampalaxtina@infoma.com contact:christine nantongoservices offered: email, faxusage charges:quick start plan:setup$30email sending$1.20 per pageemail receiving$0.70 per pagefax sending$2.95 per pagepower user plan:installation$50security deposit$50subscription$15email sending$1.00email receiving$0.40fax sending$1.95mukla: evolution of a homegrown network in uganda176bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the unima fidonet network: computernetworking for communications in malawiby paulos nyirendadr. paulos nyirenda is head of the department of physicsand electronics at the university of malawi. he has a ph.d.in electrical engineering from the university of new southwales. he has been working on networking at the universityof malawi since 1992. he asks that this chapter be dedicatedto his late wife, gemma.background and context of theprojectmalawi is a landlocked country located on the southeast side of africa. itshares boundaries with mozambique, tanzania, and zambia. the country has apopulation of about 9 million, of which about 90 percent live off subsistencefarming. malawi's economy is agriculturalbased, with few manufacturing ormining industries.the university of malawi is the only university in the country. it is made upof five colleges spread out over a wide geographical area in the central andsouthern sections of the country. there are many research institutions in thecountry, most of which are linked to the agricultural sector and, as such, arelocated in remote locations across the country. most of these research centershave access to direct exchange telephones that work most of the time but are ofrelatively poor quality, just as in some other african countries. also, as in otherafrican countries, the telephone penetration into the population in malawi is verylow.communications in malawi is difficult and expensive. research and datacommunications have been achieved primarily by physical travel to a sitešoftenover seasonal roads in poor conditionšor by fax where available. this is also thecase for most governmental and private sector communications. most neededresearch and other data and information do not reach the people and decisionmakers who require this data to make important national and internationaldecisions.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi177bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, even as early as 1992, most research, governmental, and majorcommercial offices had computers. most of these were ibmcompatible desktopcomputers or apple macintosh computers.project descriptionrealizing the difficulty of communicating among widely separateduniversity colleges and research institutions, i proposed a project titled study ofcomputer and telephone network based communications in malawi. theproposal was submitted for funding to the university of malawi (unima)research and publications committee (rpc) in february, 1992. the originalbudget was for malawi kwacha (mk) 51231 or roughly $1,000. the mainobjectives of the project were to: investigate the feasibility of establishing computer and telephonebasedcommunications in malawi; and demonstrate more efficient and effective communications amongresearchers and academics within malawi as well as among those inmalawi and outside.with these objectives and minimal base funding, the malawi fidonetnetwork was started. the network, now called unima, has grown to be a public,nationwide network serving all sectorsšgovernment, nongovernmental, andcommercialšof the malawi economy. it thus serves a much wider populationthan the academic and research communities originally envisioned and for which ihad budgeted. it is a public network in the sense that anyone and any organizationin malawi can be linked to the networkšprovided they have the basic resourcesrequired for such linkage. the project has since attracted funding from variousnational and international organizations.project experience and implementationthe proposal i made to the university led to the establishment of the unimafidonet network. the specific objectives of the proposal were to: experiment with modems, microcomputers, and the telephone network fordata communications within the university of malawi; design and build electronic interface devices for connecting direct telephonelines and switchboard (pabx) extensions to one computer and modemnode to handle both local college and direct line connections; evaluate the quality of the malawi telephone network for datacommunications; andthe unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi178bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. evaluate the cost of computer communications using modems and thetelephone network and compare it to other electronic communicationsmodalities.at the time the unima project was started, there was a regional projectcalled the east and southern africa network (esanet) funded by theinternational research development centre (idrc) of canada. (for a completedescription of the esanet project, see charles musisi's case study on page158.) the unima project had similar general objectives to esanet, whichlinked university computer centers in zimbabwe, zambia, tanzania, uganda, andkenya. because i was involved in these activities, the unima project benefitedconsiderably from the esanet project in the beginning, even though malawiwas not a participating country in esanet. the startup modems and noncommercial fidonet software that enabled unima to take off were obtainedunder esanet.my proposal to study computer and telephonebased communications inmalawi was accepted by the rpc in january 1993. i next needed to requestsecurity clearance from the malawi government, as well as from the malawiposts and telecommunications to start the project. the government issued thesecurity clearance on 15 june 1993, one day after citizens passed the referendumthat introduced multiparty politics into malawi. the malawi posts andtelecommunications department then cleared the project in july 1993. thedirect telephone line required for the node or hub of the telephonebasedcomputer communications network was installed at chancellor college in zombaon 24 september 1993.we next installed the equipment for the node: an ibmcompatible 386computer running at 20 mhz with a disk space of 40 megabytes (borrowed fromthe physics department at chancellor college); a viva 2400 baud modemdonated by idrc under the esanet project; and noncommercial fidonetcommunications software (frontdoor 2.02) obtained under esanet and testedearlier. this startup setup was then used to negotiate the network address, initialmail routing, and initial polling procedures required for the network. in thestartup phase, the network address was negotiated under esanet to be afidonet point address off the university of zambia electronic mail network.malawi now has its own network number and the node established has thefidonet address 5:7231/1.2connecting to the university of zambia fidonet node was very difficultand, when the connection was finally made, the line quality was poor. wedecided in november 1993, to switch connections to the africa zone gatedirectly at rhodes university in south africa. this improved the connectionsuccess rate as well as the quality of the connections. in may 1994, the unimanetwork started receiving funding from the capacity building for electroniccommunications in africa (cabeca) project also funded by idrc but managedunder the pan african development information system (padis) in addisababa, ethiopia. (for more information about the cabeca project, see fall'scase study on page 147.)the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi179bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.under cabeca, the unima network received more modems andassistance from the southern africa nongovernmental network (sangonet)in johannesburg. sangonet polled the unima system twice a day at first butthis was upgraded to three times a day to cater to the increased volume. alsounder cabeca, we upgraded the node with the installation of a telebitworldblazer high speed modem. this modem was eventually replaced by a usrobotics modem.figure 1 shows the general malawi fidonet network and its linkage to othernetworks in the world. the number of points running off the node has increasedfigure 1 fidonet structure in malawi.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi180bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rapidly even though the single most important constraint to the growth in the userbase has been the availability of modems at an affordable price within malawi.we replaced the computer borrowed from the physics department with adedicated computer borrowed from unima rpc. this was also an ibmcompatible 386 computer with the same speed but with a 104 megabyte hard diskand more memory. this computer made it possible to perform multitasking usingdesq view and qemm. this allowed us to operate two telephone lines, usingintermail as the communications program on the node. with this setup the node isnow able to handle two data connections simultaneously, one on a directexchange telephone line and another on a pabx telephone extension that catersto the local chancellor college campus computers. putting in the line from thelocal pabx helped to reduce congestion considerably on the direct line.the use of a multiline mailer that enabled the node to handle more than onetelephone connection at the same time made it unnecessary to develop hardwaredevices to achieve the same results. however, there were problems withrescanning the mail every time it was collected from the node. as the messagebase and user base grew, this mail rescanning took more and more time andeventually led to lengthy inbetween call processing, leading to delays inanswering calls at the node.after observing the significant contribution that the fidonet unimanetwork was making towards improving data communications in malawi, theworld university service of canada (wusc) provided funds to the unimanetwork in february 1995 to purchase a gateway 2000 ibm compatible 486 dx2computer with 730 megabyte hard disk and running at 66 mhz. this hasconsiderably improved the performance of the node, which can now process mailmuch faster and has removed the waiting that users experienced between callswhile the node computer was processing received mail and extracting billinginformation. in addition the network has also received support from the canadafund of the canadian high commissioner to malawi to purchase modems toassist the public sector in getting connected to the network so as to improve theircommunications.unima network operationunder fidonet, electronic messages and files are prepared offline to reducetelephone connection costs. the messages and computer files are then transferredonto the network in compressed files or packets to reduce the time of thetelephone connections and to improve efficiency. when a point has a message tosend, the message is normally sent to the node to be routed to its destination. ifthe message is destined for another point on the unima network, the messagewaits at the node to be picked up by the destination point. before april 1994, thenode originated international calls to the africa zone gate at rhodes universityfor delivery and collection of international mail. all international mail is nowrouted via sangonet, which polls the unima node three times a day.international mail from malawi is made to wait at the malawi node in zomba forinternational delivery during one of the polls from sangonet.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi181bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.when mail is received at the unima node, it is processed by the noncommercial fidonet mailer and other mail processors. gecho.exe (version 1.01)is used as a mail and conference processor and also for mail compression anddecompression. netmanager, netmgr.exe (version 0.99), is used as a generalmessage processor for messagebymessage identification, distribution, andredirection. message tracking is done by msgtrack.exe, which produces amessagebymessage log indicating such data as message origin, destination,dates, and volume.i have written additional software to produce bills sent to users for costrecovery and network sustainability. most of the billing information is obtainedfrom the data produced by msgtrack.exe. other data used to evaluate theperformance of the network and the telephone system is collected from thevarious log files produced by the mailer and mail processors and analyzed usingtools developed at the unima node.results, impact, and benefits of the projectnetwork performancethe network performance reported here was monitored at the unimafidonet node. as outlined above, the node software produces logfiles (logs) forthe daytoday, telephone callbycall, as well as the messagebymessageactivities that the node performs in sending and receiving electronic mail andfiles. the collection of the data presented here started in october 1993 and endedin march 1994. much more data has been collected at the node but this has yet tobe analyzed. by processing the log files, the monthly international mail volumecan be determined. this is shown in figure 2.cost of the serviceshown in figure 3 are the costs of sending or receiving one kilobyte volumeof mail and the monthly telephone bill in malawi kwacha, as charged by malawiposts and telecommunications department. this calculation was done on amonthtomonth basis as well as on a cumulative basis where the total bill and thetotal volume, up to the dates shown, were used to calculate the cost per kilobyteof mail. as shown in figure 3, the cost of operating the network per kilobyte ofmail has dropped from mk4.68 (four malawi kwacha and sixtyeight malawitambala) in october 1993 to mk0.88 in march 1994 on a monthtomonth basisand from mk4.68 to mk1.10 on the cumulative basis. using these data, the nodehas recommended that users be charged at the rate of mk1.00 per kilobyte ofmail sent or received internationally. this charge rate was still in place at thewriting of this chapter.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi182bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 2 international email volume and telephone bill using a 2400 baudmodem.figure 3 cost per kilobyte of international telephone calls for email transfersusing a 2400 baud modem.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi183bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.although the modem used for collecting the data changed from a 2400 baudmodem to a 14400 baud one (with most good connections at 9600), the malawitelephone charge per minute also changed upwards considerably from about$1.00 to $3.00 per minute in january 1995. we are currently collecting andanalyzing data to check the effect of the modem speed change versus thetelephone charge rate change.a comparison between the cost of using the email system and using a fax totransfer text messages can be made based on the above data. one full page of text(as on this page) uses nearly 3 kilobytes and would therefore take mk3.00 to sendby email. after examining several fax transmissions at chancellor college, wefound that such a page would take more than one minute to send but often lessthan two minutes. (the malawi posts and telecommunications would thereforecharge two minutes.) most of the international mail transferred during theobservation period has been for contacts outside africa. the cost of sending suchtext messages internationally by email is therefore about 20 times cheaper thanfaxing similar messages at the current telephone rates and email charges at theunima node.billing usersusing the data collected from message tracking, a bill is sent from thebursar of chancellor college in the university of malawi to each user once everythree months. in addition to the volume fee outlined above, which now stands atroughly seven cents per kilobyte, each user account held outside the university ischarged at 70 cents per month for account maintenance. experience has shownthat although these rates are very low, most malawian users and organizationsstill have difficulties paying. i am currently proposing to conduct a study to findout whether this is due to genuine financial difficulties. i hope that userperception of ''user pays" electronic communications will be better understoodfollowing the survey and analysis of the results.i have shown in figures 2 and 3 that even though the monthly bill and themonthly volume of mail sent and received internationally are increasing rapidlyfrom month to month, the cost of sending mail per kilobyte has steadilyapproached a constant value. i expect that the speed of the modem used at thenode will play a crucial role in determining the cost per kilobyte of internationalmail transferred at the node. at the moment this has been complicated by theinternational charge rate change made in january 1995. i hope that the furtherdata analysis now being carried out will assist in clarifying the situation.all the money raised from the bills is paid into a project account held at thechancellor college bursar office. money in project accounts does not getabsorbed into the university's pool account; although the money does notgenerate interest in such accounts, it is available when required to pay the billsincurred by the project. it also helps cover equipment maintenance and staffcosts.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi184bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.failure ratesfigure 4 shows the failure rate of telephone calls for data transfer asmonitored at the node. all the calls at the node involve the malawi telephonesystem. data transmitted during a call that fails in some cases have to be retransmitted because the decompression of the data at the receiving side fails dueto incomplete packets or files. thus a failed call is a major concern to a user onthe network. as can be seen from figure 4, the proportion of calls that fail hascome down considerably from nearly 100 percent in october 1993 to about 18percent in march 1994. this improvement in performance can be attributed tovarious factors. the international mail route changed in november 1993 from viazambia to via south africa. we observed that fewer calls fail on the new route.we have also learned when to make the international calls in order to achievehigher success rates. this information was not available during the startup phaseof the network.the number of calls to the node from fidonet points within malawi hasgrown considerably as a proportion of the total number of calls recorded byfdstats.exe at the node. this means that while the performance reported in figure 4applied more to international calls in the startup phase of the network, it appliesboth to national and international calls in march 1994. we can estimate fromfigure 4 that on the malawi telephone system about 18 percent of the calls fordata transferfigure 4 failure rate of telephone connections using a 2400 baud modem.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi185bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using modems will fail. more data needs to be collected and analyzed todetermine the separate failure rates of national and international calls on themalawi telephone system and to determine the rate which the graph in figure 4settles down to.analysis of lessons learnednetwork usethe main services on the malawi fidonet network are electronic mail andfile transfer. no remote login of any kind is currently supported. we need toconduct a survey to determine and categorize the purposes of sending mail byusers within the university of malawi and outside. during the experimental phaseof the network, we have sought such information from users in the university andoutside. the message tracking software at the node collects information on thesources and destinations of mail. we have observed that university of malawiusers use the fidonet network mostly for the following reasons: contacts with academic colleagues and supervisors; negotiating links with other universities at department level; submission of research papers, proposals and reports; applying for further studies abroad; coordinating research for staff on study leave abroad; library contacts; seeking funding for research and other projects; discussion of issues pertinent to malawi; ordering equipment from suppliers outside malawi; personal mail; and file transfer using archie and ftp by email.in using the network, university staff and other users are finding it easierand more efficient than before to request and access information from colleaguesand institutions outside malawi. i hope that as the network grows inside malawiit will also become easier and more efficient to access colleagues and informationsources within the country.a number of users on unima were already on email in malawi but theyused to make international calls to access email facilities abroad, such ascompuserve or cgnet. since the unima fidonet network was established,many of these users have switched to using the unima network and are findingit cheaper and more convenient since it only involves a local telephone call. (seebox 1.)toward the end of 1994 and the beginning of 1995, users in nongovernmental organizations and commercial companies began making up a fastgrowing proportionthe unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi186bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the user base. these are high volume users who request and send largeamounts of data over the networkšmostly involving business relatedinformation. i expect that in the near future these users will be the main revenuegenerators for the running of the network.box 1 reviewing the new constitutionthe unima network made a significant contribution in the development ofthe new malawi constitution. it made it possible for international lawyers inmalawi and outside to exchange information in a fast and more efficient way. itpromoted discussion and editing as the constitution was sent worldwide forcomments and review. this was reported in the local press in malawi (thenation). it was said that, without this mode of communication, the review of theconstitution would have been lengthy and it would not have been possible tomeet the deadlines for the review.growing the internetwith more than one hundred points on the unima fidonet network andover six hundred users, it is time for the establishment of a full internet link inmalawi. the user base is there to support the network and our experience hasshown that the users would also be able to pay the fees that such an installationwould demand. at the point of writing, a leased line to south africa seems tooexpensive and so we are suggesting that a vsat connection be tried instead.vsats or very small aperture terminals are satellites that provide twoway, highdata rate services. vsats appear to offer a lowcost telecommunication solutionin developing countries.users on the unima network indicate that they would not like flat billing.they would prefer messagebymessage billing so that they pay for what theyuse. we will, therefore, have to carefully examine the current billing practices onunima before full internet connectivity is installed.equipment shortagesthe main constraint on the expansion of networks in malawi will remainequipment based, with modems topping the list. i recommend to donors that,when projects are funded in a country like malawi, each project should have aninformation technology section providing for the supply of computers andmodems, when and where these are not available. donors should also considerthe expense of the installation and training of users of the information technologywithin the project. the minimum here should include electronic mail in anyproject proposal and implementation.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi187bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendationsa project to study computer and telephone network based communicationsin malawi has been in progress in the university of malawi since 1993. underthis project a nationwide electronic network using fidonet technology has beeninstalled and is being expanded. the network supports electronic mail and filetransfer. this is a public network in the sense that anyone or organization with therequired resources can link into the network. most of the objectives of the projecthave been accomplished.the project has shown that using the installed network for electroniccommunications is cheaper and more convenient than existing methods, such asfax and voice telephone. it has also shown that the fidonet software can be usedto generate data on a local telephone system that can be used to monitor theperformance of the local telephone network. we expect that such data will beuseful to the telecommunications operating corporation.we have had many positive and congratulatory comments on the networkperformance and about how it has improved the communication efficiency of ourusers. so while the project began as a scholarly undertaking, mostly to determinethe feasibility of establishing computer and telephonebased communications atthe university of malawi, it has resulted in the provision of improvedcommunication services throughout the country. the small amount of seed moneythat we received from the university has been effectively multiplied and theimpact of the project has been felt far beyond what we had originally intended.notes1. the value of the malawi kwacha has changed considerably from roughly us$1=mk5 at thetime when this data was collected to us$1=mk15 roughly at the time of writing of this report.2. fidonet uses a hierarchy to pass messages through the system. a fidonet address identifies thezone, the hub, the node, and the point (if there is one) number of the user. this address, 5:7231/1,means zone 5 (africa), hub 7231, and node number 1. see fall's case study for a more completediscussion of fidonet.the unima fidonet network: computer networking forcommunications in malawi188bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background summary a global computernetwork for changethe association for progressive communications (apc) is an extensiveglobal computer network, dedicated specifically to serving nongovernmentalorganizations (ngos) and activists working for social change. composed of aconsortium of international member networks, apc provides effective andefficient communications and informationsharing tools to ngos andindividuals. member networks exchange email and participate in selectedelectronic conferences with over 50 partner networks worldwide. many of thesepartner networks provide the only email access for ngos in their countries.through this global partnership, apc offers vital communication links to tens ofthousands of ngos, activists, educators, policymakers, and community leadersin 133 countries.apc member networks develop and maintain an informational system thatallows for geographically dispersed groups to coordinate activities online at amuch cheaper rate than can be done by fax, telephone, or forprofit computernetworks. apc wants to assure that electronic communication tools are availableto people from all regions in the world. by collaborating with over fifty partnersystems in southern countries, apc helps to increase the information flowbetween south and south. to further assure equitable access to computertechnology, apc initiated a women's networking support program, whichfocuses on increasing access to networking technologies and information sourcesfor women and women's ngos.the apc networks are distinguished by the depth and quality of theirinformation resources, by the global reach of their communication services, andby the diversity of their membership. apc developed from a dedicated grassroots constituencybackground summary a global computer network for change189bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and has become a true global community. the network provides information inseveral languages, including spanish, portuguese, estonian, serbian,macedonian, bosnian, croation, slovenian, russian, english, swedish, german,polish, french, and esperanto. in addition, apc provides extensive user supportand training to help people access the system easily and learn to use it efficiently.the apc networks are designed for use by ngos, united nationsagencies, research organizations, government departments, educationalinstitutions, multistakeholder groups, and individuals who communicate withngos. people use apc as an information and organizing tool for a wide range ofissues, including peace, human rights, public health, environmental issues,population, social and economic justice, development, education, poverty, anddemilitarization.dial locally, act globallyall apc member networks provide users with an internet email address.apc users can communicate with any of the over 40 million people who have aninternet email address; as well as with most commercial, academic and othernetworks. many apc networks provide navigational tools to help their usersaccess information that is otherwise difficult to locate on the internet. forexample, users can access any public computer on the internet, includinguniversities, libraries, research institutions, and public databases. several apcnetworks make information publicly available on the internet via the worldwideweb (www) and via gopher pša userfriendly, textbased, menudriveninformation search tool. several apc networks offer slip and ppp access whichallows the use of a graphic interface to internet services.apc provides the following networking tools: electronic mail (email) electronic conferences, both private and public databases fax and telex internet navigation tools: gopher, telnet, worldwide web, ftp, wais news and information services international user directorythe apc is a community without borders. ngos and activists worldwideuse apc networks for both their internal organizational communications as wellas their public organizing efforts. in addition, many progressive news servicesdistribute their publications electronically on the apc networks.background summary a global computer network for change190bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bringing the internet to zambiaby neil robinsonneil robinson is a senior communication software engineerwith zamnet communication systems ltd. he has beenworking in zambia for six years. this case study describes thework that led to installing a full internet link in zambia andthe attempts to make the provision of internet services asustainable enterprise, independent of external donorfunding.background and context of the projecton 22 november 1994, zambia became the fifth country in africa (and thevery first subsaharan country outside of south africa) to have full access to theinternet, the world's biggest computer network. this achievement was madedespite zambia's official status as one of africa's poorest nations and followedthree years of development by the university of zambia of an electronic mailnetwork serving noncommercial interests within the country. it was alsoachieved in a country that lacks a computer science degree course and whereadvanced computer skills are scarce. however, the technological achievement isperhaps less important than the ability to meet the considerable costs of internetconnectivity from within and thus to establish a sustainable service. zamnetcommunication systems limited is the company that has been established to dothis.computer skills in zambiadespite a steady increase in the numbers of computers in use in bothgovernment institutions and private companies, the number of skilled computerspecialists working in zambia is still desperately small. top quality staffcommand high salaries and other benefits (housing and transport) that are beyondthe reach of governmentfunded institutions and the majority of zambiancompanies. most ofbringing the internet to zambia191bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the top computer specialists work in the financial sector or for zambiaconsolidated copper mines in the (up until now) wellfunded mining sector.there is a growing number of small computer sales and support companies in thecapital, lusaka, but the quality of service they provide is variable. against such abackground, the number of expatriate computer specialists working withinzambia is relatively high.zambia's highest national qualification in computing is a threeyearcomputer studies diploma taught by evelyn hone college. the university ofzambia has no computer science department so people who wish to advance todegree level have to go outside of the country. the mathematics department inthe school of natural sciences does provide a mathematics and computingdegree but their department is desperately short of computers and is unable toprovide the practical experience necessary in such a course. the locally producedgraduates with the strongest computing background come from the electronicengineering department of the school of engineering. many who succeed inacquiring the necessary skills and qualifications during training overseas fail toreturn to zambia for very long, if at all.the university of zambiathe university of zambia (unza) is the larger of zambia's two universities(the other being the copperbelt university in kitwe). it has a student body ofsome 5,000 and approximately 500 academic staff. unza is wholly dependenton the zambian government for its funding, although several schools within theuniversity benefit from international donor support for their equipmentrequirements.the university uses an old ibm 4361 mainframe computer foradministrative computing requirements. the systems that run on this computer(personnel, payroll, admissions, examination systems, and so on) have all beenwritten and are maintained by the university computer centre, a department ofabout 50 staff. some 15 of these are technical programming and analysis staff.the rest are involved in the considerable data entry and computer operationsrequirements of such a mainframebased system.the computer centre is also responsible for providing technical support tocomputer users throughout the university. up until about four years ago, this waslargely confined to support for the mainframe computer to which students andstaff were given access through a small terminal room at the computer centre.however, as elsewhere in zambia, the number of microcomputers in use aroundcampus has been growing steadily and the support requirement for the repair ofhardware components and for the maintenance of microcomputer applications hasalso grown.the vast majority of microcomputers within the university are donated andas such there is a diverse range of models and types of computers. however, ingeneral, there are still far too few microcomputers to distribute access to thestudentbringing the internet to zambia192bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.level, and even in the mathematics department most student computer projectwork is carried out on the mainframe.unza has recently embarked on a major project to downsize itsadministrative systems to a microcomputerbased network. a campuswide fibreoptic network is being installed to distribute the administrative tasks to theschools themselves. once again donor supported (through the dutchgovernment), this should provide access to the first of the systems (studentrecords) by the end of this year. it will also provide access for members of staffthrough departmental networks to the internet, although the extent to which thishappens will largely depend on the ability of each school to extend its ownsection of the campus network through its own buildings.project descriptionsince 1991, the computer centre at the university of zambia has been thefocal point for academic, nongovernmental organization (ngo), and healthbased email networks in zambia. in that year, as a result of the internationaldevelopment research centre (idrc)funded esanet 1 project, zambia wasgiven a microcomputer and modem to provide the hub or "host" of the firstuniversity email system. the very first recorded message through this systemwas sent to the baobab, an african interests network based in washington, d.c.,on 30 september 1991. this and other international messages were initiallyrouted through the association for progressive communication (apc) network inlondon. the first recorded user of the system was the school of medicine'smedical library.the rapid growth and development of what was then known as unzanetwas assisted by an arrangement with rhodes university of grahamstown, southafrica which, in november 1991, began providing a link with internet viathricedaily, computertocomputer telephone calls. these were paid for byuninet, the south african universities network funded by the foundation forresearch and development (frd). this arrangement remained until december1994, when full internet access was achieved and by which time some 270 emailpoints were linked to the network.the early technologyfrom the beginning unzanet was a fidonet system using dialuptelephone lines to transmit messages via dedicated host computers. whenunzanet was first established in 1991, fidonet has been successfully tried andtested in zimbabwe and in kenya for ngo networks.2 thus unzanet was ableto learn from the experiences of similar networks in the region and benefit fromcooperation with them.the unzanet host system was configured to handle simultaneously threetelephone lines attached to three separate modems. two of these lines were directbringing the internet to zambia193bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.external lines, while the third was an internal switchboard line for users oncampus and with access to an internal telephone extension. the configuration ofthe fidonet system remains in place today, primarily to serve rural users andthose whose telephone lines are inadequate for interactive communication. it alsoserves users in advance of the completion of the campus network.unzanet's traditional usersthe original users of unzanet were the schools and departments of theuniversity. from the very beginning, a single site address or point number3 wasallocated to each school and administrative department. in the majority of cases,computers already existed in those departments and the email facility wasinstalled using modems supplied as part of the esanet project. some of thecomputers used were old ibm personal computers, which were still perfectlyadequate for email.from very early on, it appeared to be inevitable and desirable that initiativesin academic networking would lead to collaborations with other sectors. withoutexpansion of the service into other, betterfunded areas, the unzanet systemcould never be sustainable. the development of a nonacademic user base wasencouraged especially for those users who had an immediate need forcommunication and for those who would have a growing need for communicationin the future. these users would want to be part of a longerterm, moresustainable solution. however, with unzanet's dependence upon donorsupport in mind, and particularly that of uninet, the emphasis was always onnoncommercial applications.in zambia, following the use at the university itself, there was widespreadgrowth in the use of email among ngos, health institutions, and aid ordevelopment agencies. encouragement for the first two came about throughexternal support, while the majority of aid and development agencies were able tofund the necessary infrastructure (modems, computers and telephone lines)themselves.unzanet's free serviceone of the reasons for the rapid growth of unzanet was the fact that itwas provided as a free service. users only had to cover the cost of local calls intothe unzanet host or access the system through the university's internalswitchboard. this allowed users to ''taste" email and to experiment with it beforethey had to commit themselves to paying for the service. we feel that the growthof unzanet would have been considerably slower had it been necessary tocharge users from the beginning, although a culture of nonpayment can have itsdisadvantages when a subscriberfunded service is introduced.bringing the internet to zambia194bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the need for zamnetthrough the technical success of unzanet, it was clear that email was aviable technology within zambia. this was true not just for a rich urban elite, butalso for smaller, lesswealthy organizations within lusaka, the copperbelt, andfurther afield. we had shown that email had the capacity to remove some of thecommunications barriers that otherwise engender a feeling of internationalisolation in professional communities. at the same time it was attractive to alarge community of users outside of the academic sector. email offered a fast,easy, and highly cost effective method of communicating compared to any otheravailable technology. (see box 1.)however, a free servicešprovided through the generosity of othersšcouldnot be sustainable. the computer centre of the university, with itsresponsibilities to the university administration, was not in a position to sell andmaintain a commercial service to customers from outside of the university, nor topay the salaries of the high quality staff that such a service would require.by the end of 1993, users were transmitting large volumes of internationalmessages to and from the internet, and there was a strong desire among users ofunzanet to expand the horizons of the system. the internet was alreadyexpanding very rapidly: more and more data, journals, and information becameavailable in electronic from; the nature of the information being offeredbroadened beyond the bounds of academic interest into business and recreation;and publicity about it was reaching the popular public media. the ability totransfer large files to and from other users; to directly access remote databasesand electronic libraries; and to participate in electronic conferences and otherpeer group discussions had become of considerable interest both within andoutside of the university.to accommodate this growth and change in direction, the basicinfrastructure of the unzanet system and the way it was funded needed to bereviewed. the computer centre had already perceived the need for collaborationbetween the university and its fellow research institutions, as well as with thecommercial andbox 1 pooling resourcesat times it was suggested that the users in the ngo and health sectorsshould form their own networks (zangonet and healthnet respectively)šindependently of unzanet. however, the need for a fulltime system operatorand the considerable advantages of pooling equipment and staff resources withunzanet, dictated that both groups be maintained and administered from theuniversity computer centre. the advantages of such an arrangement are evenmore apparent under the current selffinancing service, which enables noncommercial ngo's and health institutions to be subsidized to some degree byzamnet's 'commercial' customers.bringing the internet to zambia195bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international organizations that had the resources to pay for the high quality, highvolume access to information. some of these other organizations were usingunzanet but, because they needed to transmit larger volumes of informationmore quickly, many had made their own direct links to their international headoffices using a variety of electronic mail systems. pooled access for theseorganizations to the internet through a single service provider would clearly bringconsiderable cost savings, while improvements in speed and efficiency ofcommunication, as well as the extra services available, would allow internationalorganizations to better service their target communities.the zamnet proposalby the middle of 1993, we made a decision to submit a proposal for donorfunding to enable the university of zambia to establish a direct link to theinternet. this was circulated among a number of major international donors butfailed to attract any direct support. at the beginning of 1994, the universitydecided to establish a private campus company (zamnet communicationsystems ltd.) to put in place the connection to the internet and to sell access tothe services that the internet provides. then the world bank expressed interest infunding the zamnet project and agreed to fund 80 percent of the first yearoperating costs of the new company.as a young campus company with no working capital aside from the grantfrom the world bank, zamnet issued a nominal share holding, the major andcontrolling shareholder being the university itself. the board of directors iscomprised of senior administrators from the university and the deputy ministerof health, with the director of the computer centre as managing director.the budgetthe project budget was estimated at $ 150,000 and covered the cost of: the leased data circuit to the chosen (cheapest) point of internet access; subscription paid to the service provider at that point; extra hardware required to provide the internet link and to provide a serviceto zamnet's customers; hardware required to provide a training facility for zamnet's customers; consultancy fees for technical internet experts to assist in the configurationof the service; and salaries for one administrator and two technical staff (to be met fromcustomer fees from the beginning).bringing the internet to zambia196bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the proposed servicewe intended to distribute internet services to users throughout zambia usinga variety of methods including: local leased lines providing full internet access to regular highvolumeusers with their own local area networks (lans); dialup interactive access using slip or ppp for urban users on good qualitytelephone lines; and fidonet and perhaps uucp access for users in rural areas where poortelephone quality prohibited interactive access.we anticipated that fidonet would continue to play an important role withinzambia providing as it did a quick, easytouse entry to electronic mail. it hadalready proved to be relatively cheap on remote trunk lines and generally reliablein a rural setting.the project objectiveszamnet communication systems ltd. came into being officially infebruary 1994, although it was unable to employ staff or provide a service to itscustomers until the following year. zamnet has the following objectives:1) put in place the hardware and technical support necessary to provide areliable full internet service. to do this, we would need to: establish a reliable link between the unix network at theuniversity computer centre and an internet service provider; procure, install, and configure all necessary hardware to providean internet service; provide an access point for customers to dial into the internetwith sufficient capacity to avoid congestion; provide a software package for customers to use to access theinternet through zamnet; connect the existing fidonet service to the new internet service,thus removing the dependence on the fidonetinternet gatewayat rhodes university; develop locally based information services for local andinternational access; provide a training facility and develop training courses forcustomers; and produce or obtain user documentation for the system.bringing the internet to zambia197bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2) put in place the administrative staff and procedures, and market theinternet service so that it would be fully selfsustaining after oneyear of operation, and after the world bank funding had run out. todo this, we would need to: set up a computerized accounts system; determine a pricing system; and produce marketing materials (pamphlets, brochures, price lists,advertisements).project experience and implementationalthough zamnet has been operating commercially for less than fivemonths (at the time this report was written), the financial support from the worldbank is soon to come to an end. thus, while in many ways the project is stillongoing, this is a good time to review progress on the zamnet objectivesduring the establishment of the internet service to date.establishing the link to the internetthe establishment of the data communications link between lusaka andcape town, critical to our service, proved very slow and time consuming. theinternet company of south africa or ticsa (now internet africa) of cape townhad already generously agreed to carry our internet traffic for free (for the timebeing) when, in april 1994, we submitted the application to the zambian ptt for aleased, fourwire, 9600 baud, designated data circuit between our own offices inlusaka and the ticsa offices. after the necessary surveying work, we werenotified that it would be commissioned in july 1994. however technicalproblems over the satellite link between the zambian earth station at mwembeshiand johannesburg meant that the line was not available to us to test until octoberof that year. unfortunately our problems were not over.our original choice of modem to serve both ends of our internet link was thetelebit worldblazer. we had good experience with worldblazers through ourwork with the fidonet system. however when we installed the leased fourwiredata circuit between lusaka and cape town, we did not know that theworldblazer is purely a twowire modem and, therefore, unsuitable for the typeof circuit that we were using. unfortunately our email messages (our cheapest andwhat should have been the easiest route to assistance) to telebit often failed tosolicit a response and it required several long distance telephone and fax calls toestablish the facts and to find out what options were available to overcome thisproblem.our first solution was to install hybrids to convert the fourwire circuit totwowire over the local segment of the circuit in cape town and lusaka. boththe zambian and south african ptts were extremely helpful in immediatelyinserting hybrids into their circuits. however, the resulting signal contained toomuch echobringing the internet to zambia198bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for the worldblazers to cope with and, despite the further insertion of echosuppressors into the circuit by the ptts, the resulting signal was inadequate forthe worldblazers at either end of the circuit to communicate with each other.eventually, after seeking advice from various sources, we decided topurchase two (quite expensive at $1,100 each) telebit fastblazer modemsthrough their south african agents. despite the availability of email,communication with them proved as frustrating as trying to communicate withtelebit in the united states. however, eventually, two modems were purchasedand installed. alas our problems did not end there.the line between cape town and lusaka uses microwave technology as faras johannesburg, satellite to the lusaka earth station, microwave once again asfar as lusaka's main exchange, but then uses copper wire for the last six or sevenkilometers to the university. the signal loss over this section is high and thesignal coming from south africa was already quite low. over such a longdistance, the quality of the line allocated between central lusaka and thezamnet office was highly variable and it required some intensive work fromthe zambian ptt to identify the very best connections to provide for our circuit.however on 22 november 1994 the line was finally strong enough to carry asignal from our mail server to the internet and vice versa.the line has since been quite reliable (above 95 percent), the modemstraining up to 14,400 baud. although capable of connecting at 19,200 baud, itappears that the signal loss over the circuit as a whole will prevent us fromachieving such speeds. when the data circuit does fail, the technical staff at thetwo ptts (zamtel in zambia and telkom in south africa) have been quickto respond and restore our circuit.procuring, installing, and configuring the internet hardwaremost problems encountered during the installation and configuration of thehardware were due to our own inexperience with unix and our ignorance ofmuch of the technology with which we were dealing. the staff involved weresubjected to a very steep learning curve and inevitably much of that learning wasthrough our own mistakes. (see box 2.)box 2 danger from lightning strikesa real problem during zambia's rainy season is the threat of high intensitylightning strikes. all telephone lines and the leased data circuit to cape townare protected from lightning strikes using a surge protection box that divertscurrent surges down a thick copper wire into a copper stake driven into theground outside of the equipment room. so far this system has thankfully notbeen tested by such a lightning strike.bringing the internet to zambia199bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the mail serverthrough the rinaf (regional informatics network for africa) project, theuniversity computer centre had received two identical olidata (olivetti) 486computers. one of these was pressed into service as a new fidonet host to copewith the rapidly growing number of users accessing that host. the other was setup on the computer centre network as a prospective mail server (puku.unza.zm).a copy of sco unix was installed on puku and this machine wasconfigured to run sendmail (for mail delivery), to run a pop (post officeprotocol) server (for mail collection by zamnet's customers), and to exchangemail with the fidonet host using uucp. we experienced some difficulty findingfree internet applications software to run under sco unix (a commercialproduct) and, when we employed an expert to assist in the configuration of ourmail server, we were advised to switch to freebsd2.0. this was done indecember 1994šafter the internet connection had been commissioned.freebsd is a relatively easy operating system to configure and to manage,but finding precompiled binary versions of internet applications has proveddifficult. compilation of ports and patches is cumbersome for those inexperiencedin unix and keeping abreast of the constant updates is time consuming. the onlyalternative free unix system that runs on a 486 personal computer is linux.having already started with freebsd, there are few advantages in switching atthis stage.puku is now running as the zamnet name server, as well as the server formail/pop, gopher, and www. all of these services appear to be running quitewell. however from a hardware point of view we have discovered that a systemwith eight megabytes of ram and a 400 megabyte hard disk is insufficient totackle the range of tasks and to serve the number of users that we are asking ofpuku. a gigabyte hard drive and 32 megabytes of ram is essential on such apivotal system within an internet service.the routerthe router required to connect zamnet to the rest of the internetša cisco3000šwas provided as part of the funding of the zambian regional node by therinaf project. zamnet itself purchased a transceiver to connect this router tothe ethernet network. the cisco gave no problems in terms of configuration;however since its installation two problems have arisen.first, one of the primary requirements of the router is to provide statisticsthat can be used to bill zamnet customers who link their networks withzamnet's using locally leased data circuits. such customers are billed for alltraffic carried. the data to enable this kind of billing needs to be analyzed onanother computer on the network that is running unix. we have yet to find anysoftware to analyze this data that will run under the freebsd operating system onpuku, our mail server. the only such software that we have found is written forthe sun operating systembringing the internet to zambia200bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(sunos) and we have since been advised that nobody would attempt to do ciscoaccounting on a freebsd system!the second problem is in trying to increase the speed of our link to theinternet. that link currently operates at 14,400 baud. it seems that by switching toan asynchronous connection using data compression it should be possible toincrease the throughout of data on our link. to do this, however, the cisco needsto have its auxiliary port configured to operate in asynchronous mode, which inturn requires a memory upgrade and a new version of the operating system to beloaded into the increased memory. with our whole system dependent on that onerouter we are somewhat reluctant to attempt this upgrade.providing customer accessto provide access to the internet service to as many of zamnet'scustomers as possible simultaneously, 20 dialup telephone lines configured as ahunting group were installed by the zambian ptt, and a livingston portmaster2e30 with 30 configurable ports was purchased along with 20 zyxel u1496modems to connect these lines to zamnet.the telephone lines were installed when a new cable was being laid into theuniversity and there were no problems in finding 20 new lines for zamnet.the hunting group is functioning well, although up until now (with 193 active,paying users as at the end of june 1995), we have rarely seen as many as seven ofthe lines in use at one time.the modems that the zamnet customers dial into were purchased by mailorder directly from zyxel in california. dealings with that company by emailwere very easy. the modems were purchased before the v34 (28,800 baud)standard had been ratified and they are all set to a maximum speed of 14,400baud. however, given that this is also maximum speed on our data circuit to theinternet, and that as yet there is no congestion on the dialup lines, there is nodisadvantage in restricting our customers to connections at this speed.the postmaster was chosen over a telebit netblazer on the grounds of itscheaper price and that its range of features was closer to our requirements.however we were unaware when purchasing the postmaster that some of thesoftware that is provided with it and that enables easy configuration and backupof the system would not run under the freebsd operating system that we areusing on our mail server. the inability to back up the tables used to store usernames and passwords has proved a serious weakness on two occasions when partof the user table was lost and had to be manually reentered.provisions of end user softwarefor zamnet users continuing to use the existing fidonet service or leasinglocal data circuits between their own lans and zamnet, we did not need tobringing the internet to zambia201bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.provide any new software. the fidonet installation had already been developedand proven over a number of years, while those linking through their ownnetworks were responsible for their own software.however, for our dialup interactive customers we needed to find an easytoinstall, easytouse package for windows, dos, and macs. when we found aset of books for each of these three categories, complete with software diskettes,we thought we had found the solution. however, we discovered that the dossoftware contained a hardcoded login script that did not match the promptsprovided by our portmaster; the mac software would not run on the systems onwhich we attempted to install it; and the windows software contained frustratingbugs in its mail program.software for dosthe package distributed to dos users is a slightly modified version of theslip/minuet package developed by the university of minnesota. while not asattractive as the windows software, it does contain an easytouse mail programand a gopher client. it lacks a www client and we are investigating howdoslynx (a www client for dos) might be integrated into the installation.software for windowsafter the frustrations encountered above, we borrowed the packagedistributed by greennet in london for their own ppp customers. their packageis based on shareware versions of the trumpet winsocket manager, eudora as amail client, netscape as a www client, plus ftp and telnet clients. wemodified this package for our own system and developed our own installationprogram. this package is stable, easytoinstall and has been found to be easy touse by our customers.software for macsthe vast majority of computer users in zambia use dosbased computers.consequently, providing support for the few mac customers that zamnet has,has proved very difficult. the package distributed to mac users is a combinationof the diskette provided with the internet tour guide and a second disketteobtained from greennet that they distribute to their own mac users. the resultingpackage includes the eudora mail client and netscape and is very similar in itstwo main components to the windows package. zamnet still does not possessits own mac and so streamlining the installation is still some way off. evencopying the two distribution diskettes requires a visit to one of the two privateindividuals on campus who use macs!bringing the internet to zambia202bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.integration of fidonet and the internetwhen the internet link was established in november 1994, we had just threeweeks in which to commission the gateway between the fidonet host and themail server before uninet started charging us for the use of their own gateway.on the recommendation of bob barad of the baobab, we installed the new gigopackage and were pleased to find that it was very easy to install and configure,and what's more, it worked. rhodes university had given us an experimentaluucp account and, for the three weeks prior to cutover, we polled (generated acomputer call to) the rhodes uucp host on a regular basis. we encountered noproblems with this link and the modification of the software to enableconnections between the fidonet host and our own mail server went equally well.the only disadvantage of the link at this stage is that it requires a modernand telephone line to be dedicated to the mail server for the uucp connections(none of our users use uucp directly). even using local phone calls at 14,400baud the telephone bill for this exchange of mail between adjacent personalcomputers is quite high. it would be better to move this mail over the lan ifpossible.development of local information servicesthe zamnet gopherin december 1994, a gopher server was set up (gopher.zamnet.zm) with amenu structure covering agriculture, engineering, health, communications andnetworking, and zamnet news and information. this proved to be a veryuseful way of publicizing our work and making contact and service informationavailable to potential customers and other interested parties around the world. wealso found the gopher useful for advising our customers of the latestdevelopments (or problems) on zamnet.as customers became aware of the potential of the zamnet gopher for thedistribution of local information, they expressed an interest in storing their owninformation within its menus. to date a number of customers are paying for diskspace on our gopher server at the nominal rate of $1.00 per megabyte per month.for example: the national farmers union is providing weekly agricultural commodityexchange prices; the ministry of agriculture posts regular food security and marketingbulletins; and the engineering institute of zambia is publishing a range of informationabout the institute and its activities.bringing the internet to zambia203bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the worldwide web serverour knowledge of the internet has grown and we are aware of the rapidgrowth of the worldwide web (www) and the trend towards storing moreinformation in hypertext form. around april 1995, we installed our own wwwserver. the zamnet homepage is accessible as www.zamnet.zm and containspointers to information about zambia, about zamnet, to the zamnetgopher, and to a small but growing number of pages developed for zamnet'scustomers. for example: articles from the post newspaper are currently published twice weeklybefore the paper actually reaches the streets; the zambia national tourist board has published information about traveland tourism; and the university of zambia has published the text of a short leaflet givingbackground information about the university.we plan to develop all of these areas. in particular several commercialcustomers are interested in posting information about their companies andservices within our www pages.provision of training facilities and courseswhen zamnet was formed in 1994, it occupied one small office withinthe computer centre. in april 1995 we got our own offices that include a trainingroom with capacity for nine networked personal computers. the room wasequipped in may with seven multimedia compaq personal computers and wehave set aside three mornings per week to provide training to zamnetcustomers.in addition, this facility has been used to provide sensitization seminars tothe staff, deans, and administration from each of the schools at the university.when not in use for training, it is open for these members of university staff tobook for an hour at a time, and is also open for members of the public to use at arate of $7.00 per hour.user documentationthe internet is a new concept to many people in zambia and there are fewbooks or magazines about it in the bookshops in the country. since it is importantfor customers to have access to information that helps them make the best use ofthe service they are buying, we decided to provide a book, the internet tourguide, with the zamnet subscription. in practice, as explained above, thesoftware included with the books has not been very useful and the books are veryamerican in style and language. however, there are few alternatives until we canproduce our own software specific guides. we have spent some time producingdetailedbringing the internet to zambia204bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.installation instructions for the software that we distribute and these certainlyappear to have reduced the number of queries that we field during customerinstallation.computerized accountingthe initial chart of accounts was put together by an accountant who hassubsequently kept an eye on our progress. we are using mind your own business(myob), a small business accounting package developed in the united states.while quite easy to use, it has been not been adaptable to the multicurrencysystem we operate (we accept payment in zambian kwacha and in u.s. dollars).we are considering replacing it with a package better suited to our own particularrequirements.determining a pricing systemno two internet service providers use the same method to charge for theirservices. our own method of arriving at our fees was to draw up the budget overthe next few years; decide how much emphasis we wanted to put on the basicsubscription, the cost of international electronic mail, and the cost of connecttime; estimate the number of customers and projected growth rate in eachcategory; and to fiddle with the parameters until we could be sure of breakingeven within one year.since we need to support our traditional users, we added a twotier pricingstructure for commercial and one for noncommercial customers. the resultingfee structurešwhich entails a signingon fee, a basic monthly subscription, a perkilobyte charge for international email, and a per hour charge for connect timešhas been well received within the country, although we have received somecriticism from without. we are always reviewing these fees and plan to increasethe free connect time to two hours per month. as yet zamnet is not sufficientlyfinancially sound for any radical discounting of the prices.marketing of the productto promote zamnet to a largely unaware population, we employed agraphic artist to produce a leaflet and eight page brochure. this determined the''corporate image" of zamnet and its style has been copied on price lists,business cards, and advertisements. over 1,000 brochures have been distributedso far. advertisements have been placed in the times of zambia, productivefarming, and profit magazine . however such has been the interest in theinternet that zamnet has benefited from free publicity in articles in all three ofzambia's leading newspapers, plus a lead article in profit magazine.bringing the internet to zambia205bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 3 zamnet salarieseven at the relatively (for zambia) high salaries being offered by zamnet,recruitment of the right quality staff was difficult. the package on offer of a twoyear contract with a salary but no fringe benefits was perhaps not so attractive in acountry where housing and transport costs are so high and many employersstill provide housing (or housing allowances) and transport to senior informationtechnology professionals.staff recruitmentthe recruitment of the administrator/bookkeeper with a full association ofaccounting technicians qualification and solid accounting experience proved alot easier than the recruitment of the technical staff, although an initial plan torecruit a part time administrator was revised when it was fully appreciated justhow much would be involved in administering the zamnet service. (seebox 3.)of only 30 applicants for the post of communications technician, six weresuitable to interview. few of these had unix experience, and none had anypractical experience with internetworking technology. while one member of staffwas recruited from the computer centre and had been involved in thedevelopment of the system from the beginning, the only external recruit is verymuch learning as he goes along.results, impact and benefits of the projectas part of the billing process it has been necessary to gather comprehensivestatistics about the use of the zamnet system from the very beginning. a verysimple analysis of the connection time and email statistics reveals very rapidgrowth of the service. zamnet is growing at roughly the rate of one newaccount each day and at the current rate this will lead to zamnet more thandoubling in size over the next twelve months.table 1 shows the growth in the number of interactive accounts and theconnect time that those accounts have generated. growth has been constantšwithaccounts connecting to zamnet for an average of just over four hours permonth, although the average number of connections per month has increased from38 in march to 46 in june. this increase perhaps reflects the increased regular useof the system for electronic mail rather than internet browsing.table 2 shows the steady growth in the volume of email, although it shouldbe noted that the mail volumes include mail from the fidonet system which,unlike the connect time data, would have been present before march. nonethelessthebringing the internet to zambia206bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.volume of international mail being sent has nearly doubled in two months. thisdoes not include incoming mail. interestingly, while the volume of mail tointernational destinations has increased steadily the volume of mail to local usershas remained nearly constant, perhaps reflecting the international requirements ofthe newer users, and the benefits of zamnet in economizing over traditionalcommunication methods (fax, telephone and courier).table 1 growth of zamnet by month, january 1995 to june 1995monthnumber of accountsnumber of connectionstotal connect time(hours)january5325.12february26875135.08march933,510390.26april1124,415503.87may1686,926800.77table 2 growth of zamnet by month, march 1995 to may 1995monthinternationallocaltotalcountsizecountsizecountsizemarch3,5057,629,5752,0577,316,0135,57214,945,588april4,1038,535,9962,5228,300,0206,62516,836,016may5,63313,571,7322,4227,498,5558,05521,070,287a breakdown of the usersthe majority of urban users of the noncommercial fidonet service prior tozamnet's formation have now subscribed to the interactive service. thoseremaining with fidonet include: users in rural areas (notably the health community) from where telephonecalls to lusaka are expensive, and telephone line quality is often too weakto support interactive communication. university users who will remain on the fidonet system until theinstallation of the campus network has been completed. long term users of the fidonet system who are due to leave zambia shortlyand therefore do not wish to upgrade to the new interactive service. some united nations agencies that are currently planning to connect theirown network directly to zamnet with a local leased data circuit but, inthe interim, would prefer to continue to use the technology with which theirusers are familiar.bringing the internet to zambia207bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.looking at the geographical and categorical breakdown of the fidonet andinteractive subscribers, it is clear that the vast majority of users of both systemsare lusaka based. (see table 3.) while this is not surprising, the significantlysmaller concentration of users on the copperbelt, zambia's other major urbanarea, is more unusual and perhaps can be explained by the greater difficulty infully supporting a service to users who are based outside of lusaka. it will benecessary to consider a point of presence on the copperbelt to rectify this andalso to consider ways in which greater support can be provided to rural users.table 3 users by provinceprovincefidonetinteractivetotallusaka province38165203copperbelt61218southern province7411western province7310eastern province516northern province325northwestern province033luapula province112central province022total67193260analysis of the new interactive subscribers by category is particularlydifficult. (see table 4.) beyond learning that companies are commercial, noattempt has been made to determine the line of work in which a subscribingcompany is involved. many of the private individuals joining zamnet as noncommercial subscribers are attached to development organizations orinternational ngos and use their points professionally. again we have made noattempt to survey the uses made of email and so further analysis is impossible.box 4 email to fax servicezamnet has recently reached an agreement with greennet in londonthat allows zamnet customers to send email messages to fax machines.these messages are delivered to london via the internet and are then deliveredfrom there at the cost of the delivering phone call. for faxes to europe and tonorth america, this results in a total fax cost of less than 50 cents per page. aninformative acknowledgment email message confirms to the sender whether ornot the fax has been delivered. delivery times are usually less than 20 minutesafter the email has been sent, which is perfectly satisfactory for zamnet'scustomers.bringing the internet to zambia208bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.table 4 users by categorycategoryfidonetinteractivetotalprivate25355health301848university/research181128development61824agriculture8917religion11516government066education/schools055environment055tech training022journalism011other246commercial04646total67193259apart from the 55 private individual accounts and 46 commercial accounts,the largest category among the rest of the accounts is in health. as indicated bythe number of accounts still using fidonet, many health and agriculture accountswere users of the previous noncommercial service. since the new zamnetservice was put in place there has been a growing interest from a number ofreligious organizations active in zambia (most of whom have head offices in theunited states or europe), and encouragingly recent interest from the ministriesof finance and of foreign affairs.feedbackzamnet has received very positive feedback from its customers within andoutside of zambia. zambian expatriates write to us saying how proud they feelthat zambia is only the fifth african country to establish a full internet service.starved on information about their home country, they are eager to see expandednews and information services through zamnet.zamnet customers within zambia are particularly pleased with the costsavings that communicating by email has brought. with international telephonecalls to north america and europe billed at $7.00 per minute, the ability to make acheap local telephone call and send an email message for about 20 cents per pageis very attractive. to find that this message is delivered reliably and withinminutes is an added bonus. (see box 4.)media coverageas the internet has received more and more coverage in the internationalmedia, zamnet has correspondingly come under the spotlight within zambia.bringing the internet to zambia209bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the zambia daily mail, the times of zambia, and the weekly post have allpublished articles about the internet and its arrival in zambia (the postsubsequently subscribing to the zamnet service). profit magazine, zambia'sleading business magazine published a full leading article about zamnetcomplete with a front page image of some example www pages captured fromthe internet.the zambia national broadcasting corporation has regular computing andbusiness programs that make reference to information technology and theinternet. we hope that a full interview with the managing director of zamnetwill be broadcast soon, while plans exist to connect znbc to zamnet in thenear future.further afield, the efforts that zambia has made to provide an email serviceand to establish a full internet connection have been mentioned several times onthe african service of the bbc world service. in fact when the bbc began usingemail and started accepting questions to their pop science program, the very firstemail question that they received came from an email user in ndola, zambia.analysis of lessons learnedjust four months after the zamnet product was made available to thepublic, its existing infrastructure is already creaking. its communications link tothe rest of the internet is becoming congested at certain times of the day. its mailserver is overloaded and does not have the memory or disk capacity to cope with asignificant increase in either the number of zamnet customers, or in thenumber of internet users from outside of zambia accessing its informationservices. without a doubt the main area where zamnet might have beenlaunched differently was in its technical capacity.capital fundingzamnet's initial budgets should have been significantly higher andincluded items vital to the provision of a high quality, high volume, largecustomer base service. namely, in hindsight, we should have begun with a sunworkstation, vsat communications, a router capable of handling asynchronouscommunication, and a full set of equipment to provide backup in the event ofsystem failures. while these items would have increased the initial cost ofzamnet significantly, repayment of that cost could have been spread over anumber of years.staff trainingproviding technical support from a position of considerable inexperience hasbeen difficult. while the staff currently in place are learning fast, sustainability ofthe zamnet service is not only dependent upon them but also on the availabilityof suitable staff to supplement and replace the existing staff in the future. withthisbringing the internet to zambia210bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in mind there needs to be greater opportunities for zambians to learn aboutinternet technology without having to travel outside of the region.conclusions and recommendationszamnet is providing an important and much needed service to all sectorsof zambian society: businesses and industries need a fast, reliable and economicalcommunications system in order to compete within the newly liberalizedzambian economy; international development organizations need to keep in regular touch withtheir projects in the field and their head offices overseas; the academic sector and researchers need access to the latest research andneed to keep abreast of international developments in their field; government ministries need an efficient means of communication withdistrict and provincial offices in the fields of agriculture, health andeducation; and private individuals wish to keep in touch with their friends abroad or simplywish to use the internet as a vast encyclopedia.both commercial and noncommercial customers have shown a willingnessto pay the fees that zamnet has set in order to cover the considerable costs ofits service.because its customers now rely upon its service, zamnet needs to ensureits future both technically and economically. at the current, very fast growthrate, the system will be overstretched within twelve months, by which time thecustomer base should have more than doubled to over 600 accounts. the resultingreduced performance could seriously damage the positive image of zamnet.meanwhile the lack of technical backup within the system leaves the wholeservice vulnerable in the event of an equipment failure. the downside of this isthe capital expenditure involved in safeguarding against possible disasters.zamnet urgently needs to look at ways it can improve and upgrade itsservices.increasing the bandwidththe capacity of the internet link between lusaka and cape town will not beable to support 20 simultaneously connected users without a significant andnoticeable deterioration in performance. the most promising option forincreasing the capacity of this link appears to be a direct vsat link from thezamnet offices in lusaka to our internet service provider in cape town, orfailing that, an alternative link direct to the united states or united kingdom.although continued cooperation with counterparts in the region would bedesirable, progress inbringing the internet to zambia211bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.negotiations with telkom (the south african ptt) have not been productive sofar.based on the cost estimates provided so far, we know that the hardwarecosts of a vsat link, plus annual rental and license fees should prove cheaperthan the line we are leasing from zamnet and telkom at a cost of over$60,000 per year. the disadvantages of this strategy will be the expertiseexpected of the technical support staff and the cost of paying for both the existingand the vsat link during the transition. indeed it may be desirable to maintainthe existing link to provide redundancy in the event of failure of the vsatconnection.increasing dialup accesswith the current customer base, we have rarely observed more than eightports on the portmaster modem server active simultaneously. further expansionto serve 600 customers, while also accommodating increased activity among theexisting users, is likely to put severe pressure on our dialup. this expansion canonly be accommodated through the purchase of a second modem server and afurther batch of dialup telephone lines. over the next year a number of leasedline customers will also subscribe to zamnet thus putting further pressure onthe number of free ports available on the existing system.covering for equipment failuresthe current system is highly vulnerable in the event of any kind ofequipment failure. zamnet service would be lost in the event of: the loss of the leased line modem at either end of the data circuit that linkszamnet to the internet; the loss of the router linking the zamnet lan to the internet; or the loss of the portmaster providing local access to the internet to zamnetcustomers.none of this equipment is readily available within zambia and, even iffinances were available, the resulting loss of service while replacements werebeing shipped from abroad could last for several days and have a serious impacton the image of zamnet among its customers. spare items to replace thoselisted above would cost about $8,000.increase capacity on mail and information serversthe current mail server is running on a 40 mhz 486 pc with just 8megabytes of ram and a 400 megabyte hard disk and is already overloaded. asthe number of customers and the volume of local information being provided tousers outside of zambia increases, the burden on this machine will also increase. abringing the internet to zambia212bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.second machine is currently being configured as a news server to accommodatethe growing number of useful log files that the system generates. however thismachine is itself only a 25 mhz personal computer, albeit with a one gigabytehard drive.zamnet needs to invest in a much more powerful personal computer withat least 32 megabytes of ram and another high capacity hard drive. ideallyzamnet would seek to obtain a sun workstation or equivalent, which iscapable of running some of the software needed for maintaining the portmasterand for monitoring traffic passing through the cisco router. however the cost ofsuch a sun machine would be $10,000 or more!expanding the range of provided servicesthere is an immediate need to provide a news server to enable zamnet'scustomers to participate in the many discussion groups available over theinternet. work to configure such a server is currently under way, although theimpact of a full news feed on the limited bandwidth of the internet connectionhas yet to be determined. it is likely that such a feed would be dependent on theimplementation of the vsat link.as the internet develops further, other applications will be developed andzamnet needs to be in a position to make these applications available to itscustomers (within the limitations of the bandwidth of its internet connection).current examples include "real audio" and the ability to communicate by voiceover the internet.increasing technical and administrative supportzamnet currently employs just three staff, one administrator and twotechnical support staff. this team is severely stretched in its efforts to providesupport and to develop the zamnet staff. we have decided to employ anassistant administrator to ease the workload.with the anticipated growth, it will be important for zamnet to employ atleast one additional skilled and experienced technical member of staff within thenext twelve months. with both the contracts of the zamnet technical staff duefor renewal at the same time, the possible impact of these employees departing atthe end of their contracts also needs to be anticipated.looking forwardthis chapter was written in june 1995 and i want to provide a quick update.by january 1996, zamnet had grown to accommodate 417 interactiveaccounts. these accounts generated 9,558 connections totalling 1,600 hours ofconnect time and 12,862 international messages. this is a growth rate of 100percent in justbringing the internet to zambia213bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.eight months. we have taken several steps to ease the growing congestion on boththe internet link and the server computers and to provide protection in the eventof system failures:we ordered the vsat terminal equipment and it has been shipped from theunited states. we need to complete some administrative procedures before it canbe used but we hope that a 64 kilobaud vsat connection direct from zamnet'soffices to johannesburg will be operational before the end of march 1996.we maintain the portmaster users table on the www server machine usinglivington's radius software.we moved the www server from the mail server to a second computer,which has been configured as a news server, although we still do not receive afull news feed from the internet. we just ordered a new mail server (a pentium120 with 32 megabytes of ram and a 2 gigabyte hard drive).we have recruited a new assistant administrator.within the next year zamnet plans to increase the number of accesstelephone lines to 40 and purchase an extra 20 v34 modems and a secondportmaster to serve these lines; employ two additional technical staff, a marketingmanager, and another junior administrator; and provide local telephone access tocustomers based in the copperbelt.we have proven that the provision of an internet service is viable and canpay for itself. the costs of expansion require capital expenditure and, ultimately,an injection of capital from investors either in the form of loans or in thebroadening of shareholding is required. most importantly, however, severalmonths before the end of the world bank funding, zamnet is selfsufficientand is able to buy new equipment from its own funds and to guarantee repaymenton any loans it requires. this healthy position should enable zamnet tosignificantly reduce its fees within the next three months and to continue toexpand services to meet it customers' demands.notes1. the east and southern african academic network (esanet) is described more fully inmusisi's case study in this volume. see page 158.2. moussa fall gives a more detailed description of fidonet in his case study in this volume. seepage 143.3. each member of the fidonet system has a unique address. this address identifies the zone, thehost, and the node. the point number will ensure that a message gets to a specific user in thenode's subsystem.bringing the internet to zambia214bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.case studies on the collection,management, and dissemination of localinformation resourcesmany sti projects focus less on the technology and more on themanagement of information and the content of databases. databases from abroaddo not generally give adequate coverage of research efforts in developingcountries and african scientists have learned that they cannot depend on suchoutside sources for the services needed to keep them abreast of localdevelopments in their subject fields. the following group of case studies focuseson efforts made to collect local information, to organize it into usable forms, andthen to disseminate it to those who can put it to good use.thus one case study in this section is about a group of natural productsresearchers who banded together to form a professional network that unites themthrough newsletters, conferences, publications, and now, electronic means.the next case study describes how a research institute in botswana collectedlocal data to produce an indigenous database on socioeconomic information. theproject manager learned that she required expertise in subject analysis andindexing, system design, database management, and access to computerhardware.the kenya medical research institute decided to focus on their institutionalneeds for information and designed an information system that included allaspects of their data needs. their case study demonstrates that many managementtasks can be aided by automated data processing and that the introduction ofcomputers can aid the decisionmaking process, provide information aboutfinancial and human resources, improve turnaround time for data analysis andreport writing; and improve the quality of data organization and analysis. byadding equipment215bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for desktop publishing and cdrom searches they realized the same benefits ofother case study authors.the csir in ghana took a serious look at its mandate and designed a systemto improve national access to scientific and technological information. nationalsystems are difficult to manage and finance but the rewards can be great, asdemonstrated in this final case study.216bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.napreca and its role in thedissemination of information on naturalproducts research in africaby ermias dagneermias dagne is one of the founders and the immediate pastexecutive secretary of napreca. he is an associateprofessor in the chemistry department of addis ababauniversity. he gratefully acknowledges the editorialassistance of wendimagegn mammo in writing this paper.dr. mammo is also an assistant professor in the samedepartment.background and context of the projectthis paper describes the background history, objectives, and main activitiesof the natural products research network for eastern and central africa, knownin short as napreca. we give particular emphasis to the role of the network inimproving the scientific and technological information (sti) scene in africa.origin and historythe fourteenth iupac (international union of pure and appliedchemistry) international symposium on the chemistry of natural products washeld in july 1984, in poznan, poland. over one thousand participants from allover the world attended that symposium, including six africans. 1 as we africansmet during the breaks and the social occasions, we realized that there were nosuch fora in africa, even though there were many natural products there whocould benefit from the exchange of experiences and ideas. our meetings took on amore formal character as we discussed ways to circumvent the isolation andalienation that african researchers faced. we unanimously resolved to found anetwork to bring scientists engaged in natural products research in africa closertogether and to link those researchers with colleagues around the world who wereinvolved in tackling research problems of relevance to africa.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa217bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.we felt that the task of a network should not be to build infrastructure, newcenters, or new laboratories but instead to work towards strengthening nationalcapabilities through regional and international cooperation. we called for thesharing of existing facilities and resources in the subregion. as a first step in thisdirection, we agreed to concentrate on information dissemination and exchangeof ideas through publications, including a biannual newsletter and other means.these discussions led to the crystallization of the network's constitution.before the end of the poznan meeting, we resolved to name the network thenatural products research network for eastern and central africa , ornaprenca. later an ''n" in the acronym was dropped and the network came tobe known in short as napreca. we felt that africa was too big an area toencompass initially and, for the sake of expediency and modesty, we realisticallystarted with a subregional approach. had there been participants from other partsof africa in that meeting, the arguments might have been different. in any case,the geographic definition for the network satisfied all those present and theconsensus reached heralded the birth of napreca.i was elected chairman and editor of the network's newsletter and we askedberhanu m. abegaz of the same department as myself at addis ababa universityto serve as secretary and treasurer. the rationale for this decision was to avoidhaving the two officers in different countries, a situation that would haveparalyzed the network right from its inception.project descriptionupon returning to our homes, our initial enthusiasm did not wane; on thecontrary, all concerned received the idea of founding a regional network fornatural products scientists with joy. in ethiopia, b.m. abegaz prepared the finalversion of the constitution and came up with invaluable suggestions and ideas onhow to launch napreca and initiate the newsletter. (see box 1.)the maiden issue of the napreca newsletter came out in september1984, immediately after the founding meeting of a napreca branch inethiopia. the editorial of that issue stated that:box 1 the chairman as editorthe idea of entrusting the task of editor to the chairman of napreca wasjudicious. as one of the main tasks of a network is information dissemination,anyone exercising the leadership of a network should take this duty to heart andensure the continuous flow of information through publication of a newsletterand other circulars. the raison d'etre of a network depends on how well this taskis handled. consequently this was a task that could not be delegated butexecuted right from napreca's top position.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa218bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in order for the african scientist to be worthy of the noble name – the currentstate of isolation has to be combatted and scientific fora created which willcontribute to the amelioration of the present dismal state of research andacademic activity.this issue also echoed the importance of contacts and exchange ofinformation. the editorial made a strong appeal to all natural productsresearchers in the region to interact with each other and to initiate programs ofmutual interest. it stated, "the birth of an organization per se is not a historicevent. what is more significant is whether such an organization will live up to itsname." the publication and worldwide distribution of this issue was madepossible by contributions from the members in ethiopia.in kenya, j. ogur, senior lecturer of chemistry at the university of nairobi,brought together a large team of researchers and educators and foundednaprecakenya, where he emerged as chairman. this branch was formallyregistered by the kenya registrar of societies in january 1986. although notanzanian took part in the deliberations in poznan, colleagues at the universityof dar es salaam were swift in taking up the idea and founded a branch that wasregistered in october 1985. at the same time a branch was also founded in thesudan.colleagues in zimbabwe decided to merge the napreca concept with anexisting association with similar objectives, namely napraz (natural productsassociation of zimbabwe). this was fraught with problems from the start.although an understanding was reached from the outset that napraz would belike a napreca branch, in reality this never worked. in december 1988, aseparate naprecaz was founded. this turn of events contributed to aweakening of the branch in zimbabwe, a problem that has not been circumventedto date.in ethiopia, napreca became affiliated with addis ababa university(aau) and the chemistry department served as the seat of the coordinatingoffice. this meant that napreca benefited from the administrative frameworkof the university. funds for the napreca coordinating office wereadministered by the university as a project account. since overhead charges arewaived on most grant accounts in aau, this arrangement was greatly appreciatedright from the start. the network was also able to use such university facilities asguest houses, halls, and laboratories.in march 1987, john kingston, a senior officer in the division of basicsciences in unesco, came to addis ababa leading a mission to the ethiopianscience and technology commission. that occasion provided an opportunemoment to discuss cooperation between unesco and napreca. jack canon,an australian scientist, senior unesco advisor, and chairman of the australiannetwork for the chemistry of biologically active natural products (ncbnp),strongly supported the idea of affiliating napreca to unesco. thenapreca branches in ethiopia, kenya, sudan, tanzania, and zimbabwe urgedtheir respective unesco national commissions to support the motion ofaffiliation at the unesconapreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa219bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.general assembly in november 1987. napreca was formally declared aunesco affiliated organization, entitling it to receive direct financial supportfrom unesco's regular budget.this recognition boosted the morale of the membership and gave the youngnetwork a wider international recognition. its meager financial resources werealso increased. it was then possible to call a meeting of the naprecacoordinating board, with representatives from each of the then five membercountries, namely j.a. ogur and r.m. munavu (kenya); a. taha (sudan); h.weenen (tanzania); n.z. nyazema (zimbabwe), and, of course, ourselves fromethiopia. the meeting took place in addis ababa in march 1988.napreca was pleased with unesco's decision to send the director of thedivision of scientific research and higher education in paris and the director ofunescorosta in nairobi to the march meeting. the internationalfoundation for science (ifs) sent its scientific advisor as an observer. j. ayafor(cameroon) and j. mungarulire (rwanda) came as observers. the latter countryjoined napreca a year later. 2at the first meeting of the napreca coordinating board, we adopted theconstitution of the network, elected its officers, and decided that ethiopia wouldbe the seat of the coordinating office. i was elected executive secretary andb.m. abegaz was elected assistant secretarytreasurer. h. guadey3 joined asprogram officer and exofficio member of the coordinating board. althoughnapreca had existed since 1984, this board meeting heralded the activechapter in the history of the network. since that time, we have held eight annualmeetings and the number of member countries has increased. with the joining ofrwanda, uganda, and madagascar in 1988, 1989, and 1990, respectively, ourmembership rose to eight countries.a day after the first napreca board meeting, a scientific session washeld. as all of the board members and most of the observers were activeresearchers in the field of natural products, each made a presentation followed bydiscussions. this hurriedly organized scientific conference was christened thefirst napreca symposium on natural products. the high quality of thepresentations and the enthusiasm with which the oneday symposium wasreceived gave a clear signal that such events in africa were long overdue.in the same year, the international program in the chemical sciences(ipics), based in upsalla, sweden, started to offer napreca annual grants,particularly in support of the exchange of researchers scheme, the summerschool programs, and the symposia and specialized workshops. the ipics grantwas kept mainly in sweden and used for settling expenses directly from there,relying on the efficient secretariat in uppsalla. we have on many occasions alsobenefited from the advice and guidance of rune liminga, director of ipics, whohas vast experience in networking in africa, asia, and latin america.the main aim of the network as articulated in the constitution is to "initiate,develop and promote research in the area of natural products in the eastern andnapreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa220bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.central african subregion." dissemination of information pertaining to naturalproducts research is one of the major objectives of napreca. the importanceof establishing links with counterparts in other parts of the world was emphasizedright from the outset, as one of the objectives of the network is to "foster andmaintain links with such scientists who are actively working in specific areas ofnatural products that are pertinent to africa." the sections that follow willattempt to show to what extent napreca has been successful in putting theseaims to practice.project experience and implementationseven categories of activities will be described in this section. in short, theseare: dissemination of information through publication of a biannual newsletter,monograph series and symposium abstracts; administration of a postgraduate scholarship program; implementation of an exchange of researchers scheme; organization of the natural products summer school; convening of the natural products symposium once every two years; conducting training workshops; and coordination of the unesco's botany 2000 program.publicationsthe napreca newsletter is published twice a year. about one thousandcopies of each issue are distributed free of charge to readers in various parts ofthe world. sometimes the founding of organizations by novices will lead to thelaunching of some form of publicationšinvariably designated as volume 1,number 1. too often, volume 1, number 2 never sees the light of day and thenew organization or association withers to oblivion! when the first issue of thenapreca newsletter came out, we were warned of such a pitfall. but, so far,we have succeeded in maintaining our publishing schedule and we have nowdistributed 24 issues of the newsletter.reactions to the maiden issue of the napreca newsletter were mostlycongratulatory, although some people pointed out mistakes and offered advice.thus dr. m. william, executive secretary of iupac wrote:–i was most interested to receive the maiden issue of the naprecanewsletter and to learn that the network arose from the iupac symposium heldin poland in july 1984–j.i. okogun of the chemistry department of ibadan university, nigeriawrote:napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa221bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.–the newsletter serves its purpose to inform us all on developments in the areaof natural products.we also welcomed criticismsšsuch as the one by the botanist tewoldeb.g. egziabher, then president of asmara university, who wrote:there were some spelling errors in the maiden issue– similar errors should beavoided in the future– i suggest that you check the spelling of every scientificname before you print. even if you feel you know the scientific name very well,it is worth checking each name routinely every time.the suggestions and criticisms of our readership greatly contributed tosustaining the newsletter for 12 years. four years ago napreca beganpublishing a series of monographs, the first of which was a napreca yearbook, entitled eight years of existence and four years of intensive activities, z.asfaw (ed.), 1992.administration of postgraduate scholarship programa postgraduate scholarship program was born during a visit by the germanacademic exchange service (deutscher akademischer austauschdienst, daad)delegation to addis ababa in october 1987. a conference for former daadfellows was taking place and on one evening during that conference, i happenedto sit beside mr. richard jacob, who then headed the africa desk of daad inbonn. i commented that international organizations like daad rarely supportinitiatives at local levels and that such organizations more often follow the topdown approach. i continued to narrate the story of napreca and how much wewould have appreciated it if some daad scholarships could have beenadministered by the network for the purpose of training the young in the naturalproducts field. he suggested that, if we submitted a convincing proposal, hisorganization would offer the network five scholarships per year.in march of 1988, the german ambassador to ethiopia, his excellency dr.kurt stoeckle, personally brought to the faculty of science a letter signed by dr.berchem, president of daad, declaring the award of five scholarships tonapreca. since then, napreca has received a similar letter from thepresident of daad every year.in this daadnapreca scholarship program napreca is responsiblefor selecting the candidates, who must enroll in a postgraduate program in auniversity outside of their own country. daad scholarships cover tuition,research costs, and subsistence allowances of the fellows in universities in thesubregion. the cost of the scholarship per student per annum varies from countryto country but is within the range of six to seven thousand u.s. dollars. the firstbeneficiariesnapreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa222bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.were two ethiopians who, in september 1988, joined the msc program of theuniversity of nairobi and three kenyans who came to addis ababa to joinpostgraduate programs in biology and chemistry. a total of 39 scholarships haveso far been awarded to selected individuals. of these, 15 have completed theirmsc studies; eight, including two phd candidates, discontinued or weredismissed on academic grounds; and 16 are still pursuing their studies.a followup conference was organized in cooperation with daad innovember 1993. former fellows were invited to interact with their peers andformer instructors. despite the problems, briefly dealt with in section 5, we facedin implementing this program, we are of the opinion that the daadnaprecafellowship program was one of the most rewarding offshoots of the network.implementing the exchange of researchers schemein an early issue of the napreca newsletter, we described the problemsfaced by african scientists as:"isolation, lack of contact with each other as well as with peers elsewhere,absence of conducive atmosphere of research, coupled with meager resources–"we thought that an exchange scheme might be one of the best remedies ofthese ills. napreca, therefore, invested considerable energy and resources inimplementing this scheme, thanks in particular to the financial support of twoorganizations, unesco and ipics. many junior as well as senior scientists havebenefited from this scheme.under the exchange scheme, a selected fellow is granted the opportunity tospend a month or two in a laboratory within the subregion. preference is given tocandidates who are able to find funds for travel and then the research andsubsistence expenses are covered by napreca. so far 32 individuals havebenefited from the exchange, with an average stay of one and half months in aregional laboratory. (see box 2.)organizing the natural products summer schoolone of the regular activities of napreca is the organization andimplementation of natural products summer schools. six summer schools wereorganized between 1988 and 1994. the main aim of the summer school is toenhance the research capabilities of participants, in particular inchromatographic, spectroscopic, and bioassay techniques. research scientists andtechnical assistants working for various institutions in the region have used theopportunity to improve upon their laboratory skills. usually about a dozenparticipants take part in the summer school; half of these come from outside thecountry where the program takes place.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa223bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2 benefits of the exchange schemeone of the recent participants in the exchange of researchers programwas ildephonse murengezi, chairman of naprecarwanda. our efforts tolocate him after the tragic events in that country led us to the refugee camp ingoma on the border to zaire. at the beginning of 1995, as soon as the ethiopianairlines resumed flights to kigali, we sent him a ticket and invited him to come toaddis ababa as an exchange fellow, where he stayed for six months working in anatural products laboratory [see napreca newsletter, vol. 12, no. 1]each summer school was rated highly by the participants. particularly thoseresearchers who had little or no exposure to modern research settings have foundthis program highly beneficial.natural products symposiaas the napreca concept got off the ground in an iupac symposium onnatural products, it is only natural for the network to pay special attention toorganizing similar conferences in africa. so far six natural products symposiahave been organized in the five member countries.the first symposium was indeed a modest one, convened immediately afterthe first meeting of the coordinating board in march 1988. no book of abstractscame out of that event. as our kenyan colleagues were very keen aboutorganizing a conference, the second was held quickly thereafter in nairobi inseptember 1988. sixteen participants came from outside of kenya to the secondsymposium. we published a booklet with nearly 20 brief abstracts in advance ofthe symposium. we included pictures of the speakers at the end of the book, afeature that has been kept in subsequent symposia booklets.the third symposium was held in arusha, tanzania, in may 1989. it drewover 40 participants from outside of the host country and the local organizerswere able to publish an impressive book of proceedings, with 22 full papers andnearly as many abstracts. the arusha symposium set a high standard not only interms of the quality of the scientific presentations but also in the excellent way inwhich it was organized.in the third coordinating board meeting that took place in arusha, weagreed to organize subsequent symposia every two years. that led to the fourthsymposium in addis ababa, in december 1991. the increased number of papersrequired, for the first time, the holding of parallel sessions. the symposiumbook, published prior to the conference, was of high quality with 28 papersappearing as extended abstracts. in retrospect that was indeed a good decision.the preparation of conference proceedings is a thankless job, because it is doneafter the event is over. extended abstracts published in advance of theconference, make it easier tonapreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa224bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.put pressure on participants to submit papers of reasonable standard. this hasmade the napreca symposium extended abstracts frequently cited sources ofinformation.the fifth symposium held in antananarivo, madagascar, in september1993, enabled a large contingent of researchers from south africa to participatefor the first time in a napreca activity. prior to this meeting, it was notpossible for scientists from south africa to mingle with their counterparts fromother african countries. nearly a dozen well known south african scientistscame to the symposium and this had an impact on the quality of the oral as wellas poster presentations. it was humorous to hear a south african professor say atthe beginning of his lecture that he was extremely pleased because he was "forthe first time in africa." as madagascar was a francophone country there wereseveral participants who came from francophone africa and france, and oneparallel session was dominated by papers presented in french.the sixth symposium that took place in kampala, uganda, in september1995. this symposium attracted about 80 participants who came from variouscountries in africa, europe and north america. the scientific meeting covered12 general and 28 parallel session lectures, as well as 32 poster presentations. abook of extended abstracts was published and distributed at the opening sessionof the symposium. three presymposium short courses on nuclear magneticresonance (nmr), mass spectrometry, and organic synthesis were held at thesame venue. the courses were designed to upgrade the skills of youngresearchers in applying or interpreting the results of these modern techniques intheir own research. a total of 27 participants coming from seven africancountries participated in the three short courses.participants' assessments of the symposium were very positive and somewere unreserved with their kind words of praise."–the very successfully organized napreca's sixth symposium was an eventthat one would wish to witness again–"wrote gizachew alemayehu, ethiopia.a leading natural products chemist, joe connolly, glasgow, uk,commented:"–congratulations for the excellently organized napreca's sixth symposiumand the presymposium short courses–it was great to be in kampala with yourteam."i realize how farreaching the impact of these symposia are when a kenyancolleague who was sitting next to me during a session in the sixth symposiumpointed to a group of scientists from europe, and said:"these people did not take us seriously when we started holding suchconferences in africa some years back, but now they listen to us attentivelywhen we make scientific presentations."napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa225bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conducting training workshopsnapreca has organized four major training programs so far. the first wasthe ifsnapreca workshop on nmr techniques, which took place in addisababa in december 1991. nmr is one of the most useful methods in structureelucidation of substances isolated from plants. it is also one of those techniquesthat develops by leaps and bounds and it is therefore of paramount importance for achemist to keep abreast of these changes.ifs and napreca held a symposium on bioassay methods inantananarivo, madagascar in september, 1993, as a presymposium program.the focus of the program was on ways to screen substances for antimalarialactivity. ifs support ensured that several participants could come from severalcountries in the region.another two month program, held from april to june 1993, was a trainingworkshop on herbarium techniques, which was organized in cooperation with thenational herbarium in addis ababa. as plants are the major sources of naturalproducts, their identification and documentation is of great importance for naturalproducts research. this program was designed for technicians who work inherbaria of the region. it included lectures and practicals on botany and relateddisciplines.the fourth in this series was a training program on glass blowing techniqueswhich was held in uganda in january 1995. the instructor was mr. wodajieimru, senior glass blower of the chemistry department, addis ababa university.all the 12 trainees were glass blowers serving in various research and academicinstitutions in uganda. this program speaks for the need to improve skills ofresearch support staff. (see box 3.)coordination of the unesco's botany 2000 programthe director general of unesco launched an initiative called botany2000, which is basically an interdisciplinary program that attempts to link threedisciplines, namely botany, chemistry, and pharmacology. napreca wasdesignated to take the lead in coordinating the africa botany 2000 program. aspart of that activity, napreca organized a training program for herbariumtechnicians, supportedbox 3 cofunding opportunitiesfunding from one agency often opens the door for funding from another.for example, in the first training workshop, a grant from daad enabled us tobring a topnotch nmr specialist, dr. s. berger, to lead the one week intensiveworkshop. ifs made it possible to bring some of the leading natural productsresearchers of africa, selected on the basis of their scientific output.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa226bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.activities in documenting rare and endangered plant species of africa, andsupported exchange programs that fall within the scope of botany 2000.results, impacts, and benefits of the projectmany research groups in africa and indeed in many other parts of the worldare engaged in the isolation, characterization, and evaluation of the biologicalactivities of natural products occurring in plants and animals of african origin.currently, most of the studies on natural products from african plants andanimals are conducted by research groups based in europe and north america,cooperating in some cases with groups in african universities and researchinstitutions. consequently, most of the scientific papers describing the output ofsuch work appear in scholarly journals published outside of africa. in too manycases researchers in the country where the plant material of the researchoriginated are not fully aware of the research results.it is important to follow the literature in the field to know more about ourown resources and take measures for their sustainable use. following progress inthe field, is also of paramount importance to ensure that the country of originshares in the benefits resulting from the use of natural products discovered fromafrican plants and animals.there are many international natural products chemistry journals that dealwith plant constituents and their biological activities. of these, the three withwide international coverage are: journal of natural products, planta medica, andphytochemistry. these journals frequently publish research results on the studyof the constituents of african plants. we therefore dedicate one regular column inthe napreca newsletter to list all those papers on african plants that appear inthese journals. the column attracts the attention of many researchers whoselibraries do not subscribe to these journals.a compilation of the information in this column in the period 1984œ1994now forms the basis of a database. in the three journals, we found nearly 1,000articles dealing with either the chemistry, biology, or pharmacology of plantscollected from different parts of africa. the full details of this database are nowpublished in monograph series no. 8.in the 1,000 articles various types of compound classes are reported from theafrican plants such as alkaloids, anthraquinones, flavonoids, and steroids. interms of utility of the products, anticancer, antifungal, antibacterial, antimalarial, antifeedant and molluscicidal activities are by far the most prominent.over 56 papers give chemotaxonomy as a significant outcome of the studies and29 deal with the culturally and commercially important essential oil bearingplants of africa.the limitation of the above mentioned database is obvious, as it is based onarticles in only three international journals covering just an 11 year period.nevertheless, it gives an indication on the wealth of information that is comingout in the field of natural products from africa. the database could also serve as astartingnapreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa227bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.point in literature surveys on topics of interest to phytochemists and other naturalproducts researchers interested in investigating african plants for the benefit ofthe peoples of africa and elsewhere.the publications of napreca amply demonstrate that the network hasachieved some of its objectives to a satisfactory degree. these publications haveturned out to be frequently cited sources of information and ideas. naprecahas helped many researchers break their isolation. the symposia, trainingworkshops, and summer schools organized by napreca have served asexcellent fora for the exchange of ideas and information. the benefits of all ofthese to promote research and development in the field of natural productsresearch in africa is obvious.analysis of lessons learnedthe most serious problems facing african networks are a consequence ofpoor communication and lack of appreciation for promoting interafricancontacts. travel within africa is indeed very difficult. slow and undependablemail systems and poor fax, telephone, and telex connections exacerbate theproblem. going from one country to another requires the use of expensive airtransport and, in most instances, one also has to take into consideration stringentvisa requirements. there is very little opportunity for african scholars to visitother countries in the region, and many get unpleasant surprises when the firsttravel to another african country. we were taken by surprise when the firstdaadnapreca fellows from kenya came to addis ababa and spoke ofculture shock and difficulties in adjusting to their new environment.there is also a great deal of dependence on foreign currency. fees touniversities and other institutions, hotel bills, and airport taxes have to be paid inu.s. dollars. many african scholars are accustomed to the generous travelarrangements offered by international agencies who organize conferences in oroutside of africa. napreca could afford no luxuries. for example, a ugandanlecturer was sent to madagascar on a twomonth exchange scheme. he returnedhome after 10 days because he felt the allowance he was given by naprecawas not sufficient. on another occasion, we secured a round trip air ticket fromthe commonwealth science council in the united kingdom for a senior lecturerto come to the sixth napreca symposium in uganda. he failed to show up atthe conference presumably because the donor did not provide him with per diemas well. by the time we learned of his decision, it was too late to use the travelgrant.on the other hand, there were several exemplary instances where exchangefellows did everything possible to sustain themselves with the very little we couldgive them in the form of allowance. mesfin bogale, an ethiopian exchangefellow, wrote the following after his two months research visit to the institutemalagache de recherches appliquées (imra) in antananarivo, madagascar:napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa228bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.–the subsistence and housing allowance given to me was $200 per month. onthis allowance i could not afford to stay even in the cheapest inns inantananarivo. since the guest houses at imra were still under construction, theonly option i had was to sleep in a room near the laboratory–the laboratorywhere i stayed had no facility for bathing. i could wash my hair in the laboratorysink. but i had to wash my body on the floor using buckets of water and mop thefloor at the end.during his stay in antananarivo, bogale tested fortyfive samples for theirantimalarial activity. the samples he found active were further tested for otherkinds of activities. he wrote:''the laboratory facilities and the working conditions are very good. thisresearch visit to imra enabled me to complete my thesis project. in addition itprovided me with a good opportunity to learn more laboratory techniques–our experience has shown that organizing programs in addis ababa wasmuch easier. this is because napreca was entitled to use the guest house,student quarters, laboratory, lecture halls, and other facilities of the addis ababauniversity. consequently many of the summer school and exchange ofresearchers programs took place in addis ababa.network programs thrive on a give and take basis. one is a host at one timeand a guest at another. he who gives in one round receives in another, and hewho responds to a request at one moment also gets a response to his call in timeof need. if we set aside the problems, network activities bring to all thoseparticipating many moments of joy and satisfaction. for me the most rewardingexperience is the feeling of being at home whenever i am in any one of thenapreca member countries.looking back to the formative years of the network, just as there weremoments of success, there were equally many instances of frustration andsetbacks. the unprecedented tragic events in rwanda, where many of ourcolleagues lost their lives or were forced to flee their country, is by far the worstof these setbacks.despite the above problems, it is gratifying for napreca, in the words ofprof. p.j.m. ssebuwufu, vice chancellor of makerere university, to have"developed into an organization which has achieved a deservedly notable prestigewithin and outside of africa." equally uplifting are the kind words of the nobellaureate and president of the international organization of chemistry fordevelopment (iocd), jeanmarie lehn, who made the following remark whileannouncing a travel grant for participants of the sixth symposium, "we believesupport given to napreca and its programs can multiply the impact of ourmodest contribution considerably since napreca is a truly indigenous actionamong natural products chemists in africa."napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa229bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendationsthe present office bearers of napreca, e. dagne, b.m. abegaz, and h.guadey of addis ababa university have served the network for theconstitutionally allowable two terms since 1988. the 8th napreca coordinatingboard meeting held in september 1995 in kampala, uganda, elected for a fouryear term drs. m.h.h. nkunya and m.a. kishimba of the chemistrydepartment, university of dar es salaam, tanzania, as executive secretary andassistant secretary/treasurer, respectively. we believe, that the most importanttask of the new officers is to ensure the continuity of the network by not onlymaintaining the current tempo but also meeting new challenges and adding moredimensions to its activities while leading it into the 21st century.jack canon, the australian scientist closely associated with naprecasince its inception, reflected as follows on the challenges ahead:"–you are certainly handing on a very smoothly running organization totanzania and, as napreca has now achieved a 'critical mass' of first classresearch workers i am sure that it will continue to flourish. i think that it is areflection of the strength of napreca and the goodwill existing between itsmembers that it has been able to cope with the tragic madness which took placein rwanda. i am sure napreca will be able to help reestablish research inthat country when full peace finally returns–"there are also many other issues facing napreca. in light of the improvedemail facilities in the region and possible internet connectivity of several of themember countries in the near future, the new challenge for napreca will be totap these opportunities to advance networking among its membership and toprovide them with vital information services.for some of us, what we have achieved in the last decade is like a dreamcome true. i have witnessed that a handful of dedicated individuals can make animpact if they are committed to a cause. the concept of napreca thrivesbecause there are individuals who devote their time and energy for theaccomplishment of the network's ideals. we in napreca have also learned theimportant lesson that we can make meaningful contributions to our respectivenations, and to the subregion at large, only if we pool together our meagerresources for solving our common problems.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa230bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. the africans in attendance were: j.a. ogur, chemistry department, university of nairobi; m.gundidza of the university of zimbabwe; a. taha and m. younis from sudan; n. matos frommozambique; and myself. matos was, at the time, a ph.d. student in humboldt university, eastberlin. he is now the director of the association of african universities which has itsheadquarters in accra, ghana.2. it is interesting to note that colleagues in cameroon and ghana tried to establish a parallelwest african network. despite support from unesco and a founding meeting held in ghanaduring the ifs and kumasi universitysponsored scientific meeting in september 1990, thenapreca parallel network failed to take off.3. hailu guadey was the first ethiopian to get a university degree in chemistry, bsc (mcgilluniversity, canada, 1950) and msc (howard university, u.s.a., 1959). he was assistantminister of health in the haile selassie regime and was retired in 1974 when that government wasoverthrown. he was then employed by napreca as a program officer.acknowledgementsfinally, it is only fair to conclude this brief account by paying tribute to allcolleagues and friends in the region and elsewhere in the world who havesupported our efforts to make napreca a successful venture. special gratitudeis also due to the donor agenciesšin particular to sarec (swedish agency forresearch cooperation with developing countries), unesco, daad, ipics,ifs, twas, and iocd who provided generous support for implementingnapreca's activities and programs.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa231bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.napreca and its role in the dissemination of information onnatural products research in africa232bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a socioeconomic development informationsystem for botswanaby stella monagengstella monageng is the senior documentalist at the nationalinstitute of development research and documentation at theuniversity of botswana. she has wide experience in thedevelopment and management of computerized databases andhas been working in this area of expertise since 1983 .   background and context of the projectthis case study describes my experiences in developing databases at thenational institute of development research and documentation (nir) of theuniversity of botswana. i will discuss a project entitled development sciencesinformation system for botswana (devsisbotswana), which is the system wecreated to facilitate the collection, organization, and dissemination of botswana'ssocioeconomic development information.devsis is a project that dates back to the mid1970s, when a number ofinternational agencies, including the international development research centre(idrc) of canada, established a system that would help meet the informationneeds of planners and decisionmakers responsible for economic and socialdevelopment planning. the concept was never implemented as the global schemethat had been envisaged. instead, a number of national and regional developmentinformation systems evolved out of the program. devsisbotswana is oneexample of such a national information system. in collaboration with the panafrican development information system (padis), the nir launched ourproject in may 1984 with the financial assistance of idrc.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana233bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national institute of development research anddocumentation (nir)the nir was established in 1975 as a documentation center. in 1978, itadded a research component. its objectives are to:a) coordinate and conduct research on issues of socioeconomic andenvironmental development affecting botswana;b) develop the national research capacity within botswana; andc) publish and disseminate the results of the research conducted.the research activities focus on agriculture and rural development;education; environment; health and nutrition; basarwa1; and women and genderissues.the documentation unit of the nir implemented the project. the unit wasestablished in 1975 and later developed into the present research institute. itsmain objective is to collect, process, and disseminate unpublished or greyliterature on or about botswana. the documentation unit has a library throughwhich the information that is collected and processed is disseminated.the documentation unit and its library deliver the following products,technologies, and services: reference service through which we assist users in accessing the library'scomputerized databases. selective dissemination of information through which we offer a currentawareness service to the institute's researchers through their researchinterest profiles. newspaper clipping service through which we clip and file key articlesfalling within the research areas of the institute. referral service that links nir with other major information centers suchas the national library national reference collection, the university ofbotswana library botswana collection, and several governmentdepartment libraries. photocopying service, which is provided for a fee. this service is not onlyused locally but is also used by a lot of researchers from outside botswana. computerized databases maintained by the library, the first of which wasset up in 1986. until quite recently, when the university of botswanalibrary computerized its operations, the nir library was the only one witha computerized information system. this attracted a lot of researchersbecause it made retrieval time shorter and helped to inform the userswhether or not certain information was available. devindexbotswana, which is an output of the computerized databases.documents are collected, cataloged, abstracted, and indexed and then inputinto the computer. when a reasonable number of these have beenprocessed, an index is produced.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana234bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. technologies used include: electronic mail, through healthnet andinternet; facsimile; and cdrom. the documentation unit has beenselected as a popline site for botswana and will therefore have thepopline cdrom database.project descriptionhistory of the projectin 1981/1982 many information professionals were trying to establish aninformation system called the southern african documentation and informationsystem (sadis). the envisaged aim of the system was to assist countries in theregion to build up their information infrastructures as a basis for a coordinatedregional information system. unfortunately, the system never got off the ground.botswana, however, through the initiative of the nir, decided to set up itsown socioeconomic development information system. we approached padis forassistance in computerizing our documentation system and also in acquiringfunding for the exercise. the nir circulated a proposal among variousgovernment ministries for comments and suggestions. the responses receivedwere so positive that the ministry of finance and development planningapproved the proposal and agreed to submit it to idrc for funding.nir decided to maintain the momentum started by the sadis efforts forseveral reasons. first, we realized that the situation regarding the documentationof botswana's socioeconomic development was far from satisfactory; muchdevelopment information was generated but it was ending up in very inaccessibleplaces. we also found it necessary to establish such a system so that botswanacould benefit from development information available in other countries. (seebox 1.)objectives of the projectthe principal objectives of the project were to organize the nationaleconomic and social development information in support of the planning processin botswana and to strengthen botswana's capacity to participate in the regionalpadis network and in the proposed sadis program. the specific objectives ofthe project were to:a) collect, organize and disseminate botswana's national informationand documentation related to its economic and social development;b) participate in the regional padis network;a socioeconomic development information system for botswana235bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.c) train staff in the organization and operation of a specializeddocument center; andd) determine the computer equipment, staff and training that would beneeded in order for nir to carry out its mandate as the primarynational focal point for all information and documentation in thecountry and to prepare for it to participate in regional networks suchas sadis and padis.box 1 devsis solves information problemswhen we were making efforts to establish sadis, the government ofbotswana also decided to focus its development efforts on the communalareas; that is, those areas where land tenure and resource management stillfollow the traditional communal pattern. there was a feeling that the problemsof effecting meaningful, selfsustaining improvements in the standard of living inthe communal areas were among the most intractable botswana faced. thegovernment's wanted to tackle these problems by driving for development inthese areas but they recognized that their efforts would be hampered if theywere unable to take advantage of the wealth of information that already existed.devisšbotswana was the perfect way to confront their concern.another objective of the project, although unstated, was to gauge the volumeof socioeconomic information being generated on or about botswana each year.project experience and implementationdevindex  botswanasoon after the project began, the project coordinator, who had actually beeninvolved in the conception and design of the project, had to leave nir. i had totake over the daytoday management of the project because identifying anotherproject coordinator would have delayed implementation. my initial role wastechnical coordinator and i was responsible for abstracting and indexingdocuments and checking on the quality of cataloging.devsisbotswana was conceived as a national project to collect, organize,and disseminate information related to botswana's economic and socialdevelopment. unfortunately, we lost track of this objective somewhat as weimplemented the project. for example, throughout the project implementationperiod, there was no contact with the government ministries nor with otherinstitutions that had been consulted when the project proposal was prepared. theproject, therefore, was generally regarded as an nir one and not as thecollaborative effort that it hada socioeconomic development information system for botswana236bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.been intended to be. we lost the potential national support that had been promisedat the initial stage.i should, however, point out that there was no deliberate decision on the partof nir to exclude other important partners. we were very much conscious of thisfact but the implementation schedule of the project was such that we had to givepriority to the production of a printed version of devindexbotswana. becauseof this production schedule, there was also little time to focus on identifying newinformation sources for the proposed database. we therefore had to reprocess thedocuments already available in the library.when the project started in 1984 nobody knew anything about operating acomputer. no software had been identified for the proposed database. the reasonfor this, however, was that it had been decided that the computer processing ofdata would be done in padis and this had seemed feasible until theimplementation of the project. the library was already using its own manualinformation processing and retrieval system, which was tedious but veryappropriate for the collection. the form we used for information processing wassimple but adequate for our purposes. however, processing documents for thepadis database required that we use different and more complicated informationprocessing methodologies designed by padis. this caused long delays in theprocessing of documents. we did not realize until much later that the delays werenot being caused by the methodologies we were using but because we were usingtwo methodologies simultaneously. the situation changed when we decided toadapt the padis methodologies to suit our internal operations.padis sent one of its indexers/abstractors for three weeks to assist in themanual processing of the documents. his stay was very valuable since we did nothave any experience with processing information for a computerbased system.the input sheets were then sent to padis for entry into the computer andeventually to idrc for the production of the first devindexbotswana. theensuing issues of the index were to be a collaborative effort between nir andpadis. this arrangement had some practical problems and it was eventuallydecided that nir should do the best that it could. after a lot of trial and error, twomore indexes were produced. to date, six issues of this index have beenproduced. in a way, however, this trial and error provided good training.the information in the six indexes was not selective. everything onbotswana that had been processed over a particular period was included.initially, there was no problem with this since the collection was small but, duringthe production of the sixth issue, it became clear that some criteria were necessaryfor selecting what should be included in the index. the problem was not only thesize of the index but the cost of its eventual distribution. it turned out that theproblem was that the index was rather general in terms of subject coverage andthis made it difficult for us to target specific audiences.in retrospect the manual processing of documents should have been followedby the creation of a computerized database at nir and the actual production ofa socioeconomic development information system for botswana237bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed indexes. this would have provided a practical training program thatwould have included everybody in the documentation unit and would havehelped us avoid the number of problems that we experienced. it was not,however, until 1987 that the first library database was created at nir.specialized databasesresearch institutions and information centers tend to be subjectspecific.there are of course, big libraries in america, england, and europe that areinterested in all the information about a country, but these are very few comparedto the subjectspecific ones. i decided that the main library's bibliographicdatabase should be structured to enable us to produce specialized indexes andbibliographies according to the focus areas of nir: agriculture; education;environment; health and nutrition; rural development; and women and genderissues.this does not, however, mean that there are six different databases: instead,there is one comprehensive database, subdivided by codes. i find this systemgood because searching can be done on one database or across different subjectareas. the actual production of specialized indexes or bibliographies can besubjectspecific. this not only makes networking more effective but makesmarketing of the products a lot easier. devindexbotswana will, however,continue to be produced containing information about botswana that does not fallwithin the specified areas. my experience with the specialized databases showsthat there will still be some overlap.the meetings databasethe main purpose of this database was to collect information on forthcomingmeetings, conferences, seminars, and workshops and to disseminate thisinformation to users. the database focuses on meetings taking place outsidebotswana because the information about these is available through journals,magazines, and newsletters that nir receives. one problem we face is that theinformation often reaches nir very late and users do not have enough time toregister their interest or, more importantly, arrange for funding. the informationcollected, however, still serves a useful purpose. because we knew whatmeetings are taking place, we are able to ask for reports of those meetings.electronic mail should make it possible for information to be obtained as soon asit becomes available.newspaper clippings databasethe documentation unit provides a newspaper clippings service. when theservice started, about ten years ago, articles found relevant were clipped and thena socioeconomic development information system for botswana238bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stored in folders, where they were seldom used. i decided that each newspaperarticle should be entered into the computer to facilitate immediate and easyaccess and to make it possible for one article to be used for different purposes.box 2 secondary information sourcesit is worth noting that a lot of libraries and documentation centers do notseem to appreciate the very important role that newspaper cuttings play as asupplementary source of information, particularly in developing countries whereresearch has a very recent history.a good example is that of aids, where an analysis of the issue can be madefrom a variety of angles: aids and women; aids and youth; or aids inbotswana. computerizing the newspaper article collection has put more emphasison easier and quicker retrieval of information. this is actually an easy incomegenerating activity since a lot of articles are requested through the photocopyingservice. (see box 2.)mailing list databasefor a long time the library maintained a mailing list of all the institutionswith which it had any links. the main purpose of the mailing list, however, wasfor exchanging information and, particularly, distributing the institutes'publications. the system used was a manual one, which was effective but verytedious and timeconsuming. the only way that this information could beretrieved was by name of institution.a proper mailing list is a very important management tool that manyorganizations tend to take for granted. i came to appreciate this only after i hadcomputerized the library database using micro cds/isis. in its computerizedform, it is now possible to retrieve only those institutions or individuals thatshould receive the nir's publications list, for instance. it is also possible toretrieve names of institutions and/or individuals that should receive certainpublications free of charge or only information about the availability of thosepublications, so that they can decide to order.one of our researchers had travelled overseas and desperately needed a listof institutions with which we had exchanged agreements within the area ofhealth. it was possible to provide this information in the shortest time possiblebecause the database is structured in such a way that the computer can pull outfirst those institutions with whom we have an exchange agreement with and thennarrow down the selection to the relevant subject area.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana239bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the results, impact, and benefits of the projectimpact of the devsisbotswana on the documentation unitthe documentation unit felt the most immediate effect of devis. beforethe project, we used a card catalog that was very tediousšfrom the production ofthe cards to their management after they had been filed. no longer do we type thecataloging information onto a stencil that then has to be reproduced elsewhere.of course, the list of possible tasks that always took priority over the productionof the cards was endless and all too often the machine was out of order. nolonger do we go through the most tedious exercise of filing the cards. since wewere using a controlled vocabulary, we had to update the cards every time thethesaurus was changed or updated. the automated database relieves us from allof these clerical chores. the information can be easily updated and we canconcentrate on providing quality services to our users.impact of the devsisbotswana project outside the institutethe impact of the project outside the nir documentation unit can bejudged by the number of requests for assistance with database development thatwe have been receiving and continue to receive. the following are excerpts fromsome of these requests:in terms of computerization, our center has acquired the necessary hardware andchosen micro cds/isis software. i believe your documentation center uses thissoftware and therefore offers the best prospects for attachment training– thetraining program that we have in mind is one that can provide: a) anunderstanding of the database concepts, and expose participants to the skillsrequired for the design and implementation of a database management system;and b) skills in analyzing, designing and implementing computer basedinformation systems.'' (national council for scientific research, lusaka,zambia, 1988)mr. m has recently attended a short course on improving the effectiveness ofsmall libraries and information centers held at the university of botswana,where among other things he was introduced to cds/isis software and padismethodologies. from his report on the course, we are made to understand thatthe national institute of development research and documentation of theuniversity of botswana is one of the best and most successful nationalinformation centers within the padis. it is in this regard that we wouldappreciate it if you can arrange for a study visit to enable mr. m to gainpractical experience on the applicationa socioeconomic development information system for botswana240bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of various techniques of information handling, storage, retrieval, anddissemination. (the institute of finance management, dar es salaam, tanzania,1990)i would like to take advantage of my contact leave to come and visit yourdocumentation center, and have a firsthand practical experience with yournewspaper indexing project. (mr. e.r.t. chiware, periodicals librarian,university of zimbabwe library, 1991)the university of bophuthatswana is in the process of setting up adocumentation center. i, therefore, wish to send two professional librarians, tostudy your setup, especially the organization/processing of materials. (universitylibrarian, university of bophuthatswana library, 1993)2through professor heywood i heard about your computerization project anddevsisbotswana, and i am greatly interested in paying you a visit to studyyour work in this regard. (director of the national archives of namibia, 1991)the above are only samples of the many requests that we have received. ascan be seen from excerpts, however, the requests come from a variety ofcountries and institutions. this, in my opinion, is a clear indication of the impactthat the project has had outside nir. i would like to point out that, unfortunately,it has not been possible for us to satisfy these requests due to staff constraints.attachment programs require a lot of time for participants to get the maximumbenefit out of them. we have, however, had some people spend one to threemonths with us learning the processing and management of unpublished literaturethrough the use of micro cds/isis.analysis of lessons learnedproject activities should be integrated into the normal activities of theorganization. this has implications on the type of organization selected toundertake a project such as devsisbotswana. i believe that whatever amountof success that nir may boast about is due to the fact that we did not have todeviate a lot from our normal tasks in order to accommodate the projectactivities.if, as was the case with the devsisbotswana project, immediate results areexpected, professional and experienced staff should be employed. in the case ofthe devsisbotswana, the aim was not only to obtain immediate results, but alsoto strengthen the staffing situation.the schedule that we actually followed when implementing devisbotswana was neither efficient nor effective. it was dictated more bycircumstance than bya socioeconomic development information system for botswana241bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.design. if i was able to start over again, i would definitely follow a schedule thatlooked more like the following:1. employment and orientation of a professional librarian who will beresponsible for database management.2. training of the professional librarian for about three months incomputers and database management. the latter should includethorough training in abstracting and indexing since these are veryimportant skills for a database manager.3. familiarization visit to padis by the project and technicalcoordinators. the project coordinator should always be someonewho was involved in the initial designing of the project. thetechnical coordinator is responsible for abstracting and indexing ofdocuments.4. putting a network in place for purposes of identifying informationsources. the sources should not only be for printed documents, butalso for information about research activities taking place. this way,we would have ended up with two types of databasesšabibliographic one and a research inventory database. i found thatsimply tracking hard documents misses out on getting to know whothe real information generators are.5. collecting documents that will be processed for the project.6. employment of support staff, including a data entry clerk. it is veryimportant that the latter be employed at the beginning of the projectso that data entry is given fulltime attention. the mistake that nirmade was to depend on the secretarial staff of the institute whoalways had other tasks to take care of and also never really got tolearn the library software since they did not use it all the time.7. training of the project staff in basic computer skills and padismethodologies by padis.8. processing of documents and entering data in the computer.9. publicizing the project, including organizing seminars for potentialpartners and policy makers and working with the press.10. at this stage the database manager should be back from training andcan start checking on the data entered.11. production of printed outputs, which would include not only oneindex but also some specialized bibliographies. a conscientiousdocument collection exercise should result in a big enough collectionto facilitate this. two research directories would also be produced;one on ongoing and completed research and another on researchinstitutions. the advantage of leaving the production of printedoutputs until the very end is that there will be very little editing to bedone.another lesson to learn is not to allow or encourage the development ofbibliographical databases independently of the ones that have been created by thea socioeconomic development information system for botswana242bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.library or documentation center. work can be subcontracted to individuals to setup these databases but the information should always be transferred to the maindatabase. (see box 3.)box 3 lost informationthis mistake was made at nir: a few databases were created as specialprojects. information was entered in computers outside the library and noarrangements made to transfer this information back to the library. the resultwas that, for a number of reasons, these databases disappeared and a lot ofvaluable information was therefore lost. this was unfortunate because theprogram that is used for the development of databases in the institute hasfacilities for merging different databases.the nir also embarked on a research program to build a database onwhatever documentation was available on the basarwa (bushmen). i succeeded inmaking this part of the existing library database. the good thing that came out ofthis negotiation is that this information is not only used for the basarwa researchprogram but is also used for research on the remote area development programthat is intended for disadvantaged communities, including the basarwa/san.this helps prove that, once information has been collected and processed, itcannot and should not be compartmentalized. it cannot be argued that because adatabase is developed on environmental issues, it will only be of interest toenvironmental researchers. for example, i set up a database on energy up for theafrican energy policy research network. as i processed documents for thisdatabase, i noted the close relationship between energy and environment.fortunately, i had already negotiated that the database be done as part of theexisting library database. i have tried as much as possible to check how often theinformation from this database is used by other researchers outside the energyfield and there is a strong indication that merging the two databases was the bestdecision.conclusions and recommendationsin conclusion, i would like to recommend the adoption of the basarwadatabase/bibliography as a model database development project for two reasons.first, the documentation unit was fully involved in the project from thebeginningševen though it had been conceived elsewhere. second, this projectincludes the following "main ingredients" of a database development project.preproject consultations among potential projectparticipantsthe idea of the project came from professor sidsel saugestad, researchfacilitator for the remote area development program (radp). the nirdirector,a socioeconomic development information system for botswana243bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.various officers at the ministry of local government, lands and housing, otherindividuals interested in the basarwa issues, and i all consulted on the project. iwas involved to ensure that all the technical aspects were taken care of at thebeginning. it was very important that the ministry was involved so that thenecessary link between nir and government could be established at the verybeginning.collection of documents for the databasea research assistant was employed to go through the nir library databasesand identify basarwarelated documents so that they could be reindexed with thepotential users of the database in mind. the research assistant also visited otherlocal libraries. through visits by the research assistant and enquiries fromindividuals involved in basarwa research by professor saugestad, we came toknow of the existence of many documents that we would not otherwise haveknown about.we are using a very interesting method for collecting documents. we try andmake contacts with researchers who have published widely in the area of thebasarwa studies and ask them to send us lists of their published and unpublishedworks and the actual publications. we have received a number of these lists andare using them to follow up more documents. the advantage of having these listsis that we are able to check against what has already been collected and what isavailable.provision of funding for production of abstractsvery often, organizations realize the need for information on specificsubjects but never seem to realize the need for providing funding to make thispossible. the result is that, through donor funding, databases are developed asspecial projects that end as soon as funding is exhausted and printed copies ofthose databases have been produced.for the basarwa database, funding for the production of abstracts wasprovided. this left me only with the responsibility of checking the technicalaspects of the database and editing the abstracts. some people may wonder why iam emphasizing the inclusion of abstracts in a bibliographic database when theyare so demanding to produce. i can only say that it is not until you provide thesethat you realize just how important they are to your users.the availability of funding made it possible for us to be selective in ourchoice of abstracters. mrs. janet hermans, an anthropologist with very keeninterest in the basarwa issues abstracted about 200 documents. then we hiredshelagh willet, an anthropologist and retired librarian. she also collectsbotswana documents for the library of congress and therefore has a lot ofexperience in collecting grey literature. i therefore recommend that where thesituation allows, a specialist in the field should be employed.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana244bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.immediate availability of documentsone problem we encountered when developing other databases is thatdocuments located in other organizations but processed by us for the databasewere not retrievable by users at a later date. we could produce a fantasticdatabase but the service falls apart when readers are unable to locate the sourcedocuments. all the documents that are being processed for the basarwa databaseare already available in the nir library. these are being consulted by theresearchers in the basarwa research network, university students, governmentofficials, and the general public.formalization and regularization of the attachment programi gave examples above of the requests we receive for assistance with thedevelopment of databases using micro cds/isis. i would recommend that anattachment program be formalized and properly and widely publicized so thatother people can benefit from our experience. judging from the number ofrequests from botswana and outside, there would definitely be enoughparticipants for the program to run every year.the program could be structured to provide practical training in informationmanagement and micro cds/isis. this would be a lot cheaper for institutions inafrica. at the moment, we only take participants from one organization at a time.this, i feel, is not at all costeffective. i would recommend that the training bedone for groups of participants so that they can share experiences and learn fromeach another.our program does not teach participants the basic concepts of computers andinformation science; we require that they already have experience in runningtheir libraries or documentation centers. instead, we expose them to the variousinformation services that we provide. we then work with them so that they get toknow the various processes involved in providing those services. finally, we letthem work on their own like the other staff in the documentation unit, but withvery close supervision. that way they get to experience a lot of practicalproblems and through the assistance of the staff, find solutions to those problems.so, in conclusion, i would say that we faced and overcame many problemsin implementing the devindexbotswana database project. we have alsomanaged to produce databases that are very important to our users. the lessonswe learned in this process have been put to good use as we design and implementadditional databases. although there were a lot of problems during theimplementation stages, in retrospect, they were a very good eyeopener for me.dealing with the problems gave me an understanding of indigenous informationmanagement that i would never have had otherwise.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana245bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notes1. basarwa is a term used in botswana for a group of peoples known variously as the bushmen,khoisan or san of southern africa, and for the purpose of this case study, this is the term that ishall use.2. bophuthatswana is one of the "states" that was created during the apartheid era in southafrica.a socioeconomic development information system for botswana246bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kemri's management information systemby james n. muttungajames muttunga is a senior research officer at the kenyanmedical research institute (kemri) and head of theirinformation systems. he carries out consultancies for researchprojects in information management that have been funded bythe commonwealth regional health community secretariat.he is a biostatistician by profession.background and context of the projectthe kenya medical research institute (kemri) was established in 1979 bythe science and technology act of parliament. its board of management isaccountable to the minister for research, science and technology and it isprimarily funded by the kenya government. kemri is mandated to conductresearch in the biomedical sciences and its main objectives are to: cooperate with the other research organizations and institutions of higherlearning in training programs and in matters of relevant research; work with other research bodies within and outside kenya carrying outsimilar research; and cooperate with the ministry of health, the national council of science andtechnology, and the medical science advisory research committee inmatters pertaining to research policies and priorities.the member research centerskemri has about 1,200 staff members, of which about 450 are eitherscientists or technical staff. they operate through eight research centers. one is inbusia (near the kenya/uganda border); another is in kisumu (in the lake victoriakemri's management information system247bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.region). the rest are in nairobi: four at kemri headquarters and two centersnear the kenyatta national hospital. the research centers are: alupe leprosy and skin diseases research centre (alsdrc) biomedical sciences research centre (bsrc) clinical research centre (crc) vector biology and control research centre (vbcrc) virus research centre (vrc) centre for microbiology research (cmr) medical research centre (mrc) traditional medicines and drugs research centre (tmdrc)project descriptionin 1987, kemri appointed a team to write a proposal to develop ourmanagement information system (mis). the team suggested that kemri firstembark on a pilot project that would: study and identify kemri's data processing needs and requirements; provide some additional hardware to facilitate immediate processingrequirements; and facilitate exchange of knowledge through training visits to institutions withan operational information management system.professor dean haynes, then the deputy director of the international centerfor insect physiology and ecology, an international research center located innairobi, helped us by identifying consultants who had the relevant experience andhad carried out similar activities. the chosen consultant first reviewed kemri'scurrent inventory of microcomputer hardware and software. the proposal teamthen reviewed the training needs for the data processing support staff, thescientists, and administrative support staff. we interviewed scientific, technical,and administrative support staff and asked about their present operationalsystems, the available resources for information technology, and current needsfor research production.we also arranged to train two kemri scientists at the tropical diseasesresearch center at the world health organization (tdr/who) in geneva.there, they were able to familiarize themselves with an operational managementinformation system. the training program included working visits to eachprogram and familiarization with the existing techniques for data capture,automation, and analysis.we completed the study after about six months and presented the report tothe kemri board of management for approval. based on the initial study andthe experience from the training visits, the management board adopted the studyreportkemri's management information system248bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and used its recommendations and identified needs as the basis for acomprehensive proposal for the development of kemri's mis. the primaryobjectives of this project were to improve kemri's capability in: data processing and information management, through the acquisition ofrelevant hardware and software; literature search services, through online and cdrom searches; desktop publishing, through provision of necessary hardware and software;and human resource development, by providing training aimed specifically atscientific, technical, secretarial, library, clerical, or data entry staff.the main project proposal underwent a number of revisions and reviews andwas not approved for financial support until the second half of 1991. this projectbenefited from the technical input and support of several reviewers andconsultants who shared their opinions, concepts, and understanding with us. theprocess was in itself tedious and, at times, was affected by standard bureaucraticprocesses resulting in substantial delays in implementation and funding. the mainbottlenecks were mainly due to two factors: lack of adequate information and understanding on the size, magnitude,and extent of operations at kemri on the part of the review teams namedby the potential donors; and inadequate knowledge of microcomputers systems and the costs of theseprocesses on the part of kemri staff.the hurdles were, however, overcome and the project was finally acceptedand funded by the carnegie corporation of new york. the original budgets andplanned activities were, in the end, drastically reduced to facilitate a wellphaseddevelopment and implementation schedule. this allowed us to follow the strategyof implementing the system according to the primary needs of kemri and thenbuilding the secondary systems as needed and as resources permitted.project experience and implementationthe final project provided five main initial services, which are described insome detail below.research strengthening supportthe study of existing hardware revealed that computer systems of differingcapacities and types had been acquired through assorted project grants. neitherthe various systems nor the software were initially compatible with each other.kemri's management information system249bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the board of management recommended that the equipment acquisitionprocess be better coordinated in order to identify the necessary systems, selectsoftware that could be supported by the technical staff, and facilitate theexchange, sharing, and compatibility of all new systems and software. wetherefore adopted a policy of standardizing all microcomputer systems to acommon configuration to facilitate compatibility between machines and theexchange of data sets and software applications.the project provided two microcomputer systems in each of the eightcenters and in the secretariat for data management, analysis, and reportpreparation by scientific, technical and support staff. we also acquired a dotmatrix printer and an uninterruptible power supply (ups) for each center. westrengthened the central computer facilities by acquiring powerful systems thatcould support kemri's large data management and analysis projects. the projectalso installed appropriate software for data management, analysis, graphics, wordprocessing, utilities, communications, and desktop publishing.we also stated that all new projects that were expected to have massive dataanalysis requirements would have to include funds for the necessary equipment intheir budgets. thus a number of projects acquired the necessary support systems.some of the research programs that benefited from this new policy are listed intable 1.table 1 research program that included acquisition of computer equipmentdonorcenters fundedresearch programsjicacmr, vrc, crc,bsrc, mrcfilariasis, schistosomiasis,hepatitis b, acute respiratoryinfectionswellcome trustcrc, vbcrcmalariawho/tdrcrc, vbcrc,alsdrcclinical trials, filariasis,malaria, leprosy, and skindiseasesrockefeller foundationcrc, mrcreproductive healthkemrisecretariatpersonnel, administrationidrcmrcpesticide use and healthcdc/walter reedarmy hospitalcdc, vbcrcmalariakemri's management information system250bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 sudden depreciationthe project suffered a nearly 40 percent loss from the sudden depreciationof the kenya shilling against the u.s. dollar during its second year. this problemhas affected all kemri projects and has led us to seek authority to run twoexternal accounts, with one running as a straight u.s. dollar account and theother as local external account for all projects.we initially planned to acquire the hardware and software through localfirms that could provide the necessary support and maintenance. we learned,however, that the prices of these systemsševen when ordered dutyfreešwereexcessively higher than what we had budgeted. we decided on this strategy:provide, first, the new technologies that were not available directly from the localdealers. these included the cdrom systems for the library and thecommunication hardware and all the software applications that we had identifiedfor use throughout kemri.we acquired the other systems after attending the first meeting of thenetwork of carnegie grantees in may 1992. this meeting was organized by theu.s. national research council and held at the african regional centre fortechnology (arct) in dakar, senegal. during the meeting, i learned aboutcomputer manufacturing firms who were selling high quality systems atcompetitive prices in the united statesšthrough a directmail order systemšandwho had already supplied some to arct. i used this new contact to order the newsystems at prices comparable to what we had budgeted! (see box 1.)the equipment acquisition process has improved gradually and we have nowidentified other dealers who can provide equipment. the sourcing of newproducts is presently carried out after soliciting different quotations from a fewinternational firms.documentation and library supportthe project acquired two microcomputer systems and the hardwareaccessories (ups and dot matrix printer) for use in the library and at the centralcomputer facility for online literature searches and internal databasedevelopment. two external cdrom drives were installed together with smallcomputer system interface (scsi) cards and we subscribed to medline andpopline databases on cdrom. these databases formed the core sources forliterature searches performed by scientists at kemri. we did learn that the cdrom drives should be dual or multiple drives to improve on easy access and tominimize ''disc swapping." many large databases are carried on several discs andit is quite convenient to be able to search all the discs at one time. this is notpossible in a single drive system.kemri's management information system251bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the availability of medline on cdrom provided us with a unique andunexpected opportunity. for nearly three years we had been trying, without muchsuccess, to provide the board of management with a current list of publicationsand of research developments from kemri's scientists. the scientists hadresponded very poorly to our requests for copies of their published papersbecause they were unable to provide us with hard copies. we decided, therefore,to search medline and poplinešas well as our own annual medicalproceedingsšfor information written by our own scientists. we then compiled abook of abstracts that covers the scientific output of kemri staff.in early 1993, we compiled and published the first summary, coveringmaterial published between 1985œ1991. in 1994, we compiled, printed, andcirculated among scientists and institutions a second summary, covering 1980œ1984. these abstracts now cover the period between 1980œ1993, and part of1994. they have been entered into a central database and are being edited andformatted for eventual publication on disk and in hard copy. we hope that thispublication will be the first step toward the development of local databases.human resource developmentthe project has trained many staff groups. the type of training provided issummarized in table 2.desktop publishingthe project supports the dissemination of research results by providingdesktop publishing (dtp) services. we have acquired software and a laserprinter, scanner, and other accessories. dtp was initially used for the productionof the proceedings of the annual scientific conference that has been convened forthe lasttable 2 training programtype of stafftype of training offeredscientific and administrative staffintroduction of microcomputers and tosoftware applications for datamanagement, graphics, word processing,and spreadsheets. cdrom and use ofemail systems.secretarial staffintroduction to microcomputers and to thesoftware applications for operatingsystems, database management, wordprocessing and spreadsheets.technical and support computeroperations staffspecialized training in specificapplications, programming, and lan andnovell administration courses.kemri's management information system252bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.15 years by both kemri and the kenya trypanosomiasis research institute(ketri). this conference has improved in quality and has been expanded to aregional "african health science congress," which is now held in differentcountries on a rotating basis within the african region.the production of the conference proceedings has also improved and a newjournal, the african journal of health sciences, has evolved. kemri selectsquality papers from the congress and from scientists in the region for peer reviewand publication in the new journal. in addition to typesetting and producingcameraready copy for the journal and the proceedings, kemri dtp staff alsopublishes the annual report and the quarterly kemri news.email and communicationsthe project has also acquired some 2400 baud modems and has installed twotelephone lines for use in electronic communication among scientists in thecenters, as well as among local and international organizations and associations.this has facilitated the exchange of information among local scientists and withthe international scientific community.results, impacts, and benefits of the projecthardware and softwarekemri has experienced a dramatic growth in provision and use ofmicrocomputer systems for various research activities. with the funding providedby the carnegie corporation, we have acquired 22 new computers. in addition, afigure 1 percentage of scientists at kemri with access to computerskemri's management information system253bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.number of systems have been acquired through the research activities supportedby other donors and collaborating institutions. these systems all have similarspecifications since all computer acquisitions are arranged through the technicalsupport group.table 3 hardware and software donationsdonor/organizationno. of systemssoftware packagescarnegie corp of ny2214jica32who/tdr32rockefeller foundation31wellcome trust33walter reed army hospital33idrc22kemri23standardized software has now been acquired and installed in all the existingsystemsširrespective of the funding source. a summary of these acquisitions andthe donor that supported their purchase is provided in table 3.usagefigures 1 and 2 show that access by staff to computers has risen from 46percent in 1992 to about 60 percent in 1994. word processing is the most usedapplication. use of spreadsheets (lotus 123) and presentation software (harvardgraphics) has remained below 20 percent but the ability to use medline oncdrom rose from 30 percent in 1992 to 46 percent in 1994. email serviceshave been poorly used overall with user rate ranging between 4 percent and 12percent. eighty percent of the scientists are aware of the existence of medlineon cdrom and 64 percent have conducted a search at either the library or thecentral computer facility.the kemri library has, over the past few years, experienced a reduction inthe number of journal subscriptions it was able to carry. with the total number ofjournals reduced to about 20, a shrinking budget for books and other literatureservices, and interlibrary loan transactions taking anywhere from weeks tomonths, the scientific process had been rendered a myth. the introduction of themedline database on cdrom has transformed this process. the cdromservice is complemented by the traditional process of providing reprints asrequests are received by the librarian. in terms of volume, the number of requestsforwarded to the main library for reprints has declined from about 415 in 1990, to208 in 1991, to 135 in 1992, to 83 in 1993, and to 45 in 1994.comparatively, the total requests for medline literature searches on cdrom have shown a positive increase during the past two years with about 180kemri's management information system254bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.requests in 1993 and rising to 240 in 1994. this in itself is an underestimate as itincludes only those scientists who were assisted during the search sessions or whohad their searches printed. it excludes those scientists who conducted their ownsearches or who downloaded the search results to floppy disks.other benefitsthere are many other benefits of this project. these include the following: the tendency to use the literature available in the medline database iscontributing substantially to the production of quality papers and reports inkemri. all the reference, documentation, and library automation services, includingonline searches using cdrom and the development of localizeddatabases, are wholly provided by the project. the training of the scientific, technical, and administrative support in use ofmicrocomputers for various operations has been provided through theproject activities. the project provides full support to all email, communications, desktoppublishing services that exist within kemri.figure 2 percentage of scientists at kemri able to use specific softwareapplicationskemri's management information system255bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2 timing the training sessionsbefore the project got fully under way, idrc, which was funding one ofkemri's large, fieldbased diarrhoea projects, agreed to support a trainingworkshop for about 30 scientists in the regionšof whom about 50 percent weresenior scientists in kemri. the training course content included an introductionto microcomputers, operating systems and standard software, and onlineliterature searching and library information systems. the data processing staff inkemri coordinated and facilitated these training workshops. however, sincekemri had not yet installed computer systems, the demand for computeraccess that the training workshop generated could not be met. as a result, morethan half of this first group needed to be retrained four years later when theequipment was more widely available. nearly 90 percent of the software available and in use in all the centers andcomputer laboratories has been provided by the project, inclusive of thosesystems that were acquired and donated by the other operational projects inthe institute.analysis of lessons learnedin the course of the project implementation, we discovered several thingsthat we should have done differently. first, the training of staff should ideally beplanned to take place immediately after the acquisition of the microcomputersystems. if training is conducted prior to the availability of computers, then manyof those trained will not be able to use their new skills and will need to beretrained. (see box 2.)second, we learned that hardware installation should be targeted to thoseservices that are generating data and reports. these services require "powerusers" who have a genuine need for the technology. some of the applicationsaimed at institutional strengthening were not used as much as we expected,simply because there was not a strongly felt need for them. we also discoveredthat computer services located at a central facility help to promote usage andaccess. gradually, the access can be decentralized while the support, training, andmaintenance are centralized.in this same vein, we learned that email services should be provided initiallyto those scientists and researchers who are the most motivated to communicatewith colleagues in other countries or regions. those who share a common interestin a research area or in problemsolving will readily adapt to a new technologythat makes communication relatively quick and inexpensive. their enthusiasmencourages others to try the technology.kemri's management information system256bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.we were pleased with our early decision to establish standards for theacquisition of both hardware and software. by setting up such procedures forcoordinated procurement, we were able to avoid incompatibility problems and byselecting a standard suite of software, we were able to facilitate sharing andexchange of information and data sets.another part of our project that worked well was the identification of a"computer coordinator" in each department. this person acted as the link betweenthe users, the technical support team, and the procurement officers. thecoordinators were members of the oversight committee that managed theimplementation and development of the mis project.finally, the project should have built in mechanisms oriented toward selfsustenance. evaluation systems need to be in place from the beginning. thisinvolves the identification of tangible process indicators that can be used inmeasuring the impact the project.conclusions and recommendationswe are enthusiastically planning the next phase of this project. in thatphase, we will do the following: install a local area network to facilitate easier access to hardware andsoftware by more staff. replace the single drive cdrom readers with multipledrive machines inorder to improve search services. we will continue subscribing tomedline and other databases. promote the development of more local databases. strengthen the desktop publishing operation in order to efficiently producethe new journal; put these services on a selfsustaining basis. install a communication system in order to promote the use of email and totake advantage of kenya's newlyachieved access to the internet. implement new training strategies aimed at strengthening the technical staffwith sufficient skills to support and maintain the lan and at sensitizingmore of the staff to the available services.the idea for this project dates back to 1987 and it seemed to take anincredible amount of time to actually launch it. looking back, however, we cansee that we have accomplished much since we actually began implementing theproject in 1991. the project is responsible for about 80 percent of all datamanagement, analysis, and report productions systems and services currentlyavailable at kemri. furthermore, the project has helped to develop aninformation culture at kemri and this has had a positive impact on every aspectof our activities.kemri's management information system257bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kemri's management information system258bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the ghana national scientific andtechnological information network(ghastinet) projectby john a. villarsjohn villars is director of the national science andtechnology library and information center, which he helpedto found in 1964. his current interests include thepopularization of science, science education, and theapplication of information technologies in support of science.background and context of theprojectthe republic of ghana is located on the west african coast along the gulfof guinea. in 1995, it had a population of 17.1 million, with about 1.4 million inthe capital, accra. since attaining independence from britain in 1957, ghana hasexperienced frequent political changes. over the years, ghana has had ninegovernments, five of which have been military and four civilian. in novemberand december 1992, parliamentary and presidential elections were heldrespectively for a fourth republic, and a new constitution is currently beingimplemented.ghana is predominantly an agricultural country which, for a long time, hasdepended rather heavily on a single export crop, cocoa. ghana's economicdevelopment is constrained by several factors, including the overall low level ininvestment, which is estimated at about 16 percent of gdp. of particular concernis the relatively low investment in social infrastructure, especially in basiceducation and training. the paucity of basic education and literacy is more acutein the rural areas, which account for nearly 85 percent of ghana's population andwhich are responsible for almost all of ghana's agricultural production.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project259bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the host institutionthe host institution of the project is the council for scientific and industrialresearch (csir), which was established as the national research council in1958. it is a government subsidized organization that has the status of a publicorganization outside the civil service. it enjoys a status similar to that of auniversity institution.the mandate of the csir is to implement government policies on scientificresearch and development and to advise the government on scientific andtechnological advances likely to be of importance to national development.another goal of the csir is to collate, publish, and disseminate the results ofresearch and other useful technical information. past attempts to promote thepopularization of science and technology in the society and to market researchresults have not made a very significant impact and csir is taking steps toimprove the situation.the commitment of the csir to information activities stems from itsrecognition that information constitutes an integral part of the researchenterprise. csir has thus established the national science and technologylibrary and information centre (nastlic), as well as library anddocumentation units in several of its institutes. there are in some institutesvarious categories of officers engaged in providing, processing, repacking, ordisseminating information.the role of the csir in information activities is essentially a dual one of aparent organization and a user. as a parent, it acts as promoter, supporter, andfacilitator of such activities. it plays this role by setting out broad policies;recruiting and paying salaries of personnel; providing buildings, books andequipment, and other physical facilities; and obtaining funding from governmentand other agencies for the development of information services.as a user, the csir needs information to support its research andmanagerial functions. its current mandate aims at regulating research and theapplication of science and technology in development, enabling private sectorresearch and development activities in the council, and encouragingcommercialization of research results. for a long time, the csir was perceivedas an "ivory tower" institution whose research activities have not been of directbenefit to society. this view has changed, following the general realization that itis ineffective mechanisms for marketing research results that create theimpression of csir as an ivory tower. the csir must show even greatercommitment to information and its repackaging and transfer.project descriptionthe ghana national scientific and technological information network(ghastinet) project is located within nastlic. nastlic is the nationalfocal point of the project, which includes nine sectoral nodes and several specialresource centers. nastlic provides leadership through meetings, discussions,the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project260bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and guidelines and also promotes and fosters collaboration and cooperationamong network participants.the main objective of the project is to make scientific and technologicalinformation (sti) available in appropriately packaged forms for the benefit ofusers. the beneficiaries include government officials, private enterprises,scientific researchers, including university staff and students, and also smallscaleand cottage industries.to achieve the above objective, a number of functions and activities havebeen identified for which resources are being provided. such resources includepersonnel, buildings, equipment and funding, as well as clear guidelines onoperating procedures and linkages with external agencies. these resources andother relevant issues are discussed below.human resourcesthe present core personnel of nastlic consist of eleven professionals,three technical level staff, four administrative staff, and fifteen clerical and juniorpersonnel. we have plans to recruit four more staff, including two technicalsupport level, and two junior staff.all the professional staff have basic academic and professionalqualifications. they have acquired other skills but could use more practicaltraining through attachment to similar organizations. additional training isrequired in technical areas such as database development and management,abstracting and indexing, handling user inquiries, and information searching. alllibrary staff need more and better skills in using new information technologies.many have little confidence in the use of computers because they do not haveready access to them.most senior professional staff need training in management and leadershipskills. this is particularly essential because most of them are expected to provideliaison between the national focal point and the sectoral nodes and specialresource centers of the project. they are therefore required not only to be highlytrained professionals but also good managers with leadership skills. the technicalsupport staff also require more training, especially in the use of computers and inthe new information technologies. such training, for which the present resourcesare inadequate, should ideally be provided inhouse.local training facilities are generally either not available or are inadequate.the only school for training in library and information science has a poorresource base in terms of teaching staff and equipment. this is particularly acutein the area of modern information science and technology. the school has only inthe last year acquired six personal computers. training provided tends to berather theoretical with relatively little opportunity for practical skill acquisition inspite of a three week attachment program for students in working environments.the attrition of librarians to other professions or to neighboring countries, asexperienced about a decade earlier, has ceased, mainly because of an improvedthe ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project261bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 1 staff mobilitystaff mobility and turnover has largely been a onewayšfrom the publiclibrary to the special or university library. in recent times however, as a result of acertain degree of saturation, especially at nastlic, there has been someexodus to financial institutions and to a large oil exploration company. economyand the competitive salaries of librarians as compared to salaries of universitylecturers and researchers. (see box 1.)information and communication technologiesthe project has received various items of equipment, most of which weregifts. one personal computer, donated by a local computer company, developed aproblem with the motherboard after only six months and it took several months tohave it replaced. during the last three years, the project has acquired a total ofeight personal computers. the computers are mainly ibm personal computers, orclones running msdos, that have capacities ranging from 50 to 120 megabytehard disks. there are two laser printers and two dot matrix printers. all thecomputers operate on dos with windows and they have vga color monitors.other equipment includes a cdrom drive, a telebit 1000 modem, and twomouses.we have four cdrom databases namely, the cab international abstracts,agris, tropag and rural, the maize germplasm databank, and a couple ofdemonstration disks. we currently use standard software, including wordperfectversion 5.2, lotus 123, borland reflex for dos version 2.0, dbase 4, alduspagemaker, and cdsisis version 3.1. there is also a fidonetbasedcommunication software, frontdoor, used for electronic mail exchange with theassociation for progressive communications in london.the equipment and software are used for database management, wordprocessing, desktop publishing, accounting, and electronic mail. all the softwareis userfriendly, although some observers complain that cdsisis often posesproblems and that its operation is sometimes cumbersome.1 technical support forthe equipment has posed rather serious problems in the past, partly because of thelack of information about local suppliers, their products, and their competence inthe repair and maintenance of electronic equipment. (see box 2.)although technical support is now available, it is rather expensive. lately,however, with the establishment of a repair unit in a local research institution,there appear to be prospects for much cheaper rates and more reliablearrangements for maintenance. another bit of good news is that october 1995 theimport duty on personal computers was lifted.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project262bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 2 repairing modemswe had an interesting experience with our modems. we could not find alocal company that could repair them so we took two modems across africa tofaraway nairobi and addis ababa, where we were attending conferences. wecould not repair the modems in either place, however, because they were notaccompanied by their corresponding cables. so they went back across africaand remained broken until, by sheer coincidence, a staff member complainedcasually to a relative. this person was able to fix one of the modems merely byinserting a pointed object into one of its pinholes.attempts at developing a national policy on informatics are currently inprogress. over the years, certain major issues have been identified as beingpertinent to a national policy on information technology. some of the issuesinclude: recognition of the importance for ministerial responsibility for informatics; the establishment of professional training centers for software and hardwareapplications; better methods for disseminating public information and raising awarenessabout information issues; the need to review trade restrictions and other legislation, regardingstandardization and improvement in telecommunications infrastructure; the need for greater reliability of electricity supply; support for local manufacture and assembly of computer equipment; ways to promote investment in the information sector; and the establishment of a system for effective monitoring of trends in theindustry.systems and processesthe systems and procedures of the project arise from its objectives,functions, and activities. the activities have been assigned to six sections:administration and finance; collection development; technical services;information technology; marketing, publicity and user service; andreprography and conservation. these activities ensure logical work flow andsmooth communication among the various sections.financial aspectsthe project is funded predominantly from central government sources but ithas benefited from funds provided by the international development researchthe ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project263bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.centre (idrc) of canada and the world bank. the world bank supports thenational agricultural research project (narp), which is developing the libraryand information system for agriculturešthe ghana national agriculturalinformation network (gains). gains is a subnetwork of ghastinet.another source of funding is from the photocopying service, but this israther meager and covers only the cost of paper. we also hope to cover the costsof providing email service. in this regard, our revenue has been limited by anincreasing number of email service providers in the country, some of whom areoffering service freeofchargešat least in the short term. with the installation ofdesktop publishing software and a microfilm facility, we plan to generate someadditional income. there are also plans to introduce charges for literaturesearches provided to industrial or commercial firms. we increasingly feel theneed for a vigorous marketing and publicity campaign to attract customers forthese services. our effort to generate income falls squarely in line with thecsir's new policy directives that require all its institutes to commercialize asmuch as possible.project experience and implementationthe first phase of the project developed, equipped, and strengthened thenational focal point to a level that enabled it to lead the gradual establishment andgrowth of the entire national network. to do this, we: developed an efficient system for the bibliographic control of indigenoussti; created computerized databases for indigenous sti, ongoing researchprojects, highlevel scientific and technical manpower, and a union list ofs&t periodicals; from these databases, generated and produced publications and otherpromotional material; established a facility for microfilming indigenous sti; arranged training programs and workshops for network participants; and promoted the implementation of the network and its services.by its various activities, the project is expected to arouse the awareness ofinformation personnel to the importance of science and technology information.with the ultimate objective of providing sti to assist in the socioeconomicdevelopment of the country, the project envisages carrying out a national surveyto find out the information needs of various user categories including the researchand academic; the government and public policy makers and planners; the privateor public commercial and industrial houses; and the smallscale and cottageentrepreneurs and peasant farmers.ghanaians are innovative as reflected by the ingenuity shown among thesmallscale or cottage industrialists. attitude to information and knowledge isvery positive, especially if the information has direct relevance to needs and if itis cheapthe ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project264bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and easily accessible. there is a tendency to give up the chase if information ishard to get or if it is not cheap. this attitude stems partly because informationmay not be easily accessiblešeither because it is not known to exist, because itslocation or source is not known, or because it has not been packaged or organizedin a readily useable form. there is also a general attitude of wanting things freeofcharge. this is even more acute in the case of information, probably because ithas always been provided free or because it tends to be taken for granted, unlessit is a matter of ''life and death." (see box 3.)box 3 acceptance of technologygenerally, ghanaians as a whole value education and learning. thisattitude and the desire for high economic attainment has however seemed towane. in the last decade, there has been a slight drop in the respect accorded toeducation and schooling. attitude towards the new technology is positive butnot many are willing to take risks, especially among the very highly educated. acase in point is my own attitude: for fear of it catching fire, i would not riskleaving a computer on overnight for electronic mail purposes.information transferin many areas of science and technology activity, especially in agriculture,environment, and health, there are instances where information has played a vitalrole in the alleviation of problems. for several years, ghana had experienced theproblem of lowyield of local maize varieties and their high susceptibility toserious insect attack, both onand offfarm. the role of information in alleviatingthese problems is not so much in the form of publications, but rather in the formof effective knowledge transfer and communication between the crops researchinstitute, the extension division of the ministry of agriculture, and farmers andmaize consumers.the solutions most commonly proposed for the above problem includeknowledge transfer through effective extension and communication with farmerswhose confidence is thereby won. by this means, information and feedback areeasily obtained from experiences of the farmers who are generally illiterate andwhose attitude to research may be one of suspicion or mistrust. other means ofsolving the researchers' problems include faster and easier access to foreignjournals or publications and inexpensive communication with their peers in othercountries, as well as with other agencies like the international maize and wheatimprovement center (cimmyt) and international institute of tropicalagriculture (iita).both the researcher and the farmer have interchanging roles as providers andusers of information and they therefore exhibit certain patterns in the informationlife cycles in which they are involved. they both generate information eitherthroughthe ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project265bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research or from experience. the farmer produces and distributes informationmainly orally and by demonstration. researchers publish papers in journals orother media. they may distribute information at conferences or seminars, throughinvisible colleges among peers, or in electronic form on diskettes, tapes, andcdrom. they can also communicate by means of electronic mail or bulletinboards.these media also provide the means of storage and easy retrieval andfacilitate wider dissemination in a relatively short time. modern electronic mediacan be used to capture, store, and communicate the farmer's orally delivered ordemonstrable experiences. the mode of acquisition for both user types rangesfrom word of mouth and demonstration for the farmer, to document procurementby the individual researcher or a library and information center through gift,exchange, or purchase.user reactionusers who have reacted positively to the project are predominantly theresearch scientists of institutes and academic staff and students of universities.their reaction is initially one of approbation of the objectives of the project,especially with regard to the databases and the publicizing of the collection ofindigenous sti. the policy makers and planners in government and publicorganizations who know about the project also approve of the objective of thedatabases, especially those that cover ongoing research and highlevelmanpower.researchers and academic staff however express disappointment with thepoor availability of current journals and with difficulties in obtaining fulltextarticles when searches are conducted from cdrom databases. they alsocomplain about the high cost of photocopies and lack of translations of materialsin foreign languages, especially french. industrialists hardly use the services ofthe project because they are not aware of it, and the smallscale and cottageindustries do not have any direct contact with the project as yet. this is partlybecause they do not know about it and also because, even if they did, theinformation would not be easily assimilable since it has to be repackaged. it isalso partly because of the general perception that libraries only have storybooksand not information or technical information for that matter. this state of affairscalls for sound information repackaging and marketing.information marketingmarketing of the services and products of the project has been minimal andthis is being remedied with the recent appointment of an information marketingand publicity officer. so far, the only marketing methods adopted areannouncements in the project's ghastinet newsletter. other publication outletsinclude athe ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project266bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ghastinet brochure, a flier advertising the project, and another advertisingthe electronic mail service. there is also a ghana science abstracts bulletinissued bimonthly, in which summaries of indigenous sti are provided anddistributed to research and academic institutions. we are in the process ofplanning effective marketing of the project and its services.box 4 popularizing scienceas part of the csir program to popularize science, a new radio program isin the pipeline. this program, "from the research files," is expected to start inaugust or september 1995. as part of the world science renaissance day ofafrica, which is celebrated on 30th june every year, nastlic participated in thisyear's program. it compiled a directory from a computerized database of smallscale industries in a suburb of accra and distributed it to various agenciesengaged in supporting or promoting smallscale enterprises.popularizing sciencefollowing the creation of a ministry for environment, science andtechnology and the concern of government for the need to market researchresults and to popularize science and technology, the csir has embarked ondeveloping programs for this purpose. accordingly, i am chairing a specialcommittee on science popularization and we have held preliminary meetings withthe ghana broadcasting corporation (gbc) and all public relations personnel inthe csir. during the last six months, we have prepared a set of proposals in aproject document. the proposals have been discussed with the csir directorgeneral and officials of the local secretariat of unesco. a short request forbasic equipment, including a video camera, has been submitted to unesco forconsideration in 1996. (see box 4.)with regard to user education and training in information searching, notmuch has been done. formally, only a couple of demonstrations of cdromhave been organized for selected user audiences. the major one was conductedamong all agricultural research institutions, stations, and university faculties. itwas combined with an interactive survey on user preferences and on theirperceptions and opinions on services being provided. following a fulldayseminar and demonstration of cdrom to about forty researchers and academicstaff, our expectation that we would be inundated with demands for searchesproved to be a pipe dreamšrequests for searches remained as before. we havealso taken advantage of national fairs and exhibitions to give demonstrations onthe use of cdrom and of electronic messaging.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project267bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.box 5 importance of science and technologythe project has made an indirect contribution to the increased recognitionof research as a necessary tool for development. science and technologyresearch has received considerable recognition and as a result, a ministry ofenvironment, science and technology has been established. hitherto scienceand technology did not have such prominence.results, impact, and benefits of the projecton the whole, we can say that the project has been of limited benefit to usersin the various categories targeted. more could have been achieved if we haddeveloped a vigorous and sustained information marketing program. theresponses we obtained during the survey of users in agricultural researchinstitutions indicated the benefits derived and the impact of the project, eventhough the demonstration did not result in an increase in requests for cdromsearches. these benefits included skills in using thesauri, abstracting andindexing journals, and in cdrom searches. for many, the project provided afirst opportunity to use a computer database and for some, a first opportunity touse printed abstracts.we are placing a great deal of emphasis on how to get science andtechnology to contribute to national development objectives and on ways andmeans of providing adequate funding for research. (see box 5.) the formerminister of science and technology consulted with his peers and seniorpersonnel in other ministries to determine areas in their programs to whichscience and technology could contribute. ghana has also taken steps to establish anational science and technology fund (nastef). expected contributions fromindustrialists may raise the funding for research in science and technology toclose to the target of one percent of gdp by the year 2000, as suggested in thelagos plan of action. (the level of s&t funding since 1992 is only about 0.3percent of gdp.)as part of the effort to maximize the impact of science and technology andthe contribution it can make to society, the legislation establishing the csir isbeing amended to give it a wider scope in commercializing research results. thecsir council is also being restructured to make it less cumbersome and moreeffective.a recent development was the invitation to the directorgeneral of csirand some institute directors (including myself) to a special session with theparliamentary subcommittee on science and technology. we discussed issuesrelating to how well s&t had been covered in a presidential report toparliament. the report, which is entitled ghanavision 2020: the first step, seeks, in the president's words, "to provide a framework within which we canrealize the longterm vision of raising ghana into the ranks of the middleincomecountries of the world."the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project268bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.one notable impact of the project at the national focal point has been theincreased awareness and the newly acquired skills of staff in the application ofnew technologies, especially computers, cdrom, and electronic mail. theyaccomplish assignments faster and their information products are moreimpressive, especially the publications produced by desktop publishing. staffhave become computer literate and their understanding of modern informationwork has been heightened considerably. the information literacy of users has alsoincreased considerably, especially as a result of their exposure to cdrom andelectronic mail facilities.it is, however, too early to determine if users' information query formulationhas also improved since rather few users are physically present during searches.however, as a result of their exposure to these new information technologies,both staff and users are better able to cope and feel more confident in handlingthe technologies, and they have become much more aware, not only of a widerscope and volume of information sources, but also of the potentials offered by thenew technologies.benefitsthe users who have been exposed to services offered by the project havebenefited in a variety of ways. for example, those who have used the emailfacility have been able to contact their colleagues overseas for information or forsome solution to a problem.the project staff have benefited because they have learned new skills incomputer use, database creation and maintenance, word processing, desktoppublishing, spreadsheets, cdrom searching, and electronic mailing.the csir as a whole has benefited from the introduction of computers intothe organization. as a result, some secretarial staff at the headquarters had theirfirst exposure to computers and this encouraged them to seek training inapplications of word processing and spreadsheets. csir now appreciates thepotential of the technology and is taking steps to have the project provideassistance for the development of a management information systems (mis) andin automating accounts in the csir.nationally, the project attracted the attention of the ghana nationalcommission for unesco, which designated nastlic as the nationalorganization responsible for matters relating to the general informationprogramme (pgi) and the intergovernmental informatics programme (iip).accordingly, the csir council has approved proposals by nastlic to set up aspecial committee to handle issues on informatics. the committee is expected tobe inaugurated early in 1996. nastlic also attracted the attention of thegovernment's national development planning commission and as a result it isrepresented on a special committee known as the information technologyplanning group.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project269bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.analysis of lessons learnedmajor success factorshuman, financial, and external support factors contributed to the success ofthis project. essential human factors include the perceptiveness of authorities inthe parent organization; their understanding and appreciation of the role and valueof information in their work; and the commitment and dedication of staff on theproject. added to this is the vision for the project, with its clear and wellarticulated plan, objectives, and expected benefits. the most significant humanfactor in this connection is the mutual understanding between authorities of theparent organization and the project leader. another factor derived from this isgood management practice, involving planning and constant review andevaluation.funding, especially from the ghana government, has not been easilyforthcoming; however, the limited funding that was available and the support ofidrc in the form of equipment and training, have contributed immensely to thesuccess of the project. in fact, the external support has always served as bait forobtaining government funding and very often it has been used as a threat towithhold external assistance if government funding was not forthcoming. in spiteof the generally weak economic situation of the country, even the rather meagergovernment funding can be considered as a success factor simply because itserves as evidence of government interest in the project.in this connection, another success factor has been the sometimesunorthodox public relations approach of project staff, especially at the individuallevel, to government officials in the funding ministry. this personal and informalapproach helped drive home more effectively the not easily recognizableprinciple that sti is a vital ingredient to national development. my persistentreference to the importance of information at virtually any meeting of csirdirectors often led to remarks like "oh yes, there goes the information man."the issue of funding is directly related to external support factors that havecontributed to the success of the project. the quality of any organization's libraryand information services is a reflection of the importance and commitmentattached to such services. so, while the general economic and political situationhad an adverse impact on the project, as evidenced by the delay in its takeoff andin the occasional hiccups, it can still be said that the project has benefited fromthe generally enabling environment in the csir and the government. this waspartly due to the timing of the project, which may be described as propitious, andalso partly due to my persistence and the many years of sustained effort from meand my colleagues.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project270bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.problemsthe problems that have prevented the project from reaching its full potentialcan be traced to the general lack of a sufficiently strong conviction and realizationof the importance of sti in all spheres of national development. this is alsopartly due to the inability of the project, like many a library or informationproject, to adopt a more aggressive marketing, user education, and publicityapproach. the weak marketing itself derives from an apprehension that theresulting demand for information may not be adequately met and will, therefore,lead to loss of confidence in the system. there have been a few examples of this,especially with regard to the email service, which broke down because of faultyequipment that could not be repaired quickly.lack of personnel has been a problem to the project. special services, suchas literature searches on cdrom, and the personal touch in carrying out suchservices, could not be sustained simply because the skilled staff were notavailable. there has also been a tendency for some staff to be apathetic due toinsufficient motivation because of low wages.funding, as already mentioned, has been a perennial problem. not only is itinsufficient, but it is not always guaranteed. a case in point was when there was aoneyear ban on construction works in public organizations. the most recentexample was the freezing of allocations made for equipment in the 1995 approvedbudget estimates. it is also partly due to the relative low priority accorded tolibrary and information projects. the limited funding may be partly due to ourinability to articulate more forcefully and effectively the importance of theproject. we need convincing and concrete evidence to justify our very existenceand continued support.equipment repair and maintenance has also been a serious problem. thestory of the faulty modems is a typical example. we have also lost large volumesof data due to faulty equipment, interruptions in the power supply, and dustcollecting in computers.conclusions and recommendationsone solution to these problems is the intensification of user education,especially among the senior personnel in csir. they need to better understandthe real value of information in their work as researchers and as decision makers.training at all levels of information workers needs to be strengthened and webelieve that the project should set up a special unit to conduct all trainingprograms.we should explore avenues of collaborating with the media and with otherprofessional societies and organizations. we need to develop guidelines andstandard procedures and begin services for systems reporting and evaluation.good management practice is paramount.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project271bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.generally, the ghastinet project may be described as a success storybecause it has provided the stimulus and acted as a catalyst in creating awarenessand arousing interest in sti generally. it has taken about thirty years to get thisfar and the little that has been achieved needs to be sustained and improvedfurther. there is the urgent need to reexamine the project in the light of newcircumstances and to intensify collaboration with agencies that generate ordisseminate information in one form or the other.there is further need to create the awareness that information managementis not the exclusive prerogative of the librarian or other informationprofessionals. information is a resource that practically everyone needs and thatpractically everyone handles and uses in one form or another. there is a need foran sti culture in ghana as part of a science and technology culture.finally, i recommend that external agencies, be they international orbilateral, be aware of the need to relate aid programs to sti where relevant and toemphasize information technologies and services as integral components ofassistance programs.note1. we are consoled by the fact that many information centers in africa and the developingcountry members of unesco use it and it has become a de facto standard. its use might promoteuniformity and compatibility and therefore facilitate information transfer and data exchange.the ghana national scientific and technological informationnetwork (ghastinet) project272bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusioncommon problemsšinnovative solutionsthese sixteen case studies tell very compelling and specific stories about theintroduction of selected information and communication technologies intoafrican institutions. they also demonstrate that considerable progress has beenmade since the 1989 nairobi conference, organized by the national researchcouncil, at which the participants identified problems and gave recommendationsfor their resolution. the case study authors demonstrate that, while many of theseproblems still remain, they have taken positive steps to resolve others.those information technologies and services that had been identified innairobi as most appropriatešcdrom, desktop publishing, electronicnetworking, and the collection, management, and dissemination of localinformation resourcesšare beginning to be adopted across the continent andtheir benefits can be seen throughout the research community. as the services andtechnologies become more readily available and easier to use, others areencouraged to experiment with them. information and communicationprofessionals in africa are discovering many opportunities to develop innovativeand effective information systems. as they do so, the link between informationand communications and economic development becomes more clearlyestablished. the importance of ict, networks, and linkages among institutionsbecomes even more evident to project managers and to the directors andministers to whom they report.the sixteen case study authors recount that they still face common problemsand barriers. some problems, such as incompatible equipment, poor access toconsumables (such as paper and toner) or peripheral equipment, a shortage ofrepairconclusion273bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.options and spare parts, and poor institutional coordination, were very obvious in1989. while difficulties with these certainly remain, they seem to be of lessimportance to the case study authors. other problems identified in 1989 are stillpresent and the authors suggest a number of innovative solutions. these problemsinclude: a shortage of funds; communication difficulties; a lack of institutionalcapacity to train personnel; poor collection, management, and dissemination oflocal information resources; and an absence of an enabling environment.shortage of fundsmany countries in africa are experiencing fiscal shortages and most of thecase study authors write that their projects face a shortage of funds. some of themresolved this problem by designing smaller, more manageable projects from thebeginning. look, for example, at the experiences described by albina kasango,ermias dagne, and james muttunga. others, such as charles musisi, moussafall, and paulos nyirenda, have implemented costrecovery systems that spreadthe costs of a service throughout the user community. agnes katama and alextindimubona discuss their efforts to put their scientific presses on a sustainablefooting by instituting sound business practices. public/private partnerships areanother solution for chronic funding problems and neil robinson discusses howzamnet was developed as a private company to provide internet services.communication difficultiescommunication difficulties, another problem identified in 1989, are stillpresent in africa. maintenance of the telecommunication systems has sufferedand, in many countries, it is often easier to telephone internationally than acrossthe capital city, since the international service is usually the most profitable partof the service. the telecommunication monopolies in most countries still operateon the basis that they make their profits from international calls and from theirservices for a small number of large subscribers at relatively high cost, rather thanfrom a large number of small local subscribers at low cost.however, local networking initiatives are gaining ground in many africancountries. emerging as a logical path in the development of full internetconnectivity are a series of grassroots electronic networks that use robust andappropriate hardware and software tools. fidonet systems that are able to useeven poor dialup telephone lines can provide electronic mail access to theinternet. such systems are helping to build the local user base in many africancountries and are proving to be highly effective feeder roads into the internet.because there have been few public subsidies for these grassroots developments,these networks have to be fully selfsustaining and capable of operating with onlythe simplest microcomputers, modems, and ordinary dialup lines. lishanadam, moussa fall, charlesconclusion274bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.musisi, paulos nyirenda, and neil robinson each describe how they haveachieved success in overcoming communication problems.shortage of trained personneleach case study author discusses the problems faced in training personnel.as the computer revolution creates a demand for computerliterate andspecialized personnel, more and more people need to be trained. training in thebroadest sense, including computer literacy and consciousnessraising, is neededat all levels. several authors remarked that the lack of training for senior levelmanagers is limiting the adoption of newer technologies. the lack of trainingaffects information systems in several ways: it limits the effectiveness with whichnew technologies are used and it causes users to lack confidence in their ability tomaster the technology. training programs can help ''demystify" information andcommunication technologies.most of the authors found that they had to provide their own trainingprograms when they introduced a new information service or technology. johnnewa and john villars describe their consciousnessraising efforts with seniormanagement. helga patrikios, james muttunga, and xavier carelse describe themore indepth and targeted programs they had to provide. each of the networkingauthors faced an uphill battle to educate their users. each found that the trainingburden would rest on their own shoulders since so few other options wereavailable.poor collection and dissemination of indigenous informationresourcesthe intellectual output of many african countries is not being captured ordeposited in a location where it can be maintained and made available to others.the research efforts of african scientists are not reported in the literature sincethe journals in which they publish are not indexed by the major bibliographicsources. the authors describe many solutions to these problems.stella monageng maintains a program that systematically collects recordsfor inclusion into a local database. regina shakakata and helga patrikios collectrecords from their own countries and contribute these to the african indexmedicus. they and james muttunga also publish digests of relevant material thatare disseminated to the research communities in their countries. since africanscientists face diminishing avenues of publication, xavier carelse, alextindimubona, albina kasango, and agnes katama tackled this problem byimproving the quality of local publishing houses through desktop publishing.john villars and ermias dagne take a slightly different approach in theircase studies. the former discusses his efforts to launch a nationwide network forthe dissemination of scientific information relevant to decision makers. the latterdescribes his disciplineoriented approach to uniting scientists interested innatural products.conclusion275bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lack of an enabling environmentone of the most serious problems faced by the case study authors was thelack of an enabling environment within which they could begin to build aneffective information service. many felt they were working in isolation becausethe "computer culture" in their regions was so poorly developed. there was nosupport networkšno backup, no documentation, no service, nor any spare partsšand they often resorted to trail and error to get a project off the ground. whilethis experimentation eventually resulted in successful projects, it proved veryfrustrating along the way.several authors report that they had trouble dealing with vendors. often theydid not know exactly what to ask foršas a consequence they were given older,more complicated, or inappropriate technologies. other times, they had difficultycommunicating with vendors who did not respond to faxes or email, or who didnot understand the situation in africa. james muttunga turned to mail order; neilrobinson finally found a vendor who would deal with zambia, and helgapatrikios got the right combination of software and hardware only throughperseverance. the ability to attend international trade shows and conferencesimproved the authors' understanding of the technology and allowed them toestablish personal relationships with the vendors.another problem that was identified only by a few authors was the shortageof good, easytouse software in local languages. lishan adam reports thatethiopia is one of the oldest countries using its own script. generic nativelanguage software interfaces that allow easier storage and retrieval of textualinformation in local languages and scripts are not well developed. some newprograms have features for processing data in all languages simultaneously butthese are not readily available in ethiopia.another manifestation of the poor information environment was thediscovery that many researchers had little incentive to use information services.in some cases, they were unwilling or unable to pay for information even thoughthey valued the information service. in other cases, they had little understandingof the value of electronic information resources as compared to more traditionalinformation products. the deterioration of libraries due to poor storage conditionsand lack of foreign currency to maintain journal subscriptions contributed to aserious underuse of information resources.such low expectations on the part of researchers had to be overcome byaggressive marketing techniques. some of these are described by reginashakakata, john newa, and james muttunga. helga patrikios reports that theintroduction of the cdrom improved the status of the library staff. by being in aposition to provide better service, her staff was better able to interact with therequestor on a professional level. using information technologies in an"everyday" setting demonstrates to the users that these technologies need not befeared, that instead they can be manipulated to give the user the informationwanted.conclusion276bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.despite these adverse conditions, the case study authors found unique andinnovative ways to create enabling environments within which their own projectscould thrive. many of the authors credit one or two individuals for helping andinspiring them. these experts served as support groups and as objective sourcesof advicešoften filling in the gap caused by a shortage of journals, otherliterature, and conferences and exhibits. other authors credit the donors,especially the carnegie corporation of new york, for having the vision to fundprojects that involved new, untested technologies. organizations such as thenational research council and the american association for the advancementof science also played enabling roles by helping with proposal writing, providingtechnical advice to the authors, and convening frequent meetings so projectmanagers could learn new skills, share ideas, and foster collaboration.lessons learnedan examination of the case studies as a whole reveals several commonconclusions that can be summarized quite briefly here. pilot or demonstration projects play a critical role in the introduction ofinformation and communication technologies. they allow forexperimentation and demonstrate the use and costs of cdrom, desktoppublishing, electronic mail and computer conferencing, and softwaredevelopment using personal computers and offtheshelf databasemanagement software. they provide a lowrisk, nonthreateningenvironment in which users can try new services. training programsšboth for information providers and for organizationdirectors and managersšare still badly needed throughout africa. trainingshould include broad overviews of microcomputers and networking, aswell as consciousness raising about the importance of information. it shouldinclude formal instruction through highquality schools as well as shorterterm workshops, seminars, and computerbased instruction. improveddocumentation and manuals will also help fill the training gap. the most sustainable projects are those that start small and follow a logicalgrowth pattern. local networks seem to be a prerequisite for the successfulintroduction of the internet. the successful implementation of sti systems and services often reliesupon a combination of technologies. libraries need to offer both cdromand network access. publishers need desktop publishing and access to localinformation. no single technology will solve all the information needs ofthe research community and a suitable and coordinated mixture oftechnologies seems to help all parties.conclusion277bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the informal networks, personal contacts, and user groups that have beenformed in africa have been very helpful in providing information about thecosts and suitability of different technologies. networks and professionalassociations are also good mechanisms for sharing information aboutinnovative outreach and costrecovery programs. the development of indigenous databases through the collection andpublication of locallyproduced material is extremely important. localdatabases provide resources for solving local problems by assuring that thescientific research of a country is being captured and entered into adatabase to which others in the country have access. once such databasesexist, project managers must make major efforts to disseminate informationabout their availability to researchers in the country and region.many of the lessons learned by the case study authors should be selfevidentbut the fact that projects are still being designed, implemented, and managedwithout much though to these lessons proves that more active disseminationactivities are needed. bridge builders takes an important first step in outliningremaining problems and barriers to the introduction of information andcommunication technologies. it also demonstrates that innovative solutions tothese problems are available.still needed are venues at which these lessons can be identified anddiscussed with others. networks, professional associations, trade shows, andother events provide an appropriate meeting ground where project managers candiscuss the choice of suitable technologies, get help in defining needs forinformation products and services, offer technical assistance to others, and shareinformation about information services and technologies.by reading these case studies, donors, government ministries, and projectmanagers alike should be encouraged to see just how much can be accomplishedwith relatively small amounts of funding. echoing the strongest recommendationfrom the 1989 nairobi conference is this advice from the case study authors:small amounts of funds can be highly leveraged and can provide a lowriskenvironment that allows for experimentation and innovation.the advisory committee sincerely hopes that bridge builders will helpcounterbalance the "afropessimism" that pervades the halls of policy anddecisionmakers in both the united states and africa. these people might chooseto dwell on the institutional weaknesses, poor economic environment,inadequately trained manpower, cultural and attitudinal values, and generally lowlevels of technological awareness that work together to prevent the furtherdevelopment of effective sti systems and services in africa.conclusion278bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.or they might look at the efforts of these few, representative individuals and beinspired by how their activities and efforts have helped to overcome thesebarriers. they too might find that the possibilities and the opportunities arelimited mostly by their own imaginations; they too might be infected by thepioneering spirit demonstrated by these case study authors.then, perhaps, they will choose to help by working with these "bridgebuilders" and the many, many others whom they represent.conclusion279bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusion280bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix alist of authorslishan adam, uneca  padis, p.o. box 3001, addis ababa, ethiopialishan@padis.gn.apc.orgdr. xavier carelse, department of physics, electronic instrumentation anddesign, university of zimbabwe, p.o. box mp 167, harare, zimbabwexcarelse@zimbix.uz.zwdr. ermias dagne, napreca ethiopia, department of chemistry, addisababa university, p.o. box 1176, addis ababa, ethiopiachemistryaau@padis.gn.apc.orgmoussa fall, operatuer de systeme, endatiers monde, p.o. box 3370,dakar, senegal moussaf@endadak.gn.apc.orgalbina kasango, publications and publicity officer, economic and socialresearch foundation, 51 uporoto street, ursino estate, p.o. box 31226, dar essalaam, tanzania esrf@costech.gn.apc.orgagnes katama, manager, icipe science press, p.o. box 72913, nairobi,kenya icipe@cgnet.comappendix a281bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stella monageng, librarian, national institute of research, university ofbotswana, private bag 0022, gaborone, botswanacharles musisi, makerere university, p.o. box 7062, kampala, ugandacmusisi@starcom.co.ugjames muttunga, senior research officer, kenya medical researchinstitute, mbagathi road, p.o. box 54840, nairobi, kenyajmuttunga@ken.healthnet.orgdr. john newa, director, university library services, university of dar essalaam, p.o. box 35092, dar es salaam, tanzania lib@unidar.gn.apc.orgdr. paulos nyirenda, head, department of physics and electronics,university of malawi, chancellor college, p.o. box 280, zomba, malawinyirenda@unima.wn.apc.orghelga patrikios, medical library, university of zimbabwe, p.o. box mp45, mount pleasant, harare, zimbabwe patrikios@healthnet.zwneil robinson, zamnet, university of zambia, box 32379, lusaka,zambia neil@zamnet.zmregina shakakata, medical librarian, medical library, university ofzambia, box 50110, lusaka, zambia rshakakata@unza.zmdr. alex tindimubona, chairman, african science and technologyexchange (astex), p.o. box 10382, kampala, ugandaastex@mukla.gn.apc.orgdr. john villars, ghastinet, council for scientific and industrialresearch, p.o. box m32, accra, ghana jvillars@ghastinet.gn.apc.orgappendix a282bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix blist of acronyms and abbreviationsaasafrican academy of sciences, nairobi, kenyaaaasamerican association for the advancement of science,washington, d.c.ahilaassociation for health information and libraries in africaaimafrican index medicusapcassociation for progressive communications, united kingdomarctafrican regional centre for technology, dakar, senegalbbsbulletin board systembitebringing internet to ethiopiabostidboard on science and technology for internationaldevelopment, national research council, washington, d.c.cabecacapacity building for electronic communication in africadtpdesktop publishingeaiaeast africa internet associationelcienvironmental liaison centre international, nairobi, kenyaendaenvironment and development action in the third worldesaneteastern and southern africa networking projectesapeconomic structural adjustment programfrdfoundation for research and development, south africaftpfile transfer protocolgiiglobal information infrastructuregnfidogreennet/fidonet hubictinformation and communication technologyidrcinternational development research centre, ottawa, canadaappendix b283bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ifsinternational foundation for science, swedenigcinstitute for global communications, united statesiipintergovernmental informatics programme (unesco)illinterlibrary loanisdnintegrated services digital networklanlocal area networkleolowearth orbiting satellitemgmegabytemhzmegahertzmismanagement information systemocroptical character recognitionoiaoffice of international affairs, national research council,washington, d.c.ngonongovernmental organizationnmrnuclear magnetic resonancenrcnational research council, washington, d.c.pabxprivate area branch exchange (switchboard)padispan african development information system, addis ababa,ethiopiapgigeneral information programme (unesco)ppppointtopoint protocol connectionpvoprivatevoluntary organizationramrandomaccess memorysangonetsouthern africa nongovernmental networksarecswedish agency for research cooperation with developingcountriessdiselective dissemination of informationslipserial line internet protocolstiscientific and technological informationtcp/iptransmission control protocol/internet protocoltdrtropical disease researchthfthe health foundationtifftagged image file format; also .tiftwasthird world academy of science, trieste, italyunecaunited nations economic commission for africausiaunited states information agencyvsatvery small aperture terminalwaiswide area information serverwhoworld health organization, geneva, switzerlandwwwworldwide webappendix b284bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cglossarybaudratethe transmission speed of an asynchronous communications channel.technically, it refers to the maximum number of changes that can occur persecond in the electrical state of a communications circuit. often baud is usedinterchangeably with bits per second.bit/byteall computer data is composed of tiny electrical pulses called bits (short forbinary digits). each pulse represents a single digit of data. a group of eightbits is called a byte. bytes are measured in units of a thousand, thus kilobyte.bulletinboarda system with a computer, modem, and phone line that acts as a centralpoint for information exchange. it can be used for electronic mail and forstoring files that can be downloaded.cdromstands for compact disc/readonly memory. a high density storage mediumon which electronic data is etched and read by a laser beam.computer conferencea form of computerbased communications that emulates a facetofaceconference where people meet to discuss issues of common concern.computer conferencesappendix c285bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. include a ''messaging" module to simulate the private discussions that oftentake place at meetings but they also permit communication among multipleusers and allow flexible treatment of conference comments.database managementsystems(dbms)databases are organized collections of information. they are used to file,search, and retrieve data.desktoppublishing (dtp)publishing by means of a personal computer. dtp is the product oftechnological advances in personal computing, print graphics, andcomputergenerated typography. it synthesizes the capabilities oftypesetting, graphic design, book production, and platemaking in oneintegrated, costeffective hardware and software configuration.electronicmailcomputerbased messaging. the transmission of letters and messages fromcomputer to computer over a network.fidoneta robust network of individual computerized bulletin board services thatuses regular dialup phone lines and highspeed modems to move electronicmessages.fileservera highperformance personal computer that serves all the users of a localarea network. it provides access to files and software.floppydiska magnetic storage medium. the floppy disk is compact, light, and portable.you can input or output data or software applications between a floppy diskand the computer.ftpfile transfer protocol. allows users to exchange files between theirworkstations and remote computers connected to the internet. it is mostuseful for retrieving files from public archives that are scattered around theinternet.gatewaya device that connects two dissimilar lans or that connects a lan to awan, a server, or a mainframe. it reformats the data so that it is acceptablefor the new network before passing it on.appendix c286bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.harddiska hardware component used for storing software, applications, and data. ithas a higher capacity and faster speed than a floppy. hard disks are sealedunits not usually meant to be removed from the computer.hardwarethe central processing unit, monitor, keyboard, mouse, printer, and otherequipment associated with a computer system.interactiveused to refer to applications that engage the computer user by prompting forcertain responses and then reacting to those responses in what seems likeoriginal ways.interneta system of interconnected computer networks. provides access tocomputers, electronic mail, bulletin boards, databases, and discussiongroups, all using the tcp/ip protocol.leasedlinea dedicated private telephone line between two locations. leased lines areoften used to connect midsized local networks to an internet serviceprovider.localareanetwork(lan)a method of connecting computers, peripherals, and communicationsequipment within a restricted locality, such as a building or campus.megahertz(mhz)a unit of measurement, equal to one million electrical vibrations or cyclesper second, commonly used to measure the clock speeds of computers.microprocessorhardware component responsible for the basic elements of computerprocessing: arithmetic, logic, and control. the microprocessor is anintegrated circuit chipša dense network of microscopic electrical pathwaysetched into highly refined sand, or silicon.modema device that connects a computer to a telephone line and converts thedigital data from the computer into analog (sound) frequencies. the modemsends the sounds through the phone line to a receiving computer's modem,which then turns the sounds back into a digital form that can be displayed onthe receiving computer's screen. (modem is a contraction of modulator/demodulator.)appendix c287bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.monitorthe video display terminal (vdt); the part of the personal computer systemthat looks like a tv screen. it allows the user to see text and graphics as it isentered into the computer.msdosan operating system for microcomputers. short for microsoft disk operatingsystem, dos has been perhaps the most common set of programs forcontrolling the microcomputer.networkindividual computers linked in such a way that users can share software andhardware (for example, printers) and communicate with each other.onlinethe "state" of being connected, either via a modem or a dedicated line, to adistant database or to another computer.operating systemsthe master program that controls the computer hardware and applications.also called the system software.packeta "bundle" of data. in some types of electronic communications, data isbroken into small chunks that traverse the networks independently.packetswitchingnetworka widearea network that achieves high data transmission speeds by dividinginformation into sections, called packets. the packets are then transmitted bythe most efficient route and reassembled at their destination.peripheralshardware components that are not essential to the basic operation of thecomputer but that may be necessary to perform certain applications.peripheral hardware includes printers, scanners, and modems.pointthe lowest level of the fidonet hierarchy. points are connected to hubs andhubs to hosts in order to move mail through the system.appendix c288bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.polla method by which a central computer calls or "polls" another computer tosee if that computer has electronic messages to transmit. polls can be set upto automatically call another computer when the rates are lower or whentraffic is minimal.randomaccessmemory(ram)the computer's shortterm memory or the electronic "work space" in whichsoftware, programs, and data reside while they are active.resolutiona measurement, usually expressed in linear dots per inch (dpi), of thesharpness of an image generated by an output device such as a printer ormonitor.routera device that connects networks that use the same protocols together andpasses information among them.scannerhardware device that allows the transfer of photographs, graphic images, ortext to the computer. scanners convert the image to a form than can bemanipulated and stored by the computer.softwarethe applications, data, and operating systems associated with computersystems.spreadsheetsan electronic means of organizing, storing, and presenting numericinformation in formats that allow for easy calculations. the most commonmeans of handling numeric information.tcp/iptransmission control protocol/internet protocol. connotes a fulltime,interactive internet connection.telnetthe internet standard protocol for remote terminal connection service usedfor logging into and searching other computers connected to the internet. itallows your computer to interact with a remote timesharing system at anothersite as if your terminal were connected directly to the remote computer.appendix c289bridge builders: african experiences with information and communication technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uninterruptiblepowersupply(ups)device that insures a steady and clean supply of electricity to the computer. asudden loss of or change in power can destroy data and cause damage to acomputer. upss give the user time to exit from all active applications andsave all current data in the event of a power outage.unix an operating system for a wide variety of computers, from mainframes topersonal computers. it supports multitasking and is suited to multiuserenvironments.virusa program designed to enter a computer without the user's knowledge andperform tasks that can be destructive to the data and software stored in thecomputer.windowa rectangular, onscreen frame through which you can view a document,worksheet, or other application.windows a windowing environment and application program interface for msdosthat brings to ibm compatible computers some of the graphical user interfacefeatures of the macintosh computers.wordprocessorthe single most universal application for personal computers. wordprocessing programs convert computers into writing and editing machines.word processing easily allows revisions, formatting, and corrections.wysiwyg pronounced wizzywig, an acronym for what you see is what you get. aterm used in desktop publishing that means that what you see on thecomputer screen is exactly what you get on paper when you print.appendix c290