detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5504bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data250 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309056359 | doi 10.17226/5504committee on issues in the transborder flow of scientific data, nationalresearch councilbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceicommittee on issues in the transborder flow of scientific datau.s. national committee for codatacommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1997bitsofpowerbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, nw ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation (under grant no. int9507279), the national library of medicine (under purchase orders 467fz501994, 467mz600631,and 467fz402090), the defense technical information center (under purchase order no. d0394and award no. sp060096p0470), the national aeronautics and space administration (under purchaseorder s73093z), the national institute of standards and technology (under contract no.50sbnb6c9118), the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (under grant nos.na56ec0622 and 56dkna795101), and the department of energy (under grant no. defg0296er30277).library of congress cataloginginpublication databits of power : issues in global access to scientific data / committee on issues in thetransborder flow of scientific data, u.s. national committee for codata, commission onphysical sciences, mathematics, and applications, national research council.p. cm.includes bibliographical references and index.isbn 03090563571. communication in science. 2. researchñinformation services. 3. databasemanagement. 4. information technology. i. u.s. national committee for codata.committee on issues in the transborder flow of scientific data.q223.b58 1997974836bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data is available from the national academypress, 2101 constitution ave., nw, box 285, washington, dc 20055 (18008246242; http://www.nap.edu).cover photo courtesy of peter arnold, inc., new york, n.y.copyright 1997 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americabits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee on issues in the transborder flow ofscientific datar. stephen berry, university of chicago, chairshelton a. alexander, pennsylvania state universitybeth e. allen, university of minnesotamarion baumgardner, purdue universityanne w. branscomb, harvard universityjolie a. cizewski, rutgers universitymartin w. dubetz, washington universitygerald r. faulhaber, university of pennsylvaniajoanne i. gabrynowicz, university of north dakotapaul h. ginsparg, los alamos national laboratorywilliam e. gordon, rice universityrichard e. hallgren, american meteorological societydonald w. king, king researchmicah i. krichevsky, bionomics internationalthomas f. malone, sigma xijerry m. melillo, marine biological laboratory (through may 1996)jerome h. reichman, vanderbilt universityb.k. richard, trwethan j. schreier, space telescope science institutedieter s–ll, yale universityjack h. westbrook, brookline technologiesronald l. wigington, american chemical society (retired)national research council staffpaul f. uhlir, study directorjulie m. esanu, program associatedavid baskin, project assistantalexandra c. spaith, project assistantbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivprefaceivu.s. national committee for codatadavid r. lide, jr., national institute of standards and technology(retired), chairstanley m. besen,* charles river associates, inc.lois blaine, american type culture collectionwilliam bonner, university corporation for atmospheric researchevan buck, union carbide corporationnahum d. gershon, mitre corporationali ghovanlou, department of energybruce gritton, monterey bay aquarium research institutejulian humphries, cornell universitymicah i. krichevsky, bionomics internationaldavid mark, state university of new york at buffalogoetz oertel, association of universities for research in astronomystanley ruttenberg,* national center for atmospheric research(retired)pamela samuelson,* university of california at berkeleynational research council staffpaul f. uhlir, directorjulie m. esanu, program associatedavid baskin, project assistantalexandra c. spaith, project assistant* term ended june 30, 1996.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacevvcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairpeter m. banks, environmental research institute of michiganlawrence d. brown, university of pennsylvaniaronald g. douglas, texas a&m universityjohn e. estes, university of california at santa barbaral. louis hegedus, elf atochem north america, inc.john e. hopcroft, cornell universityrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, u.s. nuclear regulatory commissionkenneth h. keller, university of minnesotakenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatorymargaret g. kivelson, university of california at los angelesdaniel kleppner, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin companymarsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniathomas a. prince, california institute of technologynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryl.e. scriven, university of minnesotashmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directorpaul f. uhlir, associate executive directorbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection ofits members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibilityfor advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academyof sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professionsin the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was established by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering inproviding services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.vibits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacescience is perhaps the most truly international of human enterprises, notbecause it is based on cooperation among nations but rather because its practitioners collaborate and compete in an endeavor in which nationality tends to beirrelevant. since galileo corresponded with kepler and leeuwenhoek sent hisobservations to the royal society in london, the internationalization of sciencehas grown steadily, with postworld war ii travel and fellowship support, growing numbers of opportunities for academic exchanges, and, most recently, electronic information exchange and the end of the cold war. financial support forscience, especially by governments, has been crucial in enabling this international interchange.at the same time, such support has made possible a manyfold expansion ofscience, in numbers of scientists, institutions, and publications. the amount ofscientific data has grown both because there are more scientists and because withtechnological advances, each of them can produce more data than ever before.but as new technologies and working styles rapidly supersede older ones,altogether new problems are appearing that affect how data are handled and used.some of these are technical; others are directly related to the substance of thescience itself. still others involve legal, economic, and social dilemmas that arisewhen the work of scientists is integrated into the daily life of the larger society.one such issue that is particularly important for science concerns the exchange ofscientific data, especially exchange across national boundaries. factors affectingexchange of data in the natural sciences, and the significance of important changesaffecting access to data, are the central topic of this report.in 1994 the u.s. national committee for the committee on data for scienceviibits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceand technology (codata),1 organized under the commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications of the national research council, established the committee on issues in the transborder flow of scientific data toinvestigate the changing environment for the international exchange of scientificdata in the natural sciences. the results of the study committeeõs deliberationsconstitute the substance of this report. its aim is to examine the current state ofglobal access to scientific data, to identify strengths, problems, and challengesthat exist today or appear likely to arise in the next few years, and to recommendactions to build on those strengths and ameliorate or avoid those problems. thefocus is on data in the natural sciences, because that is the primary subjectmatterpurview of codata, but this should not be interpreted as implying that thecommittee considers engineering or social science data to be less important.although many of the issues identified in this study pertain to those other discipline domains as well, they involve different contexts and problems that requireadditional study.the committee included practicing scientists who both contribute to and usethe data resources needed in international scientific efforts, computer scientistsand engineers who create and maintain the means for such exchange, economistswho interpret how the scientific enterprise sustains itself in the larger society, andlawyers who specialize in scientific data problems. learning to talk with eachother and to understand different perspectives was a necessary step toward reaching some agreement on important issues and crafting recommendations to address them. in all of these efforts, the focus was on understanding how to ensureglobal access to the data required to conduct basic research in the natural sciences. the committeeõs specific recommendations are presented in the relevantsections of the main text and are listed together in the summary that begins thisreport.r. stephen berry, chairpaul f. uhlir, study directorcommittee on issues in thetransborder flow of scientific data1codata is an interdisciplinary committee of the international council of scientific unions.codata is concerned with all types of quantitative and qualitative data resulting from experimental measurements or observations in the physical, biological, geological, and astronomical sciences.particular emphasis is given to data management problems common to different scientific disciplinesand to data used outside the field in which they were generated. the general objectives are theimprovement of the quality and accessibility of data, as well as the methods by which data areacquired, managed, and analyzed; the facilitation of international cooperation among those collecting, organizing, and using data; and the promotion of an increased awareness in the scientific andtechnical community of the importance of these activities. additional information about codata isavailable online at <http://www.cisti.nrc.ca/programs/codata/welcome.html> or from the codatasecretariat, 51 boulevard de montmorency, 75016 paris, france.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixacknowledgmentsthe study committee is very grateful to the many individuals who played asignificant role in the completion of this study. the committee held its firstmeeting on january 2022, 1995, and extends its thanks to the following individuals who provided briefings and other information from the studyõs sponsoringagencies: gerald barton and christopher miller of the national oceanic andatmospheric administration; william blanpied of the national science foundation; joseph bredekamp of the national aeronautics and space administration;kurt molholm of the defense technical information center; john rumble of thenational institute of standards and technology; and elliot siegel of the nationallibrary of medicine. at this meeting, the committee also received backgroundbriefings from other federal agency representatives, including gesina c. (cynthia)carter, wanda farrell, and jay snoddy of the department of energy; paulkanciruk of the oak ridge national laboratory; and dorothy bergamaschi ofthe department of state.the committee also extends its thanks to the issue area experts who briefedthe committee at its september 2224, 1995, meeting: gershon sher of thenational science foundation, gregory van der vink of the incorporated research institutions for seismology, carlos gamboa of the pan american healthorganization, amy gimble of the american association for the advancement ofscience, and lane smith of the u.s. agency for international developmentparticipated in a roundtable discussion of data access issues in less developedcountries; hal varian of the university of california at berkeley discussed economic aspects of data transfer on the internet; john baumgarten of proskauer,rose, goetz, and mendelsohn, mary levering of the library of congress, edixbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacexacknowledgments1an edited compilation of the responses to the committeeõs òinquiry to interested partiesó isavailable on the u.s. national committee for codataõs world wide web site at <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.ward malloy of the state department, pamela samuelson of the university ofcalifornia at berkeley, and peter weiss of the office of management and budgetparticipated in a discussion concerning intellectual property issues; and richardgreenfield of the national science foundation provided an update of the worldmeteorological organizationõs data exchange policy.the committee is very appreciative, as well, of the contributions of the morethan 200 individuals who responded to the committeeõs òinquiry to interestedpartiesó (see appendix d of this report)1 and of the many data experts whoresponded to specific requests for information used in the body of the report. inaddition, the committee would like to express its gratitude to the members of theu.s. national committee for codata, who provided oversight of this study,and the following ex officio members, who provided liaison with other relevantactivities: david r. lide, jr., consultant and chair of the u.s. national committee for codata; francis bretherton, of the university of wisconsin, chair ofthe national research councilõs committee on geophysical and environmentaldata; and ferris webster, of the university of delaware, chair of the codataworking group on data access. the committee also wishes to acknowledge theassistance of anne linn, director of the committee on geophysical and environmental data, and wendy white, director of the committee on international organizations and programs.finally, the committee would like to recognize the invaluable contributionsof the national research council staff without whom this report could not havebeen completed: paul f. uhlir, associate executive director of the commissionon physical sciences, mathematics, and applications, who served as study director; julie m. esanu, for the program and research assistance provided to thecommittee; david baskin and alexandra spaith for the staff support to the committee; and editorial consultant roseanne price, who edited the final manuscript.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexicontentsxisummary11introduction17charge and scope of study, 19underlying assumptions and concerns, 21notes, 222trends and issues in information technology24overview of technical trends, 24specific technical concerns, 35data access issues in developing countries, 40recommendations on issues in information technology, 43notes, 443scientific issues in the international exchangeof data in the natural sciences47types of data and their use in different disciplines, 49data trends, opportunities, and challenges in the natural sciences, 57disciplinespecific data issues, 68access to scientific data in developing countries, 90recommendations on data issues in the natural sciences, 100notes, 103bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiipreface4data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective110the trend toward markets: good or bad for science?, 111determinants of the structure of scientific data distribution, 114privatization: when does it make sense?, 116pricing publicly funded scientific data, 124electronic access and internet congestion, 126recommendations regarding economic aspects of scientific data, 128notes, 1295the trend toward strengthened intellectualproperty rights: a potential threat topublicgood uses of scientific data132salient features of the predigital status quo, 135digital technologyñdisrupting the balance of public andprivate interests, 139the drive for legal protection of noncopyrightable databases, 145charting a wellconsidered course in the new era, 161recommendations regarding legal developments affectingaccess to data, 171notes, 172appendixesaabbreviations and acronyms191bglossary196cexamples of successful international dataexchange activities in the natural sciences205dinquiry to interested parties on issuesin the transborder flow of scientific data220index227xiicontentsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexiiithis study is dedicated in fond memory ofgesina c. (cynthia) carter,director of the u.s. national committeefor codata from 1978 to 1991.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivprefacebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary115summaryin todayõs technological world, sustaining science as a source of new knowledge and innovation has become as important to modern society as maintainingthe nationõs capabilities in manufacturing, trade, and defense. the extent to whichpublic funding in the developed world supports science is testimony to societyõsrecognition that basic as well as applied research must be carried out to advancethe public interest.science itself is a living enterprise. with few exceptions, acquisition ofscientific knowledge is a cumulative process that depends on researchersõ continuing ability to collect and share data. this capability has been strengthened bythe advent of information technology, which is supplying powerful new tools andenabling new styles of working. however, farreaching changes involving complex technical, economic, and legal issues also have begun to alter the conditionsfor exchange of data among scientists, especially across national boundaries.to help understand the impact of such changes and to learn what actions areneeded to ensure full and open exchange of scientific data1 worldwide amongresearchers in the natural sciences, the committee on issues in the transborderflow of scientific data undertook a study responding to the following charge:¥outline the needs for access to data in the major research areas of currentscientific interest that fall within the scope of codatañthe physical, astronomical, geological, and biological sciences.¥characterize the legal, economic, policy, and technical factors and trendsthat have an influenceñwhether favorable or negativeñon access to data by thescientific community.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2bits of power¥identify and analyze the barriers to international access to scientific datathat may be expected to have the most adverse impact in discipline areas withincodataõs purview, with emphasis on factors common to all the disciplines.¥recommend to the sponsors of the study approaches that could help overcome barriers to access in the international context.this study addresses issues in effective access to data in numerical, symbolic,and image forms by scientists for scientific research purposes, rather than tobibliographic or purely textual information. the focus is on digital rather thananalog data, since practically all scientific data are now collected and storeddigitally, and most older data are being transferred to digitized electronic formats.the scope of inquiry also is limited to data in the natural sciences, which is theprincipal subjectmatter focus of codata.2because the sponsors of the study are u.s. federal government science agencies, the committee has emphasized those trends, issues, and barriers that have animpact on international access to data collected and used in publicly funded, basicresearch programsñthat is, scientific research conducted as a public good. despite this emphasis, the committee took into account the continua between fundamental and applied research, between raw data and processed information, andbetween public and private uses of scientific data. indeed, the most vexing publicpolicy issues facing the international scientific community in the exchange ofdata involve defining the appropriate balance of divergent interests.underlying the committeeõs approach, however, and informing its conclusions and recommendations, is the principle that full and open exchange of scientific datañthe òbits of poweró on which the health of the scientific enterprisedependsñis vital for advancing the nationõs progress and for maximizing thesocial benefits that accrue from science worldwide.complex developments affecting access toscientific datarecent trends and emerging concernsfreedom of inquiry, the full and open availability of scientific data on aninternational basis, and the open publication of results are cornerstones of basicresearch that u.s. law and tradition have long upheld. for many decades, theunited states has been a leader in the collection and dissemination of scientificdata, and in the discovery and creation of new knowledge. by sharing andexchanging data with the international community and by openly publishing theresults of research, all countries, including the united states, have benefited.today, however, many rapid changes portend significant consequences, somepossibly adverse, for the conduct of basic research in the natural sciences.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary3in broad terms, the challenges of greatest import for full and open globalsharing of scientific data are those associated with two quite recent trends:1.the need for scientists to adapt to conducting research with data thatcome in rapidly increasing quantities, varieties, and modes of dissemination,frequently for purposes far more interdisciplinary than in the past; and2.the worldwide trend toward imposition of increasing economic and legalrestrictions on access to scientific data gained from publicly funded research.the former obliges scientists to reexamine how they carry out their calling. thelatter impels the scientific community to become more involved in understandingthe significance of public policies and legislative activities that can have a profound impact on their work.chief among recent developments affecting access to scientific data is thewidespread use of powerful new technologies for data acquisition, storage, andcommunication, as well as their inevitable consequence, the rapidly growingquantity of data that scientists are generating, preserving, and distributing. moreover, because of increasingly diverse applications for the results of scientificresearch, these data are becoming ever more useful and valuable in many sectorsoutside the specific areas of research that generate them. finding ways to distribute such information to all who want itñequitably, reliably, and in keeping withthe principle of full and open exchange as a sine qua non of progress in scienceñis the greatest challenge this committee identified while conducting its study.although scientific interchange was an important stimulus for developmentof the internet and initially represented one of its greatest uses, commercialactivities and entertainment now far surpass scientific use of the network andmay be expected to dominate policymaking for the electronic exchange of information. this development raises questions about the scientific communityõscontinuing capability to utilize what has clearly become a beneficial and versatiletool for scientific exchange and interaction. the economic framework for aglobal information system and legal models for dealing with conflicting interestsare increasingly influenced by stakeholders who have no longterm responsibilities for, or concern about, sustaining publicly funded scientific inquiry. simultaneously, the government science agencies expected to assume longterm responsibilities for sustaining scientific inquiry are questioning their capacity to continueto invest at traditional levels in the creation, preservation, and dissemination ofscientific data.issues in information technologysome technical trends and developments have had a significant, largely positive impact on the management and international exchange of scientific data.these include the steadily decreasing cost of computing and communication;bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4bits of powergreatly enhanced capabilities for collecting scientific data, for example, fromremote sensors; increasing exploitation of broadband networks and capabilitiesfor transmission of video data over networks; the advent of digital wireless communication; increasing support for collaborative work by longdistance communication; growing capabilities for natural language processing; increasing recognition of the importance of standards in data structures and in networkedcommunication; growing acceptance of the need for cooperation in monitoringand controlling network activity; and increasing use of intranets.associated with advances in, and increasing reliance on, information tools andinfrastructure are a number of problems that present barriers to access, includingthe growing congestion of the internet and consequent constraints on scientificcommunication and research; the storage and distribution of data that are inadequately described or indexed for significant numbers of potential users; the rapidobsolescence of electronic informationprocessing tools and storage media; thevulnerability of electronic networks and data repositories to accidental or deliberatedamage; and the growing competition for use of currently limited network resources. another difficultyñthe current lack of adequate access to scientific datain developing countriesñnevertheless has the potential to improve quickly.data issues in the natural sciencesthe natural sciencesñincluding the physical, astronomical, geological, andbiological sciencesñface a number of trends, opportunities, and challenges affecting researchersõ capabilities for sharing data. the most obvious involvesdealing with the exponentially growing volume of accumulating scientific data,which now, as a result of expanding computational power, also includes elaboratesimulations that often incorporate animation as well as quantitative information.with the end of the cold war has come declassification of some data that are nowproviding many new opportunities for researchers, particularly in the earth sciences. in addition, because of the breadth and scale of major interdisciplinary,globalscale research efforts such as the international geospherebiosphereprogramme, the human genome project, and the hubble space telescopeproject, data from individual disciplines have become important to understandingand progress in other fields. making data available, comprehensible, and usefulacross disciplinary boundaries has become a far greater imperative than beforethese projects existed. this task, however, is complicated by the fact that scientific data do not constitute a uniform, easily accessible body of information.for example, scientific data may be categorized in many ways: by form orcoding (numeric, symbolic, still image, animation, or other); by content; by meansof generation; by level of quality and complexity; by the source of support for thedataaccumulating activity; by time and space, in the case of observational,geospatial records; and by the institutional structures through which the data aredistributed and stored. certain of these characteristics, such as level of qualitybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary5(including degree of review and certification) and institutional origin, have givenrise to additional complications associated with the increasingly pervasive electronic distribution of scientific data.some data issues are more discipline specific. perennial problems affectingaccess to data in the observational sciences, for example, include gaps in qualitycontrol, incompatibility of data streams, inadequate documentation of data sets, anddifficulty in meeting the requirements for longterm retention of data. in thebiological sciences, the variety of attributes and qualifiers included with each observation and differences in terminology and usage put a heavy burden on anysupplier of data to identify and specify the character of the data precisely enough toprevent misinterpretation. in the laboratory physical sciences, as in many otherbranches, fragmentation of data into numerous, autonomous, and often incompatible databases with different formats and levels of quality is a chronic problem.putting scientific data to use rapidly in sectors outside the immediate discipline of origin poses additional challenges to the longerterm effort to providefull and open access. in the observational environmental sciences, for instance,massive archives and reliable institutional memory are necessary to keep the dataaccessible and intelligible. simultaneously, however, data also must be availableto meet the publicõs need for warnings of natural hazards and disasters and forcommercial use by the private sector. in addition, availability of data can beaffected by governmental concerns related to national security, foreign policy,and international trade. newly adopted or proposed restrictions on previouslyopen and unrestricted data have caused particular concern in the earth sciencecommunities, for example.another significant concern regarding full and open access to scientific datais related to commercialization of electronic publication and electronic databases.science operates according to a òmarketó of its own, one that has rules and valuesdifferent from those of commercial markets. while protection of intellectualproperty may concern a scientist who is writing a textbook, that same scientist,publishing a paper in a scientific journal, is motivated by the desire to propagateideas, with the expectation of full and open access to the results. to commercialpublishers (including many professional societies), protection of intellectual property means protection of the rights to reproduce and distribute printed material.to scientists, protection of intellectual property usually signifies assurance ofproper attribution and credit for ideas and achievements. generally, scientists aremore concerned that their work be read and used rather than that it be protectedagainst unauthorized copying. these conflicting viewpoints pose challengingproblems for science and the rest of society. current discussions are seeking abalance between protecting publicly supported activities that advance the publicwelfare and strengthening individual rights to intellectual property.associated with the internationalization of scientific data collection and usehas been the growth of data centersñdedicated, stable institutions supportingcollaborative data sharing across international boundaries and providing verificabits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6bits of powertion, documentation, archiving, and dissemination of large, accumulating datasets. the scientific community is increasingly dependent on these data centersñon their skills in data management and distribution and on their capacity tosupport international scientific efforts.finally, an important concern in global access to scientific data is the need toimprove capabilities for electronic communication by researchers working indeveloping countries. a twoway communication capability is needed: scientistsin developing countries, like scientists everywhere, generate data that are just asimportant to science as the data they acquire. finding ways to help less developed nations acquire affordable electronic network services is an effort that canand should be undertaken by concerned national and international organizationswith the help of the telecommunications sector.the constraints caused by inequalities among nations in access to scientificdata are especially damaging to those sciences concerned with inherently international issues, such as food production, biodiversity, the prevention and cure ofcommunicable diseases, global climate change, and other earth system processes.each of these sciences requires the generation of globally compatible, accessible,and usable data sets related to terrestrial ecosystems, the physical environment,and human activities. collaboration among members of the scientific communities in every nation, rich and poor, in developing global observational data setsand in ensuring the subsequent full and open availability of those data is imperative; its importance cannot be emphasized too strongly.economic aspects of scientific dataas the quantities and uses of scientific data have expanded, and as nationsõdiscretionary budgets have become increasingly constrained, some governmentshave begun to privatize activities previously delivered by the public sector andhave sold some products and services on a commercial basisñincluding thegeneration and distribution of scientific data. this development has stimulatedfears that scientific data may become priced beyond the means of the scientificcommunities, even in the more developed countries, despite the fact that theconduct of basic scientific research, like other government activities related topublic health and safety, serves the public welfare and thus is appropriatelysupported by government funding.although economists may initially see privatization as a positive development for science, careful analysis suggests that a market model different fromthat of ordinary commerce is more appropriate for scientific activity for severalreasons. first, the conduct of some scientific research is itself tightly tied to thecollection, maintenance, and distribution of the data generated by that research.in particular, in the observational sciences, whose databases can be massive,separating the gathering, archiving, and maintenance of data from their distribution is likely to be more costly and inefficient than keeping them integrated.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary7second, the contributors of scientific data, particularly in basic research, arefrequently also the consumers of such data, and nonmonetized exchange of datamay be most efficient in such cases. third, in many situations, the market forscientific data is not large enough to support more than a single commercialsupplier, if that. finally, most basic research is necessarily funded from publicsources. privatizing the distribution of those data would mean that the funds nowprovided in grants to institutions supplying data would be channeled instead (ifsuch funds were still available) to grants to individual scientists as users of data.such funds in small grants to individuals are likely to be vulnerable to even theslightest budgetary pressure, thus potentially compromising the longterm health ofscience. direct appropriation or block grant support to institutions with broadresponsibilities for data management, preservation, and distribution, while not assured of continuity, is typically more stable and secure and is fortified by institutional memory that recognizes and supports the continued utility of archived data.at issue now is whether or when the government should remove itself entirely as a distributor of scientific data. (there is no question here regarding thecontinued support by government of data generation; it is a part of the process ofdoing basic research that falls outside the charge of this study.) largely becauseof the possibility of monopoly control and the potential threat to the principle offull and open availability of data, the government should not remove itself as aprimary distributor of the scientific data that its funding has produced, withoutadequate safeguards as discussed below.3the concern that privatization, accompanied by high prices and legal restrictions, would limit scientistsõ access to data needed for their work is paralleled bya similarly serious concern among economists about the possibilities for unrestricted monopolization, particularly by any party whose objectives do not include advancing the public interest. whether they are private or governmental innature, profitmaking monopolies would endanger science, whereas privatizationstructured so as to encourage competition in supplying valueadded data to multiple user communities could well represent good public policy.any pricing policies that bear on the availability of scientific data shouldreflect this informationõs characteristics as a public goodña resource that is bothnondepletable (cannot be diminished by repeated use) and indivisible and nonexcludable (once having been supplied to some, cannot easily be denied to others).because there is no social cost from repeated use, price differentiation may bejustified in many situations, to ensure that the needs of the scientific communityare met. pricing of governmentfunded data in a differentiated system shouldensure that data are available at no cost to those who provide them or otherwisecontribute substantively to any given data set; for others, including commercialusers, prices for data should cover the costs of serving those users. because thereis a cost associated with repeated distribution, marginal pricing has been thepolicy in many of the sciences. it allocates the smallest nonzero cost to users andthus is consistent with the principle of full and open exchange of data.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8bits of powerinternet congestion, a growing problem for transnational exchange of scientific data, has obvious economic aspects and will be resolved only if participatingnations and network providers work together. for the scientific community, apartial solution may involve the creation of separate intranets.intellectual property rights in data:legal constraints on full and open access?the emergence of a new intellectual property rights model that protects thecontents of electronic databases as well as those in print has the potential to significantly affect the international flow of scientific data. the problem has reached acrux with the current attempts, national and international, to establish a legal framework that threatens to subordinate the needs of data users working in the publicinterest to the desires of those seeking protection of investments in creating andmaintaining databases. unfortunately, and until very recently, the input into thislegislative process at all levels by the scientific and educational communities hasbeen all but nonexistent. sustained action by those sectors is needed to avertpossible restrictions on the full and open exchange of scientific data.the u.s. constitution articulates the legal protection of technological inventions and of literary and artistic works through the patent and copyright systems,which attempt to balance incentives to create against the public interest in freecompetition. any publicly disclosed technology or information that does notmeet the eligibility requirements for protection under u.s. patent and copyrightlaws becomes public domain matter that anyone can appropriate freely. moreover, the special needs of libraries, educators, and researchers for access to thecopyrighted literature has been recognized under the concept of fair use.4but this traditional balancing of private and public rights has become morecomplex in the information age. many information goods with commercialvalue, notably the contents of most electronic databases, are not eligible forpatent or copyright protection, and database producers consequently face thethreat of rapid duplication by freeriding competitors who do not contribute to thecosts of collecting, managing, or disseminating the relevant data. in its 1991decision in feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co.,5the u.s.supreme court raised the threshold of eligibility for copyright protection, requiring significant original and creative authorship in the selection and arrangementof contents and not simply industrious compiling efforts. earlier, the commission of the european communities (cec) had started to develop a new protectionframework for databases to encourage their commercialization in europe. thisculminated in the formal adoption of a new european directive on databases bythe cec in march 1996, which reflected influences by the feist decision, as wellas other concerns in europe. in may 1996, legislation similar to the final european directive, but even more protective, was introduced in the u.s. house ofrepresentatives (h.r. 3531), and in august 1996, a proposal almost identical tobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary9the proposed u.s. legislation was placed before a diplomatic conference underthe auspices of the world intellectual property organization (wipo) with a viewto adopting a new protocol to the berne convention that would protect noncopyrightable databases in a tailormade legal regime. action on this proposalhas been postponed until later in 1997.scientific data already largely compiled and distributed in electronic formconstitute one of many types of data and information that will be affected by thelegal framework now evolving in response to conflicting needs. although newforms of legal protection may be needed to attract private investment to financethe creation and maintenance of electronic databases, including those for use inscience and technology, current european and u.s. initiatives would confer amonopoly on database developers far broader and stronger than is needed to avertmarket failure. the pending legislation would create exclusive, monopolisticproperty rights of virtually unlimited duration, but without public policy limitations. if adopted in their current form, these legal proposals could jeopardizebasic scientific research and education, eliminate competition in the markets forvalueadded products and services, and raise existing thresholds to entry intoinsuperable legal barriers to entry.if put into practice, such measures could restrict the full and open access todata on which scientists and educators have depended. neither the already adoptedeuropean directive on databases nor the proposed wipo protocol and pendingu.s. legislation would provide adequate fair use safeguards that recognize theneeds of the scientific and educational communities for unrestricted access to dataat affordable prices. they take little or no cognizance of the publicgood characterof scientific data for research and educational purposes.more generally, such an approach ignores the contribution of basic scienceto the ability of u.s. firms to predominate in markets for technology and information goods. despite a general consensus on the need for sustained levels ofinvestment in research and development, the proposed database laws could changethe status quoñwithout anyoneõs wanting it to happenñby elevating the price ofthe one raw material to which u.s. researchers have always had ready access. ifless available scientific information were to translate to fewer applications ofeconomic importance, the end result would be a loss of u.s. technological competitiveness in an integrated world market.it is therefore essential to retain a òfair useó zone in cyberspace and in othermedia to protect the strong public interest in ensuring that certain uses and certainusers, including the scientific and educational communities, are neither pricedout of the market nor forced to cut back the basic research that has played acrucial role as a public good in the economic and technological growth of theunited states. the pending legislative proposals, which the committee considersto be precipitous and radical attempts to alter the terms and conditions underwhich scientific data may be accessed and used on a worldwide basis, have thepotential to do severe damage to the scientific enterprise. the scientific commubits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10bits of powernity and its defenders must step in quickly to insist on further, open debate beforethese changes reach implementation.recommendationsgeneral guidelinebased on its deliberations and understanding of the issues involved, thecommittee believes that the following overarching principle should guide allpolicy decisions concerning the management and international exchange of scientific data in the natural sciences: the value of data lies in their use. full andopen access to scientific data should be adopted as the international norm for theexchange of scientific data derived from publicly funded research. the publicgood interests in the full and open access to and use of scientific data need to bebalanced against legitimate concerns for the protection of national security,individual privacy, and intellectual property.recommendations on data issues in the natural sciences1.governmental science agencies and intergovernmental organizationsshould adopt as a fundamental operating principle the full and open exchange ofscientific data. by òfull and open exchangeó the committee means that the dataand information derived from publicly funded research are made available withas few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than thecost of reproduction and distribution.2.the international council of scientific unions (icsu), together with thescientific specialized agencies of the united nations, the organisation for economic cooperation and development megascience forum, and the nationalscience agencies and professional societies of member countries, should considerdeveloping a distributed international network of data centers. such a networkshould draw on the strengths of successful examples of international data exchange activities as described in appendix c of this report, including, in particular, the icsu world data centers, and become a prominent part of the globalinformation infrastructure that has been proposed by the ògroup of sevenó nations. to facilitate the international dissemination and interdisciplinary use ofscientific data, all public scientific data activities, including the network of datacenters, should plan for and commit to providing human and financial resourcessufficient for carrying out the following functions:a.involve experts from the relevant disciplines, together with informationresource managers and technical specialists, in the active management andpreservation of the data;bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary11b.develop and maintain uptodate, comprehensive, online directoriesof data sources and protocols for access;c.provide documentation (metadata) adequate to ensure that each dataset can be properly used and understood, with special attention given tomaking the data usable by individuals outside the core discipline area. thisproblem is particularly acute within the biological sciences, in whichimprecision and variations in taxonomic definitions and nomenclature posesignificant barriers to communication, even among the biologicalsubdisciplines. the committee suggests that the codata commission onstandardized terminology for access to biological data banks be enhancedinto a true international consultative body and that similar mechanisms bedeveloped for other disciplines, as needed;d.incorporate advances in technology to facilitate access to and use ofscientific data, while overcoming incompatibilities in formats, media, andother technical attributes through vigorous coordination and standardizationefforts;e.institute effective programs of quality control and peer review of datasets; andf.digitize all key historical data sets and ensure that every importantcondition for the longterm retention of data be met, including the adoptionof appropriate retention and purging criteria and the timely transfer of alldata sets to new media to prevent their deterioration or obsolescence.3.the icsu and other professional scientific societies should encourage thestudy of, and publication of peerreviewed papers on, effective data managementand preservation practices, as well as promote the teaching of those practices inall institutions of higher learning.4.all scientists conducting publicly funded research should make their dataavailable immediately, or following a reasonable period of time for proprietaryuse. the maximum length of any proprietary period should be expressly established by the particular scientific communities, and compliance should be monitored subsequently by the funding agency.5.as a corollary to recommendation 2.a above, publicly funded scientificdatabases should be maintained either directly or under subcontract by the government science agencies with the requisite discipline mission and need. in theunited states, the office of science and technology policy should develop anoverall policy for the longterm retention of scientific data, including a contingency plan for protecting those data that may become threatened with the loss oftheir institutional home.6bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12bits of power6.with regard to improving access to scientific data in developing countries, the committee makes the following recommendations:a.international development organizations, together with professionalsocieties, should provide targeted training programs for scientists in the useof computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data in specificdisciplines.b.foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientistsin developing countries more direct, peerreviewed grants that include support for access to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists insuch nations in their own countriesõ capacitybuilding initiatives, researchpolicy decisions, and national database construction efforts.c.scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organizeto promote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their owncountries, as well as to make their data available internationally.d.the icsu, together with funding agencies and nongovernmentalbodies, should strengthen its efforts to assist developing countries in undertaking their own scientific studies and encourage scientists engaged in suchstudies to take active roles in the international scientific community, wheretheir efforts can be appreciated and used. legal and procedural protocolsmust be developed to provide for fair and equitable sharing of any resultingintellectual property.e.until affordable and ubiquitous electronic network services are available, national and international scientific societies and foreign aid agenciesshould establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocks ofscientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developingcountries that need them.7.finally, the icsu, together with the principal national and internationalscientific organizations mentioned in recommendation 2 above, should convenea series of major international meetings to initiate meaningful action on theserecommendations.recommendations on issues in information technology1.the principal scientific societies and the internet engineering task force(ietf) should begin a longterm planning effort to assess the carrying capacityand distribution capability of the internet, using projections of storage and transmission capacity and of demand and taking into account the next generation ofinternet protocols. scientific societies should encourage their publication committees to maintain contact with the ietf and keep their members abreast ofadvances in technologies useful for scientific information management. oneoption that scientific societies and government science agencies should evaluatebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary13is the creation of dedicated international science networks, such as the internet iinow being developed.2.to improve the technical organization and management of scientific data,the scientific community, through the government science agencies, professionalsocieties, and the actions of individual scientists, should do the following:a.work with the information and computer science communities toincrease their involvement in scientific information management;b.support computer science research in database technology, particularlyto strengthen standards for selfdescribing data representations, efficientstorage of large data sets, and integration of standards for configurationmanagement;c.improve science education and the reward system in the area ofscientific data management; andd.encourage the funding of data compilation and evaluation projects,and of data rescue efforts for important data sets in transient or obsoleteforms, especially by scientists in developing countries.3.u.s. government science agencies, working with their counterparts inother nations, should improve data authentication and apply security safeguardsmore vigorously. they also should continue funding for research and development in information technologies that are important to the pursuit of science.4.a consortium of intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,including the international telecommunications union, the world bank, the specialized agencies of the united nations, the international council of scientificunions, and other concerned bodies, should mount a global effort to reducetelecommunications tariffs to scientists in developing countries through differential pricing or direct subsidy.5.foreign aid to developing countries in the form of computers, computernetworks, and associated software, coupled with the training and resources necessary to operate and maintain those technologies, should be given high priority,on the basis of the potential for longterm socioeconomic returns. the communication systems must have adequate carrying capacity to meet growing demand.recommendations regarding economic aspects of scientific datathe committee recommends that the economic aspects of facilities for storage and distribution of scientific data generated by publicly funded research beevaluated according to the following criteria:bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14bits of power¥does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investmentin one or more facilities that generate the data of interest? if so, the datadistribution facilities are most likely to benefit by being vertically integrated withthe observational or experimental facilities themselves.¥does the (nonfacilitiesbased) distributed scientific research involvecoordination among researchers, possibly in different countries? if so, then datadistribution becomes a means of communication among contributing scientists,and for this community, the price of the data alone should be zero. if thedistributor subsequently adds value to the data, then the price should be no higherthan the marginal cost of adding value.7¥is the community of users roughly the same as the community ofcontributors? if so, then data distribution should be priced at zero (or at marginalcost, if value is added). if there are many users who are not contributors, such ascommercial customers, then some form of price discrimination to ensure zero orlow prices to contributing scientific users, with possibly higher prices to others,may be appropriate.¥is the user community large enough to support more than one datadistributor? if so, then privatization of data distribution may be a viable policyoption. if not, then privatization should occur only if the contractual arrangementsare adequately protective of the needs of the scientific community. necessaryñbutnot necessarily sufficientñconditions for privatization to be desirable are asfollows:ñthe distribution of data can be separated easily from their generation.ñthe scientific data set is used by others beyond the researchcommunity.ñit is easy to price discriminate/product differentiate between scientificusers and other users, and it is easy for the government to contractually mandatelow prices to scientific users for governmentfunded data.ñprivatization will not result in the unrestricted monopoly provision ofthe data.the appropriate price ceiling for nonscientific users of scientific data generated through government research is incremental cost, as defined in the sectiontitled òpricing publicly funded scientific dataó in chapter 4. the price ofscientific data to the contributing scientific community should be zero, or at mostmarginal cost.recommendations regarding legal developmentsaffecting access to datathe new proposals supporting an overly protectionist property rights regimefor the contents of databases and for online transmissions of data and otherscientific information have reached an advanced stage of legislative considerbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary15ation at both the national and the international levels. the committee believesthat these legislative changes do not reflect adequate consideration of the potential negative impacts on scientific research and education and that they have beenproposed for implementation at an unnecessarily precipitous pace. the committee therefore recommends that the office of science and technology policy,leaders from the science agencies and professional societies, and all those concerned with sustaining the health of the scientific enterprise should immediatelytake the following actions:1.present to all relevant legislative forums the principle of full and openexchange of scientific data resulting from publicly funded research, and clarifythe importance of sustaining such exchange to the nationõs future whenever theseforums consider laws that would apply to exchange of scientific data.2.demand that national and international legislative processes now inprogress slow to a rational pace, and that the deliberations become more public toallow the scientific and educational communities to present their views and concerns to lawmakers.3.advocate the incorporation of equivalents of òfair useó as part of anyregulatory structure applying to databases as such, or to online storage andtransmission of data and other scientific information. as a corollary, ensure thatthe publicgood aspects of scientific data are preserved and promoted in laws andregulations governing intellectual property on the internet and in any futureelectronic networked environments.4.work with congress and the official u.s. representatives to the worldtrade organization and the world intellectual property organization to ensurethat the nationõs interests in maintaining preeminence in science and technologyare not undermined.5.pursue these issues not only within the united states, but also internationally through international scientific organizations and u.s. foreignpolicy channels as they deal with trade and other agreements affecting intellectual propertyprotection.notes1.by òfull and open exchangeó the committee means that data and information derived frompublicly funded research are made available with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution. this definition isadapted from a basic tenet regarding availability of scientific data in global change research.see òpolicy statements on data management for global change researchó (july 1991), officebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16bits of powerof science and technology policy, doe/ep0001p, washington, d.c., and national researchcouncil, committee on geophysical and environmental data (1995), on the full and openexchange of scientific data, national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 2.2.throughout this report, the term òscientific dataó refers to data in the natural sciences.3.the landsat privatization effort, described in chapter 4, is one example of unrestricted monopolistic data distribution under which the scientific community suffered loss of access. nevertheless there may be situations in which the scientific community would benefit if a body ofdata were distributed either by a competitive set of private firms or by a single adequatelyconstrained private source.4.before the electronic era, copyright evolved as a protection for authors and their assignees;under copyright, a document could be reproduced only with the approval of the copyrightholder, under whatever terms that person chose. copying machines made possible, even easy,violations of this protection. a doctrine of òfair useó then evolved to allow very limited copying by scholarly, educational, scientific, and other notforprofit users, but not by any whowould make commercial use of the copies. the fair use doctrine has become a principal protection of the right of the publicñand thus of the scientific communityñto have ready, lowcostaccess to copyrighted material; its economic and cultural justification rests on the nature ofinformation as a public good that benefits users.5.feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co., 111 s. ct. 1282 (1991).6.see the recommendations in national research council (1995), preserving scientific data onour physical universe: a new strategy for archiving the nationõs scientific information resources, national academy press, washington, d.c.7.by òadding valueó in this case is meant any transformation of the data beyond that necessaryfor scientific research that increases the value of the information for some or all potential usersof the data.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction171715introductionbasic scientific research fuels most of our nationõsñand the worldõsñprogress in science.1 society uses the fruits of such research to expand theworldõs base of knowledge and applies that knowledge in myriad ways to createnew wealth and to enhance the public welfare (see box 1.1). yet few peopleunderstand how scientific advances have made possible the ongoing improvements that are basic to the daily lives of everyone. fewer still are aware of whatit takes to achieve advances in science, or know that the scientific enterprise isbecoming increasingly international in character.freedom of inquiry, the full and open availability of scientific data on aninternational basis, and the open publication of results are cornerstones of basicresearch that u.s. law and tradition have long upheld. for many decades, theunited states has been a leader in the collection and dissemination of scientificdata, and in the discovery and creation of new knowledge. by sharing andexchanging data with the international community and by openly publishing theresults of research, all countries, including the united states, have benefited. inthis centuryõs dramatic growth of scientific knowledgeñan expansion motivatedby a combination of forces including military, commercial, public benefit (especially health), and purely intellectualña necessary component has been the wideavailability of scientific information, ranging from minimally processed data tocuttingedge research articles in newly developing fields. this information hasbeen assembled as a matter of public responsibility by the individuals and institutions of the scientific community, largely with the support of public funding.data are the building blocks of scientific knowledge and the seeds of discovery. activities in the recording, analysis, and dissemination of data are motivatedbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18bits of powertoday by the same forces that have impelled humans for thousands of years:curiosity to understand the natural world; desire to pass that understanding tosucceeding generations; selfaggrandizement; and personal or national power.2data challenge us to develop new concepts, theories, and models to make senseof the patterns we see in them. they provide the quantitative basis for testing andconfirming theories and for translating new knowledge into useful applicationsfor the benefit of society. the assembled record of scientific data is both a historyof events in the natural world and a record of human accomplishment.3 theinternational availability of these scientific data for fundamental research on afull and open basis and issues associated with ensuring global access are theprimary concerns of this report.technological advances in recent years have led to an exponential increasein the amount of data collected, stored, and transmitted. new, ever more sophisticated sensors record observations on objects ranging from the smallest particlesof matter to the largest objects in our known universe. it is now commonplace tocontrol such large instruments as telescopes remotely, during the observation ofan event, from a point hundreds or thousands of miles from the instrument.satellites in orbit around earth provide us with electrooptical observations, collecting billions of bits of data about our planet on a daily basis. powerful machines unravel genomes to reveal the genetic code of life and help us decipher thesecrets of heredity. in addition, rapid advances in computing, data processingand storage, and, most recently, in global telecommunications have given us thepower to communicate and share the information produced by these remarkableobservational and experimental tools, almost as quickly as it is generated. thebox 1.1examples of benefits derived from scientific researchnew scientific understanding and its applications are yielding benefits such asthe following:¥improved diagnoses, pharmaceuticals, and treatments in medicine;¥better and higheryield food production in agriculture;¥new and improved materials for fabrication of manufactured objects, building materials, packaging, and special applications such as microelectronicsin the production arts;¥faster, cheaper, and safer transportation and communication;¥better means for energy production;¥improved ability to forecast environmental conditions and to manage naturalresources; and¥more powerful ways to explore all aspects of our universe, ranging from thefinest subnuclear scale to the boundaries of the universe, and encompassing living organisms in all their variety.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19exponential accumulation of these electronic datañthese bits of powerñand ourexpanding capacity to manipulate them are in turn changing the nature of scientific inquiry and its application to the great challenges facing mankind.as in the past, generating data in the natural sciences is only the first step inthe process of creating, organizing, and applying knowledge. other elements ofthis endeavor include discovery of new principles, integration of informationacross disciplines, dissemination by formal and informal education, and application by many sectors of society. today, however, larger interdisciplinary research efforts such as the international geospherebiosphere programme,4 thehuman genome project,5 and other international òmegascienceó research programs6 are creating new frameworks of knowledge not only about the universeand what constitutes it, but also about living organisms, human behavior, andtheir mutual interaction. in addition, traditional disciplinary research continuesin field studies, the laboratories of individual scientists, and at large joint facilities.increasingly, all forms of research involve both formal and informal international scientisttoscientist contact and exchanges of data. this increase in international collaboration is owing partly to changing political and economic conditionsand also to the growing availability of electronic communication. whether carriedout on a large scale under cooperative agreements or less formally among individual researchers, these collaborations have become integral to the search forscientific understanding. their successñas well as progress in achieving the public benefits of scienceñdepends on the full and open availability of scientific data.charge and scope of studythe purpose of this report is to describe and develop new insights into thetrends, issues, and problems that are shaping the transnational exchange of scientific data. specifically, the committee on issues in the transborder flow ofscientific data was charged with the following tasks:¥outline the needs for access to data in the major research areas of currentscientific interest that fall within the scope of codatañthe physical, astronomical, geological, and biological sciences.¥characterize the legal, economic, policy, and technical factors and trendsthat have an influenceñwhether favorable or negativeñon access to data by thescientific community.¥identify and analyze the barriers to international access to scientific datathat may be expected to have the most adverse impact in discipline areas withincodataõs purview, with emphasis on factors common to all the disciplines.¥recommend to the sponsors of the study approaches that could helpovercome barriers to access in the international context.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20bits of powerperhaps the most obvious aspect of this charge is its wide scope. the broadnature of the committeeõs inquiry precluded a comprehensive analysis of all theissues and trends in all the disciplines and across all geographic areas. moreover,many activities beyond the sphere of science impinge on the transnational exchange of scientific data, a fact that required the committee to establish practicallimits on its treatment of these topics.this report focuses primarily on issues pertaining to scientistsõ effectiveaccess to data in numerical, symbolic, and image form, rather than bibliographicor purely textual data, for research in the natural sciences. however, the committee is acutely aware that distinctions among these categories of data are fading.most of the discussion concerns digital rather than analog data, since practicallyall scientific data are now collected and stored digitally and most older data arebeing transferred to digitized electronic formats.with regard to the needs for data in the physical, astronomical, geological,and biological sciences, the report incorporates by reference the more detailedand thorough analyses of research strategies produced in recent years by thenational research council for the various natural sciences. the importance ofdata for fundamental research across these disciplines is described in a summaryoverview at the beginning of chapter 3 and is highlighted in various examplesthroughout the report.because the sponsors of the study are u.s. federal government science agencies, the committee has emphasized trends, issues, and barriers that have animpact on international access to data collected and used in the context of publicly funded, basic research programs. despite this emphasis, the committee tookinto account the continua between fundamental and applied research, betweenraw data and processed information, and between public and private uses ofscientific data. indeed, the most vexing public policy issues facing the international scientific community involve defining the appropriate balance of competing interests.in addressing the international aspects of data exchange, the committee conducted a widely disseminated informal inquiry to develop at least an anecdotalsense of what data issues trouble the international scientific community today.7the issues were broadly divided into those affecting the economically most developed nations, defined as the countries belonging to organisation for economic cooperation and development, and those confronting the developing countries. thecommittee recognizes, however, that the developing countries encompass a widespectrum of economic and technical capacities; illustrative examples of major issues are provided with reference to specific regions, countries, or institutions.finally, in its deliberations the committee discovered certain matters thatwere central to the subject but were not explicitly included in its charge. although expressly requested to provide its advice to the agencies that supportedthis study, the committee became aware that many of the issues and barrierspertinent to global access to scientific data could only be addressed collectivelybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21by the worldõs international scientific community in concert with a broad rangeof national and international governmental and nongovernmental bodies. therefore the committee considered it necessary to make several recommendations ofbroader scope in keeping with these concerns.underlying assumptions and concernsseveral assumptions underlie the committeeõs work. the first is that international collaboration enhances scientistsõ capacity to better understand the naturalworld and thus strengthens the science base that is a source of important benefitsto society. from this assumption, the rest follow.science is one of the most internationally cooperative of activities. today,the improving means and ease of communication and travel, as well as theirdecreasing costs, have made transnational interactions a normal, daily part ofcarrying out scientific research. national boundaries are invisible in scientistsõdaily interactions, whether they are engaged in facetoface discussion in a singlelaboratory or across great distances by electronic mail. joint multinational authorship is common, and many funding institutions have encouraged such efforts.with the end of the cold war, international collaboration can be expected toincrease further.the handling of scientific informationñone of the results of such collaborationñhas also changed dramatically. in fact, the distinction between òdataó andòinformationó has itself become blurred. data now include not only numericaldata, but also symbolic data and images, and, for many scientists, textual data.much of this convergence is the consequence of powerful electronic capabilitiesaffecting the acquisition, storage, and exchange of scientific data. primary datacollected by a detector now frequently go directly into a computer for storage andprocessing before the person who generates the data ever sees them. in such anexperiment, how are òprimaryó data to be defined? fortunately, the integrationof electronic methods has occurred so naturally that this question is unimportantto the working scientist, who might ask instead, òis this the best way to collectand analyze the data?óthe storage and exchange of scientific data have been more problematic thantheir collection. even within the particular communities that generate and initially use data, their storage and dissemination traditionally have required attention and expense. moreover, many scientific data have value outside the community of origin. entire institutions have evolved to provide data services, amongthem public and private data centers. electronic media have changed the means,costs, capacities, and time scales associated with the handling of scientific data.some of these changes are already well established, some are evolving, and someare still only imagined. what is certain is that change will continue and that ourmanagement and use of scientific data in 10 years will differ from current practice.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22bits of poweranother of the committeeõs assumptions is a corollary of the first and reflectswhat the committee believes is virtually a consensus of the global scientificcommunity: that the most valued goal of scientists is that other scientists shouldlearn of their work and use it. the common interests of all scientists, of science,and indeed of society in general thus are best served by as full and open anexchange of scientific information as possible, consistent with the preservation ofscientistsõ capacity to continue their investigations. this assumption can sometimes put scientists at odds with other sectors of society, as discussion and examples in this report illustrate. because the scientific community is not the onlysector with an interest in the handling of scientific data and information, scientists need to remain involved in the current policy debate that will affect theprospects for continuing open, global access to scientific data.this study has been motivated by a concern for ensuring the continuingstrength of the scientific enterprise as a source of international wellbeing andprogress; hence the analysis and recommendations reflect that motivation. theextent to which the committeeõs recommendations are adopted may require balancing this motivation against the motivations of others, whose objectives are notnecessarily the same.the chapters that follow (a) describe the information technology tools andcapabilities that are transforming the handling and use of scientific data, andsome of the principal impacts on data exchange arising from these technologicaldevelopments; (b) summarize the underlying factors in international scientificdata exchange, how scientists use data, and what data issues confront them asthey carry out their research; (c) examine the economic aspects of data obtainedfrom publicly funded research; and (d) analyze the conflicts arising from information technologyõs impact on the domain of intellectual property law that regulates scientistsõ access to data. technical terms and acronyms are defined, andexamples of successful data exchange activities given, in the appendixes.notes1.basic, or fundamental, research may be defined as research that leads to new understanding ofhow nature works and how its many facets are interconnected. see john a. armstrong, òisbasic research a luxury our society can no longer afford?,ó karl taylor compton lecture,massachusetts institute of technology, october 13, 1993.2.j.h. westbrook, (1992), òa history of data recording, analysis, and dissemination,ó pp. 430460 in data for discovery: proceedings of the twelfth international codata conference, p.glaeser, ed., begell house, new york.3.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data on our physical universe: anew strategy for archiving the nationõs scientific information resources, national academypress, washington, d.c.4.see the international geospherebiosphere programmeõs world wide web site at <http://www.igbp.kva.se/index.html>. note: in keeping with the subject and message of this report,the reader will find, in addition to references to texts and personal communications, manybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23references to sites on the world wide web. most of these are uniform resources locators, orurls; a few are uniform resources names, or urns. although the validity of all of these webaddresses was determined at the time of publication, the reader is cautioned that urls sometimes change, and that one of the shortcomings of the current state of electronic communicationis inadequate tracking capability to lead someone from an old to a new url when the addresschanges. the replacement of urls by urns is a likely solution to this problem in the comingyears, but it has not yet happened.5.for additional information about the human genome project, see the national human genomeresearch instituteõs web site at <http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/hgp>.6.organisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd) megascience forum(1993), megascience and its background, oecd, paris, france.7.the inquiry is reprinted in appendix d, and the results are summarized separately on theusnc/codata web site at <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24bits of power2425trends and issues ininformation technologyadvances in information technology offer unprecedented opportunities aswell as new challenges in the international exchange of scientific data. rapidimprovements have led to ever greater computational speed, communicationbandwidth, and storage capacity at costs within reach of even smallscale usersña trend that appears likely to continue well into the future.1 moreover, technicaladvances in satellites, sensors, robotics, and fiberoptic and wireless telecommunications are extending the range of technologies affecting the acquisition, refinement, analysis, transmission, and sharing of scientific data.in this chapter, the committee examines some of the concerns that rapidchanges and growing reliance on information technology have raised with respect to the exchange of scientific data. table 2.1 frames some of the profoundadvances in technology that are having an impact on access to and exchange ofscientific data and thus on researchrelated capabilities. the committeeõs overview of associated technical trends provides some context for its discussion of sixbarriers to and concerns regarding global access to scientific information, including access by scientists in developing countries. its recommendations for technical improvements to facilitate the international sharing of scientific data areaddressed to a range of participants.overview of technical trendsthe committeeõs discussion focuses on 10 trends (table 2.2) that representmajor forces of change in data and information technology. these trends interactwith and reinforce each other, often further accelerating change and complicatingbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology25table 2.1advances in technologies relevant to the generation and exchange of scientific data and informationtechnologyrelevanceprognosishighdensity storage andmemoryencryption/authenticationpacket asynchronous transfermode (atm) communicationssensorssmall satellites (and inexpensivelaunches)wireless (space and ground)communicationshighperformance computerprocessorsrobotics for exploration and fortechnology data transmission,from or to inaccessible placescapacity to deal with large volumes of data and highrates of transmission for todayõs science demands.ability to protect copyright, the privacy ofindividuals, and data integrity.support for highspeed, flexible transmission of videoand images.extension of the range of that which can be observed(more precision, more spectral range, higher samplingfrequency, less calibration effort).lowering of barriers to entry for remote sensingapplications.capability to enhance communication in remote areasor areas where post, telephone, and telegraph havelimited capability/capacity.enhanced capability for computationally intensivescience activities (e.g., models, transformation oflarge data sets).improved autonomy of vehicles for ocean andatmosphere studies and for planetary missions.precipitous drop in cost. holographic and highdensity optical memorytechnology will enter market.aimbedded encryption in numerous products expected to make privacy andsecurity applications manageable. widespread application of publickeyencryption.longterm steady growth in atm applications over highspeed fiberopticlinks. use of atm within local area networks, competitive with otherlocal area network (lan) technologies (e.g., 100mbps ethernet)new multispectral sensors, improved resolution, smaller and morenumerous satellites. additional terrestrial applications (e.g., agriculture).increased space and ground remote sensing activity. broader array ofapplications.bworldwide access to voice and highspeed data transmission within 5years. wireless systems filling in to meet communications needs thatongoing investments in fiber cable or wireline systems have been unable toaccommodate.more expensive fabrication processes expected to cause reduction insupplier alternatives.c potential for òsingleelectronó circuits.d mooreõslaw applying through 2005, or longer.new frames for small submarines and pilotless aircraft (driven in part bymilitary applications); òdownholeó oil, gas, and geologic exploration;microelectromechanical systems (mems) applications.e(continues)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26bits of powertable 2.1continuedtechnologyrelevanceprognosishybrid analog/digital computerslanguage processing bycomputerdatabase technology (includinginformation retrieval,òknowbotsó)fiberoptic communicationscapacity for new sensing and reasoning power,helping machines to do òintelligentó work.assistance in getting relevant information to scientistson time. capability for speakers of differentlanguages to improve collaboration.capability to deal with the extremely complex varietyof information in natural sciences and medicine;support in organizing relevant, current information.vastly increased capacity to accommodate rates ofmany gigabits per second.potentially rapid advancement portended by breakthroughs in computationand neural science research.fimproved filtering and organizing of information in response to the wwwinformation glut. many graphical tools have capabilities to deal withspecial fonts and 16bit character sets. limited to òmajoró language pairsin the near term.objectoriented databases entering the market; massively parallelrepresentations (e.g., paradise at university of wisconsing). widespreaduse of electronic agents to assist research.new, erbiumbased systems expected to reduce power and improvereliability.h improved connectivity using undersea cables.iademetri psaltis and fai mok (1995), òholographic memories,ó scientific american, november:7076; praveen asthana and blair finkelstein (1995), òsuperdense optical storage,ó ieeespectrum, august:2531; robert f. service (1995), òpushing the data storage envelope,ó science, july 21:299300.bk.c. cole (1996), ònasaõs mission: think small,ó los angeles times, january 21:1.ca discussion of the increasing cost of semiconductor production capability is provided in g. dan hutcheson and jerry d. hutcheson (1996), òtechnology and economics in thesemiconductor industry,ó scientific american, 274 (1):5462.dchappell brown (1996), òelectron switching simplified,ó ee times, january 8:35.emems are nanoscale machines. applications include instrumentation within living tissue. see <http://mems.isi.edu/>.fr. colin johnson (1995), òmead envisions new design erañanalog and digital techniques to create a new ôart formõ,ó ee times.gdavid j. dewitt, (1994), òthe trend toward object oriented dbms,ó briefing to nasa. see <http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/oss/aisr/1994minutes.html>.hgeorge gilder (1997), òfiber keeps its promise,ó forbes asap, april 7:9094; and frank j. denniston and peter k. runge (1995), òthe glass necklace,ó ieee spectrum, october:2427.isee <http://www.teleport.com/~simoriah/scow/sub.htm> for more information on undersea cables and plans. also, at&t has announced support of òafrica one,ó a $1.9 billion projectintended to link coastal countries in africa.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology27application choices. each is discussed below, and their actual or potential effecton international scientific data exchange among the member countries of theorganisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd) is broadlycharacterized. the impact of these technical trends on access to scientific data indeveloping countries is also discussed.decreasing cost of computing and communicationsthe cost of owning and operating increasingly powerful computers hasdropped dramatically over the past several decades. todayõs personal computers, for example, offer the processing speed of workstations of fewer than 5 yearsago at a fraction of the cost. the availability of information technology productswith everincreasing computing, communication, and storage capability has contributed to the ubiquitous assimilation of computers into modern daily life, andcomplex applications taking advantage of continually improving computer performance have emerged. among other uses, information technology is beingapplied increasingly to product development, manufacturing, and distribution, aswell as to new financial services such as debit/credit transactions and investmentportfolio management.one effect of this phenomenon is an opportunity for òtechnology leapfroggingó: late entrants to the use of information technology can enjoy the immediateadvantage of lowcost systems, without having had to make earlier investmentsin more expensive and less capable technologies and then carry the burden ofdepreciation of that investment. modern computing technology is thus increasingly accessible to lowbudget endeavors as prices fall also to the press of massproduction and competition.2even though the pace of change can be daunting to information technologynewcomers, in general it should become easier and cheaper with time to obtaintechnology to participate in the global sharing of scientific information. in thecontext of the natural sciences, this means that scientists and other users indeveloping countries or in economically depressed regions such as those in eastern europe and the former soviet union are increasingly able to acquire newcomputing and communications tools for carrying out their work.enhanced capabilities for collecting scientific datathe natural sciences produce prodigious amounts of data. earth observationand weather systems lead the way, with the potential for collecting terabytes3 perday. the same trends in lowcost microelectronics that are fueling the information and network revolutions also are driving the development of lowcost sensors and (relatively) lowcost storage systems. major òbig scienceó efforts suchas the international geospherebiosphere programme (igbp) and the humangenome project involve the collection and distribution of large volumes of databits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28bits of powertable 2.2summary of technical trends affecting exchange of scientific data and informationtrenddescriptiondecreasing cost of computing andcommunications; òtechnologyleapfroggingóenhanced capabilities for collectingscientific and other dataincreasing exploitation of broadbandnetworks and emerging dominance of thevideo data type in networksadvent of digital wirelesscommunicationsfollowing mooreõs law, the cost of computing, data storage, and communication has fallen consistentlyfor more than 25 years. developing countries and the newly independent states of the former sovietunion have, in some cases, been able to acquire modern communications and computing equipment.new users have been able to avoid substantial capital expense and the burden of depreciation of thatinvestment.the collection power of their instruments enables major scientific enterprises such as the humangenome project, climate modeling, and satellite remote sensing studies to generate very large volumesof data.the investment in fiberoptic cable over the past two decades is increasingly being exploited to supportdemanding new applications with highcapacity or realtime delivery requirements (video, medicalimaging, largescale science). the entertainment industry and new applications such as videoteleconferencing, movies on demand, and interactive television have attracted substantial investment andwill be the dominant factors in the development of networks in the next 10 years. voicecommunication will require a minor share of telecommunications capacity.wireless networks are rapidly connecting the world in new ways, and at low cost. groundbasedwireless systems are creating modern infrastructure in cities that have had unreliable phone systemswith inadequate capacity. proposed satellite ventures will provide data and voice connections on aglobal basis.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology29shifting dominance in data networksfrom primarily science/defense tocommercial/entertainment applicationsincreasing facility in collaborative workincreasing capabilities for languageprocessingincreasing recognition of the importanceof standardsgrowing acceptance of a need forcooperation in monitoring andcontrolling network activityincreasing use of intranetsthe internet was developed to support advanced science and technology activities. recent changes (inparticular, the advent of world wide web browsers) have transformed the internet into a tool for a vastarray of both commercial and noncommercial applications (including shopping, entertainment,education, and general publication).teams of scientists (remote from each other and often in different countries) are able to work togetheron a project, facilitated by highperformance communication for active, realtime interaction with eachother using data and other information resources.machines using natural language processing techniques are helping to organize the vast amount ofinformation available in electronic form. new tools are providing transparent access (via rudimentarymachine translation) for speakers of the worldõs major languages.standards provide the means for interoperability and help to support competition and product evolution.recognition of the role of standards (whether de facto, industry driven, or supported by formal nationalor international bodies) has grown, further accelerating the acceptance and applications of standards.mechanisms have been built into authentication systems, retrieval systems, and networks to account forspecific activities of users and to support flexible billing systems. publickey encryption technology isincreasingly accepted as a means to protect data and authenticate users. this activity is being drivenprimarily by the needs of commercial users of the network.the use of dedicated networks, particularly among private firms, is growing.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30bits of powerand data products. other observational science and engineering projects4 involving largescale models, simulations, or sampling volumes also produce enormousquantities of data. nasaõs earth observing system (eos) is perhaps the bestknown example of a highvolume, longterm scientific observational system.5eos is expected to collect a terabyte per day of satellite sensor data by thebeginning of the next century.the desire to collect, manage, and preserve scientific information alwaysappears to exceed the financial and technical capabilities to do so, even in thewealthiest nations. scientific communities must organize themselves better toselect information for acquisition and for retention.advent of digital wireless communicationswireless communications received a major boost from the effort to developmobile communications systems in the united states. interest and investmentalso have been stimulated by the possibility of creating competition in localtelephone service, heretofore a 100year monopoly. moreover, the end of thecold war has forced aerospace companies to seek new markets for satellitetechnology, including directbroadcast television and satellitebased cellular telephony. wireless communications links are being installed worldwide, enablingmobile communicationñand, for developing countries and other nations withhistorically weak telecommunications infrastructure and rapid growth, avoidanceof much of the capital cost of a wired communication infrastructure. new competition will drive down the cost of telephony and offer new applications. videobroadcast from space or from fixed terrestrial sites may offer new ways to deliverdata in interactive communications systems.increasing exploitation of broadband networks and capabilities fortransmission of video datacommercial providers believe that new applications such as videoconferencing, interactive television, and the ability to access movies on demandfrom a large archive will be the dominant factors in the development of networksover the next 10 years. voice communications will require an ever smaller shareof telecommunications capacity.the widely discussed convergence of personal computers and television hasbeen accelerated through the widespread licensing of new tools for interactiveworld wide web (www) applications and through emerging standards by whichcable television companies can provide highspeed internet access. much of thisactivity is driven by the goal of providing interactive access to large video databases in òreal timeó (at least 1 megabit per second).new, higherbandwidth protocols such as the highperformance parallel interface (hippi), the first gigabitpersecond standard begun at los alamos nabits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology31tional laboratories in the early 1990s, and the mbone (a virtual multicast backbone network for delivery of audio and rudimentary realtime video across theinternet) are being developed. in the short term, however, the impact of highbandwidth applications will be negative (especially for highdatarate users inoecd countries), since the need for higher bandwidth has already been outpacing bandwidth improvements, both on major backbone networks and on bridgesbetween them (see the section below titled òspecific technical concernsó).shifting dominance in data networksthe international public infrastructure for data communications is builtaround the internet. originally developed in the united states by the departmentof defense, the national science foundation, and other agencies to support scientific and technical collaboration,6 the internet now serves a much wider rangeof purposes. in recent years, it has become a highvisibility source of entertainment as well as an indispensable tool for many commercial and noncommercialapplications (e.g., catalog sales, news, social interaction, dissemination of company and product information). advertisers use the internet to promote themselves and their wares as òhigh techó and, moreover, view the current demographics of internet users (who have disposable incomes that are typically muchhigher than average) as extremely favorable.in 1995, the total number of commercial (ò.comó) sites on the internet grewto exceed the number of educational and government sites for the first time, andthis continues to be the sector of most rapid growth. for example, the percentageof web sites on the internet running from the ò.comó domain in the united statesincreased from 1.5 percent in june 1993 to 50 percent in january 1996.7this trend toward commercial use of the internet could have a significantimpact on the scientific community. what has been until now a governmentsubsidized activity could become a significant cost factor to scientists as networks become privatized. further, the scientific community originally played amajor role in developing the technologies and standards for the internet, but thisis no longer the case. scientific activity will have to follow (and potentiallybenefit from or suffer because of) the standards and pace set by others.increasing technical support for collaborative workscientists are increasingly aware of the importance of information technologies that facilitate collaborative work. the electronic messaging capabilities ofoperating systems used widely in the context of the arpanet and in private,commercial messaging systems, as well as text retrieval systems such as ibmõsstairs, system development corporationõs orbit, nasaõs recon,battelleõs basis, and the work at cornell university by gerard salton onsmart, provided much of the early technical framework for knowledge manbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32bits of poweragement and sharing. in recent years, electronic mail (email) systems, mailinglists, and bulletin boards have enabled rapid information sharing among groupsof people distributed throughout the world. other commercially available computerbased tools and technologies have enhanced collaborative work by facilitating cooperative research involving, for example, the use of remote instruments, and electronic data publishing that speeds the dissemination of researchresults.8 indeed, the success of many complex scientific investigations now ispredicated on bringing the capabilities of diverse researchers from multiple institutions together with stateoftheart instruments. in addition to the purely technical issues raised by these requirements, however, the research agenda for creating such òcollaboratoriesó must address fundamental psychosocial questions.9desktop video conferencing is a next logical step in the use of collaborativetools and may be as widely available within 10 years as email is currently,provided that adequate bandwidth can be supplied. users can now obtain rudimentary desktop video conferencing systems for as little as $100 using the cuseeme software from cornell university;10such systems provide crude servicetoday but offer great promise. the internet engineering task force (ietf) andseveral universities are using the mbone to broadcast symposia and conferenceevents worldwide.11 video conferencing systems based on integrated servicesdigital network (isdn) services and asynchronous transfer mode (atm) are nowavailable commercially, offering highquality images and advanced applicationsharing features.12 òplain oldó telephone service (pots)based video conferencing is expected to be available with the next release of major pc operatingsystems.the low cost of desktop video conferencing equipment and the ability tooperate over a variety of media types will enable scientists who have access tothese technologies to communicate more readily. these types of technologiescan help improve the efficiency of scientific fieldwork, especially in remoteareas, but only if they are supported by links with sufficiently high bandwidth.investment in commercial products that support information sharing andworkflow has accelerated as vendors recognize the importance of multiuser support to acquiring and sustaining market share.growing capabilities for natural language processingnatural language processing has been an active branch of artificial intelligence for decades. recent approaches and products have significantly improvedautomated document subject classification.13 in addition, the internet has greatlyincreased interest in capabilities for indexing and locating knowledge, thus contributing to the rapid growth of the text retrieval industry. users can now gainmore rapid access to a wider base of scientific information.14 moreover, numerousproducts (e.g., fulcrum, context, limbex, inquizit, excaliber, excite, systran) andservices (e.g., digital equipmentõs alta vista, yahoo, lycos, dejanews, infoseek)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology33are now using natural language processing capabilities to help organize information. more advanced products from the u.s. governmentõs tipster project arematuring for òinformation robotó (òknowbotó) applications, such as agentbasedinformation gathering, data overload filtering, and extracting key facts from rawtext. these new tools accelerate work by reducing the volume of information thatneeds to be evaluated.slow but steady advances in machine translation are already beginning toproduce acceptable levels of quality for some applications. new applications inhandwriting and voice recognition as well as voice synthesis promise to bring theworldõs information resources within reach of many who previously had beenexcluded because of language differences or disability. the development of newlanguageprocessing capabilities is increasingly important as the historical dominance of english in data networks gives way to multilingual communications.the ability to perform automated language translation, though still crude,facilitates global data and information access by helping users with native languages other than english to participate in scientific activities. although currentinvestment is limited to a small number of the languages most widely used forpolitical and economic purposes (e.g., english, french, chinese, japanese, spanish,russian, german), advancing techniques in language processing and computerpower will make extension to new language domains less costly and time consuming. some databases, such as the european dictionaire automatique, have beendeveloped explicitly to facilitate machine translation and semantic analysis.increasing recognition of the importance of standardsstandards play a major role in the evolution of telecommunication networksbecause of the importance of interoperability of these networks, which also mustprovide for continuous paths for improvement without disruption of existinginfrastructure. in computing, vendors put substantial effort into proprietary approaches to protect market share. but the u.s. governmentõs championing ofòopen systemsó and the portable operating system interface for computer environments (posix) standards has allowed a new class of vendor to emerge andcreate entirely new market forces with many suppliers in every niche of computing. ibmõs decision to make the pc an open, standard product provided anothermajor force toward standardization in computing. standards for products and forthe representation of information have advanced rapidly over the last decade.industry standards such as transmission control protocol/internet protocol (tcp/ip), simple message transfer protocol (smtp), simple network managementprotocol (snmp), x.400, standard generalized markup language/hypertextmarkup language (sgml/html), and easytouse browser products such asnetscape and mosaic were necessary for the rapid expansion of the internet.companies still use proprietary approaches to gain shortterm market advantages,bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34bits of poweroften with the hope that their products will become the standard (e.g., microsoftõsole). sunõs java language is an interesting example of a companysponsoredeffort that is becoming a standard through rapid expansion of licensing agreements.the marketplace today often converges rapidly on one or a few standards, thestandard for a highdensity cd/rom (and, more recently, digital versatile disks)being an excellent example.15 the music and entertainment community realizedthat competing standards would risk an expensive competitive battle. other examples include, among many others, the widespread application of html.technical standards increase competition and product availability, while reducing price. the downside is that standards themselves evolve and can contribute to a kind of industrydriven obsolescence. also, when multiple standardsapply in the same area, buyers are forced to try to choose prospective winners andlosers (recall the battle for consumer support of the beta and vhs standards).within the scientific disciplines, there is increased attention to systeminteroperability in terms of both data and software. in the astronomy community,for example, the interchange of data has become fairly simple because of effective coordination in the united states and internationally. radio astronomersdeveloped a voluntary standard format for data interchange (the flexible imagetransport system; fits) that was widely adopted in the astronomy communityduring the 1980s. this standard is maintained by an international committee,with support from several organizations, including nasa. there are relatedstandard formats for planetary data, as well as a trend toward the developmentand adoption of a few comprehensive data analysis systems that could be usedwith a variety of types of astronomical data from different observatories andinstruments and different subdisciplines. sharing of analysis software and commercially developed computing tools among the different systems is encouraged.of course, the need for standards for effective data exchange is not confinedto telecommunications, computer languages, and storage media. even within anarrow discipline or subdiscipline, true data exchange with proper interpretationof numbers, symbols, words, and graphics depends on standards for data structures, database management systems, and even terminology.cooperation in monitoring and controlling of network activitythe rapid growth in networks over the last 15 years has led to the need forappropriate levels of cooperative monitoring and control. initial ad hoc activityin developing protocols such as snmp has given way to more elaborate standards and tools today. authentication systems, retrieval systems, and networkscan now account for specific activities of users and can support flexible billingsystems. publickey encryption technology is increasingly accepted as a meansof protecting data and authenticating users. such developments are being drivenby needs associated with the network as a market place.version 6 of the internet protocol (developed by ietf and often referred tobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology35as the internet protocol next generation)16 includes the necessary technicalcomponents to support security, authentication, delivery of multimedia, and thecontinuing growth of the internet. several implementations of the proposedstandard are now available.17 as with telephones, circuit and switch technologyreadily supports network control and accounting during connection creation andbreakdown. the atm forum18is leading much of the work in this area. theseinitiatives will help applications developers to implement the functions necessaryto make networks commercially viable.the functionality provided by finegrain network control will support additional penetration of network equipment and services into the market, whichshould in turn drive down equipment costs and provide an infrastructure to support community services such as network access to the public libraries. thetechnology also can be used to protect proprietary information and allow publishers and others to make better use of the internet.increasing use of intranetstools for searching and creating html pages, internetworking hardware(e.g., routers), and strong dependency on electronic mail have supported the rapidgrowth within corporations of private networks known as intranets. these networks provide reliable service, highperformance access, and information protection not afforded by the public internet. today, sales are brisk for intranetproducts such as browsers, servers, and search engines for internal corporateapplications. a highprofile example is the hewlett packard intranet, which linksmore than 110,000 pcs and workstations and transfers over 5 terabytes of dataper month. hewlett packard also supports public bulletin boards with companyor product information that dispense over 15 terabytes of data per month.19the interest in intranets is also evident in initiatives to support priority research and education needs. prominent among these is the internet ii project,which initially is connecting approximately 100 universities over a private, reserved backbone with 622mbps links.20 this type of network could be usedmore broadly by the scientific community and extended to reach internationalpartners to solve specific needs for bandwidth and for realtime control.specific technical concernstable 2.3 summarizes six major technical barriers to the international transfer of scientific data and information within the context of the trends discussedabove. these are cases in which the trend, while generally favorable, produces anegative consequence or side effect.internet congestion becoming a serious problem21the scientific and technical community once dominated the internet andbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36bits of powercollectively dictated its priorities and use. today, the network is available for awide range of activities, which sometimes significantly reduce or block access byscientists. even scientific events, such as the shoemakerlevy cometõs crashinto jupiter, have caused such high lay public interest and associated highvolume transfer of images that scientific access to research resources has been impeded or blocked. requirements for carrying out scientific research, the resultsof which are often at the service of the world community on an urgent basis, noware not being served with responsive mechanisms that give them priority.table 2.3summary of major technical barriers to international transferof scientific data and informationconcernimpactinternet congestion isbecoming a serious problem.description and indexing ofdata are inadequate to supporttheir use by others.electronic storage media havelimited life spans.tools for authentication andprivacy are immature. dataand networks are vulnerable.scientific requirements forcomputer technology could beleft unsatisfied by prioritysupport for other larger marketneeds (e.g., entertainment andbusiness).few international networkssupport realtime data.scientific activities are disrupted through lack of controlof network capacity. highbandwidth applications areimpeded or blocked, and urgent communications areslowed.data must be transformed, recomputed. data cannot belocated, and there is potential for error. cost and delay inperforming scientific work are generally increased.data are lost or rendered unusable in the absence of longterm commitments for transferring them to new media ona regularly scheduled basis.valuable assets (data and infrastructure) could be lost orcorrupted; intellectual integrity could be compromised. iftools depend on restricted (for export) encryptiontechnology, barriers to free, protected exchange ofinformation could emerge. encryption technology fordigital identification, authentication, and privacysafeguards might remain inconsistent from country tocountry, limiting information commerce. alternatively,data would remain unprotected.increased expense to scientists for equipment specificallytailored to research needs (e.g., supercomputers). there isthe risk that specific requirements will not be met.lack of support for conferencing and collaborative work,large file transfer, or shared scientific infrastructure.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology37generally, the rate of international exchange of scientific information hasrisen steadily as the means to carry out such exchange have improved. nowscientists on different continents commonly share ideas and data daily, or evenhourly. a researcher in one country can remotely connect to a computer in adifferent country to perform calculations and data analyses and sometimes complete experiments. when linking to a remote computer, one expectsñor at leasthopesñto transfer information between the local and remote computers at approximately the rate at which data move in the local computer alone. as theinternet developed in its first decade, it usually operated in this way.but as the internetõs popularity and use have grown, more people are expecting to get instantaneous service for all their activities. these include using theweb as well as linking to a distant site to extract data of all sorts (from accumulated electronic mail to numerical tables to animations) or to run programs andobtain the results remotely. as the speed and efficiency of computers haveimproved, scientists using them have generated and have expected to obtain evermore complex kinds of data. images, particularly animations, require extremelylarge data sets if they are to be transmitted electronically.22 in fact, the burgeoning interest in images and video animation has led to a dramatic increase in theamount of information people want to transmit over the internet, especially asmore people use the web and as the web serves more commercial and entertainment functions.this explosion of use has strained the carrying capacity of the internet,particularly for many of the most heavily used intercontinental links.23 directtransatlantic links between the united states and germany, for example, functioned virtually as efficiently as local area networks until sometime in 1993 or1994. then delays began to occur at about 12:00 or 1:00 p.m. gmt when userson both sides of the atlantic are active. the delays have grown ever longer, ashas the time period during which delays occur, so that now, from about 8:00 a.m.until midnight gmt, delays can be so lengthy that the user is òtimed offó by thesystem in the middle of a (delayed) transactionñnot once, but many times. thisproblem apparently can occur even with data exchanges such as email, whichcomputers transmit whenever the lines are open. in nations with very limitednetwork or gateway facilities, email may take a day or more to be transmitted toor from some countries. since the inception of this study network congestion anddelays have become severe.if the internet were to become saturated, it would be rendered ineffective asa means of transmitting scientific information directly. although there are several satellite and undersea fiberoptic cable systems currently being developedthat may be expected to supply sufficient transmission capacity worldwide, somenearterm remedies will be necessary to ensure that scientists and others withprofessional needs will be able to continue using the internet with at least moderate efficiency, until the new systems become operational.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38bits of powerinadequate description and indexing of dataresponses to the committeeõs òinquiry to interested partiesó (see appendix d)revealed the lack of common representations for data to be the primary technicalchallenge for international scientific exchange. interdisciplinary, collaborative workbuilds on shared understanding and agreement on terminology. standards forrepresentation of data, including units and formats, as well as description (metadata),are vital. effective directories and navigation tools are needed to help scientistslocate relevant information. shared understanding of the operation of algorithms isimportant to the application of information. this understanding must also evolvecoherently over time as algorithms, standards, and collection instruments are developed. for all scientists, the lack of shared understanding can lead to duplicatedeffort, additional work to ònormalizeó data, or limited capability to integrate research results. in extreme cases, information collectors duplicate each otherõsinformation, because they have no a priori agreement on effective data representations. problems of data compatibility and integration, even within the united statesalone, were reviewed in some detail in a 1987 codata conference from threedifferent perspectives: government, geography, and technology.24rapid obsolescence of electronic storage mediathe media on which scientific data are stored are vulnerable to decay andobsolescence. the standard lifetime of a particular disk or tape appears to be lessthan a decade; the data stored on these media must be copied or refreshed atregular intervals. a recent national research council study25discussed the effects and implications of longterm commitments in scientific data management,with respect to both selection of data for longterm retention and media obsolescence. further (and paradoxically), data collected before the advent of computersand stored on òarchival mediaó (paper) must be put into electronic form to beused widely and effectively today. such data can add enormous value to researchefforts, particularly for studies examining longterm trends, but are costly totransform.26valuable records may fail to be transferred to new media or transformed toelectronic form because of a lack of resources (funds or appropriate equipment)or lack of motivation. scientists without longterm support commitments willface the discouraging fate of losing precious data assets over the long term. withthe extraordinary volumes of data being collected, transferring data to new mediaand managing highvalue data sets for active use will increasingly challenge thescientific community, particularly since the time frames for rescuing old, deteriorating data are frequently quite short. examples include scientific publicationsprinted on highacid paper and data sets stored on magnetic tapes that are crumbling, some after only a score of years.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology39vulnerability of electronic data networkssome scientific data must be treated with special care to ensure their dissemination only within a prescribed community (e.g., to protect the privacy ofindividuals, to allow for verification of results, or to maintain the proprietaryadvantage of a private enterprise). today, tools for authentication and for protecting privacy of data are difficult to use, do not follow widespread standards,and, in some cases, involve encryption technologies that cannot be universallydistributed. such tools, however, can help researchers to maintain control overthe research environment. because effective use of authentication and privacymeasures involves the collaborative effort of numerous scientists or institutions,òtopdownó leadership in standards setting across the scientific community mayhelp speed the acceptance and use of emerging tools designed primarily forelectronic commerce on the internet.beyond the basic issue of protecting information privacy and integrity, thescientific community must prepare itself for disruptions of basic network andcomputing infrastructure. the complexity of software and networks, the largenumber of users, the dynamic changes in staff, and the relative sophistication ofprogrammers worldwide leave networks vulnerable to attack and catastrophicaccidents. we already have experienced largescale disruption of the internetand telephone systems. international scientific data collection and disseminationactivities are similarly vulnerable to both intentional and unintentional disruptions. a proper balance thus needs to be maintained between open, but vulnerable, access and secure, but not overly rigid, control.scientific requirements for computer hardware potentially unmetthe demands of entertainment (in particular, interactive multimedia, animation creation, and delivery of large numbers of simultaneous video channels) aredriving the frontiers of computer and communications technology. it is possiblethat computers and networks will be optimized for entertainment applications,making it difficult for some scientific endeavors to have access to costeffectivecomputer power. for example, a computer optimized for video streaming mightnot be suitable for running a large chemical model or ocean simulation. in thepast, scientific applicationsñand funding for the advanced computers to supportthemñhave driven computer design. advances such as floating point and vectoraccelerators, massively parallel computers, gigabit networks, largevolume storage media, and visualization software were developed because of scientific needs.continued funding on an international basis for research leading to these kinds ofadvances is necessary if vendors are to respond to the technical needs of science.the goal is to incorporate advanced features for scientists within commerciallyavailable products.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40bits of powerlack of sufficient international realtime data networksscientists increasingly need realtime communications capabilities for collaborative scientific activities and optimal use of major experimental and observational facilities. advanced networking and computing services can make largefile transfers practical and provide for remote access to (and control of) largescale scientific and medical facilities. however, even with the growth of newtelecommunications capacity, the availability of highbandwidth circuits to dataacquisition and analysis sites and to the desktop will continue to lag behinddemand. also, the internet protocols that are now in wide use do not effectivelysupport timesynchronized activity. circuits to the developing countries will belimited to the relatively low speeds of voice circuits until new (submarine andextension fiber) cable connects all corners of the world and affordable capacitybecomes available. wireless communication systems will operate at lower speedthan comparable wired services for the most costeffective use of spectrum. insome countries the existence of outmoded governmentoperated facilities couldimpede the development of new, highspeed or alternativecapacity links becausegovernmentrun post, telephone, and telegraph ministries (ptts) are used tosubsidize nontelecommunication governmental activities and maintain monopolistic control over access and use.data access issues in developing countriesalthough at first sight, the gap between the òhavesó and òhave notsó foraccess to scientific data and information seems to widen each day, the longtermoutlook for such access in developing countries is far better than it was before theadvent of electronic communications, primarily because the cost of the technology continues to decline even as the capabilities improve. it is potentially morecosteffective to buy computers, networks, and mirror sites of the libraries anddata centers in developed countries than to try to maintain autonomous librarieswith uptodate collections of books, journals, and data compilations.as scientists in developing nations obtain computers with connections tonetworks linking them to international collections of scientific information, theygreatly increase their research capabilities. lowcost computers and modernsoftware approaches are available to help developing countries òleapfrogó multiple generations of equipment and approaches. satellite ventures are planned toprovide worldwide access for short messages, voice telephony, and broadbanddigital links.27 directbroadcast television also is having an impact by offeringhundreds of channels of highquality video to a growing percentage of the worldõspopulation.many of the developing countries may soon be expected to be the beneficiaries of a broadly distributed modern telecommunications infrastructure. scientific efforts in these countries will be supported, even in remote areas. forbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology41example, the planned teledesic wideband satellite communications system haspledged to give excess capacity to developing countries for a variety of uses,including applications in education, science, and medicine.28 direct broadcasttelevision could serve to raise education levels. the anticipated low cost ofdesktop video conferencing equipment and the ability to communicate with multimedia functions, as described above, can enable scientists and others in the lessdeveloped countries to participate more fully in global scientific research, subjectto the availability of highbandwidth transmission capabilities and the mitigationof local cost barriers. hardware and software for electronic communication inthe sciences therefore offer particularly high leverage for return on investment inforeign aid to developing nations.unfortunately, many of these technologies are not yet widely available in themost developed nations, much less in the developing countries. for example,roughly half the nations now served by some form of internet connection haveaccess only to electronic mail.29 even in those countries with at least one fullservice internet node, the proportion of users actually accessing all services islow. in addition, as noted throughout this report, full internet service does notautomatically mean full access to information.for example, the university of chile has highspeed internet service. twocomponents of the u.s. national institutes of healthñthe national library ofmedicine and the national cancer instituteñprovide chilean researchers withexcellent internet access to abstracts from journals through outreach programs.although requests for search results are answered quickly, the journals themselves usually are not in the chilean libraries. thus the researchers frequentlymust wait for months to receive the fulltext reprints of published papers. thissituation is improving, however, and the system will become truly effective withfulltext online access to journals. nevertheless, most scientists in less developed nations now have little or no access to the internet and the world wide weband still must depend on inadequate library facilities for fulltext access to scientific data and literature.there are various other reasons for low internet usage in developing nations,aside from the lack of infrastructure. these include internal institutional policiesstipulating the placement of computers in administrative offices rather than inlaboratories, governmental restrictions on the free flow of information, poorquality telecommunications systems, and, most commonly, lack of funds for useof whatever communications infrastructure does exist. the costs of telephoneservices, for example, generally bear an inverse relationship to the per capitaincome of a country. international calls that cost $1.00 when originating in theunited states frequently cost many times that when originating in a less developed country or a country where the tariffs are a general source of revenue for thegovernment. for example, a call from nairobi or moscow to washington, d.c.,can cost seven times as much as the same call originating in washington, with thehigher costs often being borne by those least able to afford them.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42bits of powervarious strategies can help mitigate these differences or eliminate the enduserõs cost entirely. the internet itself, by institutionalizing communicationsfacilities, can make the costs transparent to the end user. however, persons indeveloping nations often must limit their internet use or drop their subscriptionsto list servers because of cost.30 one biologist in indonesia who dropped hissubscription observed that the communication costs per month were considerablymore than his salary and that his institution was passing these costs on to the endusers. a number of kenyan scientists have obtained calling cards from u.s.providers and are directly dialing the united states. the billing is to their kenyanaddress. people in other countries also have adopted this strategy.one current approach to reducing communication costs in african countries isthe use of the messageforwarding fidonet system, a lowcost network of individual computerized bulletin board services that uses regular dialup telephonelines and highspeed modems to transfer electronic messages.31 although most ofafrica currently lacks direct tcp/ip internet and www connections,32 individuals can send and receive electronic mail via the fidonet service of the associationfor progressive communications, a u.s. nongovernmental organization dedicatedto bringing lowcost communications to developing nations throughout the world.33on other continents, the situation is somewhat better with respect to directinternet access. however, even where internet connections do exist, access stilltends to be spotty in all but the most prestigious or centrally located institutions.for scientists in developing countries, another difficulty is competition foraccess to large remote data sets, which is made even more difficult by the increasing volume of data, particularly from new observational sensors. in addition,given the vast amount of data being collected, small data sets that they mightcontribute may be viewed as less important, limiting the ways in which researchers in the developing countries can participate in the scientific community. oneresult of such disparities is the perception by some scientists in developing countries that the oecd countries take information but seldom return it on an equitable basis.currently, developing countries severely lag the oecd countries in bandwidth for emerging applications.34 if the majority of communication in developing countries is wireless, end users may not be able to take advantage of the morebandwidthintensive applications. moreover, as noted above, problems ariseeven after advanced communication capabilities are installed. transoceanic andintercontinental communication and exchange of scientific information must compete with all the other electronic trafficñincreasingly business and entertainment. unless bandwidth is improved, the òinformation superhighwayó becomesthe electronic equivalent of many urban highways during rush hour. furthermore, in many of the developing nations, the decreasing costs and increasingbandwidths that might be available generally are not passed on to the scientificend user by the government communications monopolies.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology43recommendations on issues ininformation technologybased on the areas of concern discussed above, the committee makes thefollowing recommendations for improving technical support for the internationalflow of scientific data and information.1.the principal scientific societies and the internet engineering task force(ietf) should begin a longterm planning effort to assess the carrying capacityand distribution capability of the internet, using projections of storage andtransmission capacity and of demand and taking into account the next generationof internet protocols. scientific societies should encourage their publicationcommittees to maintain contact with the ietf and keep their members abreast ofadvances in technologies useful for scientific information management. oneoption that science societies and government science agencies should evaluate isthe creation of dedicated international science networks, such as the internet iinow being developed.2.to improve the technical organization and management of scientificdata, the scientific community, through the government science agencies, professional societies, and the actions of individual scientists, should do thefollowing:a.work with the information and computer science communities toincrease their involvement in scientific information management;b.support computer science research in database technology, particularlyto strengthen standards for selfdescribing data representations, efficientstorage of large data sets, and integration of standards for configurationmanagement;c.improve science education and the reward system in the area of scientificdata management. provide incentives and recognition for papers dealing withdata representation standards, archiving strategies, data set creation, data evaluation, data directories, and service to users.d.encourage the funding of data compilation and evaluation projects,and of data rescue efforts for important data sets in transient or obsoleteforms, especially by scientists in developing countries where substantialcadres of highly educated scientists exist who are underemployed and relatively inexpensive to support.3.u.s. government science agencies, working with their counterparts inother nations, should improve data authentication and apply security safeguardsmore vigorously. they should implement the means to protect data, includingsafe storage of data copies, and support policies that make it easier to exchangeencryption technology.35bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44bits of powergovernment science agencies also should continue funding for research anddevelopment in information technologies that are important to the pursuit ofscience. examples include highperformance computing and communications,advanced database technology, higherdensity storage media, and basic researchin microelectronics.4.a consortium of intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizationsconcerned with the international exchange of scientific data and informationñincluding the international telecommunications union, the world bank, the u.n.environment programme, u.n. industrial development organization, u.n.commission on economic development, and other specialized agencies of theunited nations, as well as the international council of scientific unionsñshouldmount a global effort to reduce telecommunications tariffs to scientists in developingcountries through differential pricing or direct subsidy. this reduction in tariffswould have to be coupled with more timely access to new telephone lines in somecountries. the result would be increasing rates of scientific data transfer in thedeveloping countries and a significant improvement in their research capabilitiesand economic development.5.foreign aid to developing countries in the form of computers, computernetworks, and associated software, coupled with the training and resourcesnecessary to operate and maintain those technologies, should be given high priority,on the basis of the potential for longterm socioeconomic returns. thecommunication systems must have adequate carrying capacity to meet growingdemand.notes1.mooreõs law, named for intel founder gordon moore, predicts that the density of microprocessors will double every 18 months, thus halving the price. the byproduct of this longlivedphenomenon has been the doubling of processor speed in the same 18month period. mooreõsòlawó is in fact a representation of the speed of change of the microelectronics industry overthe last 20 years. it is expected to continue to apply to technology change for at least the next 5to 10 years. see ashley dunn (1996), òthe demise of mooreõs law signals the digitalfrontierõs end,ó new york times, august 14, at <http://www.nytimes./com/library/cyber/surf/0814surf. html>. see also <http://wwwuseast.intel.com/product/tech briefs/manbnch.html>.2.see brian grimes (1995), òmodeling and forecasting the information sciences,ó knowledgescience institute, university of calgary, at <http://ksi.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/articles/bretam/infsci/> for a discussion of exponential change in the performance of these technologies and itsimpact.3.one terabyte is 1012 bytes, or 1,000 gigabytes. it is roughly the equivalent of 40,000 4drawerfiles holding 500 million pages of paper documents.4.oryx energy co. estimates that in petroleum prospecting a threedimensional seismic survey ofa 3squaremile block in the gulf of mexico involved hundreds of gigabits of data, requiringthree months of supercomputer time to digest. see j. dubashi (1990), òimages and imaginations,ó financial world, 24 (july):8.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trends and issues in information technology455.see nasaõs eos project science home page at <http://eospso.gsfc.nasa.gov/> for additionalinformation and related sites.6.for a description of the origin of the internet, see vinton cerf (1996), òcomputer networking:global infrastructure drive for the 21st century,ó on the internet, 1(5):1827.7.see matthew gray of the massachusetts institute of technology (1996), òweb growth summary,ó at <http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/mkgray/net/webgrowthsummary.html>.8.national research council (1993), national collaboratories: applying information technology for scientific research, computer science and telecommunications board, national academy press, washington, d.c.9.richard t. kouzes, james d. myers, and william a. wulf (1996), òcollaboratories: doingscience on the internet,ó ieee computer, 29(8):4046.10.see the cornell university cusee me welcome page at <http://cuseeme.cornell.edu>.11.see the mbone information web home page, sponsored by icast communication, inc., at<http://www.best.com/~prince/techinfo/mbone.html>.12.see the bits scout software home page at <http://www.bitscout.com/>.13.kenneth w. church and lisa f. rau (1995), òcommercial applications of natural languageprocessing,ó communications of the acm, november:7179. see also the home page of theamerican society for information science at <http://www.asis.org>.14.a recent prototype is the net advance of physics, a master hierarchical index of online reviewarticles in physics. it is hoped that this free service eventually will be expanded to include theentire content of the physics eprint archives (see science 272 (1996):1516).15.a technology going beyond cdrom is hdrom (high densityread only memory), originallydeveloped at los alamos national laboratory, which gets much greater storage density thanconventional cdroms at a fraction of the cost. it uses an ion beam to etch pins of stainlesssteel, iridium, or other similarly longlasting materials. the etching is done in a vacuum, whichallows the high densities, but the reading can be done in air. it is now in the process of commercialization. the dvd standard is being supported by sony and toshiba. see <http://www.islandtel.com/newsbytes/headline/dvddisputeen/dsincompro350.html>.16.see the ip next generation (ipng) home page, developed by robert hinden of ipsilon networks, inc., at <http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/ipngmain.html>.17.see the implementations ipng home page at <http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/ipngimplementations.html>.18.see the atm forum communications home page developed by raj jainõs group at ohio stateuniversity in columbus, ohio, at <http://www.cis.ohiostate.edu/~jain/atmforum.htm>.19.caryn gillooly (1996), òblazing a trail in intranet usage,ó information week (september 9):98102; additional information on intranet products can be found on the internet design magazine home page at <http://www.innergy.com>.20.see white house press release, òbackground on clintongore administrationõs nextgeneration internet initiative,ó office of the press secretary, october 10, 1996, washington, d.c.21.the economic aspects of internet congestion are discussed in chapter 4 in the section titledòelectronic access and internet congestion.ó22.text is far less demanding; for example, the 20volume oxford english dictionary is availablenow as a single cdrom. however, storing a fulllength movie on a single cdrom will befeasible only when the new, highdensity cds, with much greater storage capacity than thecurrent variety, become available.23.see <http://www.nlanr.net/isma/report/#background> for the results of the nsfsponsoredworkshop on internetstatistics measurement and analysis; also the corporation for nationalresearch initiativesõ home page at <http://www.cnri.reston.va.us>, and òthe interminablenet,óthe economist, february 3, 1996, pp. 7071.24.l.j. allison, and r.j. olson, eds. (1988), piecing the puzzle together: a conference on integrating data for decision making, u.s. national committee for codata, integrated databits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46bits of powerusers workshop, national governors council, published by the national governors association, washington, dc: 264 pp. plus appendices. for a more recent study regarding the barriersand issues inherent in data integration efforts, see national research council (1995), findingthe forest in the trees: the challenge of combining diverse environmental data, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.25.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data on our physical universe: anew strategy for archiving the nationõs scientific information resources, national academypress, washington, d.c.26.w. grattidge, j.h. westbrook, c. brown, and w.b. novinger (1987), òa versatile data capture system for archival graphics and text,ó computer handling and dissemination of data,ed. p.s. glaeser, elsevier science publishers b.v. (north holland), codata; w. grattidge,w.b. lund, and j.h. westbrook (1990), òa data capture system for printed tabular data,óproc. 11th intõl codata conf.: scientific and technical data in a new era, p.s. glaeser, ed.,hemisphere press, karlsruhe, frg, 302306; w. grattidge, w.b. lund, and j.h. westbrook(1992), òproblems of interpretation and representation in the computerization of a printedreference work on materials data,ó computerization and networking of materials databases,vol. 3, astm stp 1140, thomas l. barry and keith w. reynard, eds., american society fortesting and materials, philadelphia.27.see the norwegian university of science and technology department of computer systemshome page at <http://www.idt.unit.no/>.28.patrick seitz (1995), òfirms battle for spectrum,ó space news, november 27:1.29.international internet connectivity levels improve constantly and cannot be generalized about.for a continuously updated report, see the internet connecting chart, copyright by larrylandweber 1995, at <http://www.infopro.spb.su:8000/info/internet/tableeng.html>. see alsothe international email accessibility home page compiled by oliver m.j. crepinleblond at<http://www.ee.ic.ac.uk/misc/countrycodes.html>; email access information is based on international organization for standardization (iso) standard 3166 names. for a survey ofinternational internet and k12 connectivity done by the nasa science internet program,compiled by antony villasenor, see <http://nic.nasa.gov/ni/survey/survey.html>.30.see, generally, the series of articles in òeye on emerging nationsó in on the internet, theinternet society, reston, va.31.national research council (1996), bridge builders: african experiences with information andcommunication technology, national academy press, washington, d.c. see also the africanacademy of sciences/american association for the advancement of science (1993), electronic networking in africa, aaas, washington, d.c.32.see the u.s. agency for international developmentõs africa link home page at <http://www.info.usaid.gov/alnk/connect/conmap.html> for a detailed description of internet and othertypes of network connectivity on the african continent.33.see <http://www.apc.org/about.html> for more information about the activities of the association for progressive communications in africa and other regions of the world.34.see trudy bell, john adam, and sue lowe (1996), òcommunications,ó ieee spectrum (january):40.35.see national research council (1996), cryptographyõs role in securing the information society, computer science and telecommunications board, national academy press, washington,d.c.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues474735scientific issues in the internationalexchange of data in the natural sciencesscience is the process and the product of discovering the cumulative body ofknowledge and understanding through which we humans comprehend the tangible universe. its cumulative nature is a key to the uniqueness of the knowledgegained in the natural sciences. this knowledge is sometimes reorganized at aprofound conceptual level when a field undergoes a shift of paradigmñfor example, the change from the caloric fluid to the kinetic theory of heat or from thecontinuum of classical mechanics to the discreteness and duality of quantummechanics. yet the facts of science and the links among them remain; we maychange the way we interpret those links, but the body of scientific data continuesto accumulate.data in science are like bricks, and the theoretical concepts are the mortarthat connects them to give a subject its structure. each new bit of data plays apart: it may be uncovered in efforts to test a hypothesis, estimated from previousinformation, or collected in observations, experiments, or computations. as anobserved or measured new piece of information, it becomes part of our base ofknowledge, to share, interpret, and reconcile with the data already in hand. scientists ask, òare these new data consistent with what we already know? are theyjust what we might have expected, or do they require us to question the results, torepeat the experiment, or to find a new interpretation that accounts for why thedata are what they are?ó when the scientific community resolves these questions, the new data become part of the foundation on which the next conjecturesand experimental plans build. at this stage, also, researchers begin to considerthe implications of the new data, both to strengthen and extend basic understanding in the natural sciences and to seek applications that may bring benefits tobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48bits of powersociety and progress in bettering the human condition. throughout this process,scientific data are the cumulative substance on which all of science builds.data in science are universalñthey have the same validity for scientistseverywhere. the atomic mass of iron, the structure of dna, and the amount ofrainfall in manaus in 1972 are facts independent of the political views of theiruser, the time at which we determine them (apart from the evolving, improvingaccuracy of the determinations), or the userõs location. their utility depends onthe precision and accuracy with which they are determined and the units we useto express them. a dna sequence or a nuclear cross section can be as importantto a researcher in novosibirsk as it is to another in pasadena. consequently,except in situations involving national security, the protection of individual privacy,1 or proprietary rights, scientists have developed an ethic of full and openexchange of data, within and across national boundaries. although infringements occasionally do occur, they typically generate community disapproval.full and open exchange of information is a fundamental tenet of basic sciencethat scientists regard as essential to optimizing their own work and that of theircolleagues, as well as to enabling the advance of science overall.2traditionally, scientific data were compilations in lists, tables, and booksñessentially all on paperñwhich circulated like all other scholarly information,through personal exchanges, subscriptions, and libraries. today, electronic handling of scientific information is becoming the norm. with this evolution hascome a dramatic increase in the international scope of scientific cooperation andexchange of information. while basic science has always been largely a collaborative activity that readily crossed national boundaries, electronic communicationhas made this cooperation much more informal, intimate, instantaneous, andcontinuous than ever before. consequently, scientific data now may flow between scientists in different parts of the world as if they were across the street.scientists have been, to a large extent, the creators of the means and theenvironment for the ethical code governing the open exchange of their data. thisis as true in the evolving electronic environment as it has been in the past. now,however, interests outside the scientific community are exerting forces on thatenvironment that could severely restrict this open exchange. scientists believethat restrictions on data access will slow the progress of science and significantlydiminish the potential benefits that science renders to society.an important consideration in any discussion of exchange of scientific dataconcerns the òmarketó in which scientists participate, and particularly what itsògoodsó and òreturnó are. scientists in academia and government are motivatedoverwhelmingly by the desire to generate ideas that influence the course ofscience. they want their papers to be read, so much so that they regularly paypage charges to have those papers published. traditional concepts of copyright,protection of intellectual property, and financial return to the creator of a writtenwork may apply to a scientist who writes a textbook, but become irrelevant to theresearcher publishing a paper in a scientific journal. publishers of such journals,bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues49sometimes including professional societies, adhere to traditional motivations forprotection of intellectual property and copyright. scientists are usually delightedwhen someone wants to photocopy their articles; their publishers are sometimesaghast at the same photocopying act. this tension is often overlooked in considerations of adapting to electronic exchange of scientific information. it becomesespecially important when one tries to bring economic and legal thinking to bearon the management of scientific data, and on the behavior and the system ofvalues of scientists. (for more detailed discussion on these issues, see chapters4 and 5.)this report focuses primarily on international access to scientific data forbasic research purposes. nevertheless, in some disciplines, such as meteorology,a significant part of the data is generated to serve the general public by makingpossible severe weather and flood warnings and associated weather prediction.in formulating policies for international data exchange, the need for data for theseapplications also must be taken into account. in this chapter the committeebroadly characterizes types of scientific data and their use in the laboratoryphysical sciences, astronomy and space sciences, earth sciences, and biologicalsciences; outlines some of the major data trends, opportunities, and challenges inthe natural sciences; discusses selected disciplinespecific issues; and describesproblems of access to data in less developed countries. the chapter concludeswith the committeeõs recommendations for steps to improve access to data in thenatural sciences worldwide.types of data and their use in different disciplinesthere are several ways to characterize scientific data: among others, byform, whether numerical, symbolic, still image, animation, or some other; by theway they were generated or gathered, that is, from experiment, observation, orsimulation; by level of quality; by the size or form of the databases that containthem; by the nature of the support for their generation or distribution, that is,public or private, national or international; and, of course, by subject. perhapsthe most obvious differentiation is according to the degree of refinement of dataalong the path from collection to publication. several linked levels of data can bedistinguished in this hierarchy, beginning with initially collected experimental orobservational data.in the laboratory sciences today, data at this first level are rarely raw readingsor counts. sophisticated means for gathering and manipulating such informationhave softened the concept of òprimaryó data. the computer mediating an experiment is likely to extract from several measurements some average of the totalsignal minus the background noise. frequently, the first data an experimentersees appear as a curve or a set of points that represents addition, subtraction, andaveraging of several kinds of measurements, all collected and manipulated electronically. while some of these data may be published as tables, most data at thisbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50bits of powerlevel have limited distribution. they are useful when shared among the participants in a large collaboration, for example, in a highenergy physics experiment.international distribution of data of this kind is normal practice, particularlyamong collaborating scientists.the second major level of data in the laboratory sciences is usually publishedscientific results based on collected data, sometimes including the data and sometimes only providing a pathway by which the data can be obtained. evaluateddata files, the next level in the hierarchy, are compilations of data from severalsources created when an òevaluatoró has worked to obtain the òbestó values of thetabulated quantities. such files are often broadly disseminated, sometimes injournals established for that purpose, such as the journal of physical and chemical reference data; increasingly, these files will be available electronically and,with hypertext, will be linked, so that anyone reading a manuscript will haveready access to online data files on which published results are based, just byclicking on the relevant figure or text. when data are structured or compiled in anorganized manner, whether in raw form or after thorough evaluation or processing, they become a database.in the observational sciences, scientific research leads to the generation ofdata that can be processed and interpreted at different levels of complexity.3typically, each level of processing adds value to the original, raw data by summarizing the original product, synthesizing a new product, or providing an interpretation of the original data. the processing of data leads to an inherent paradoxthat may not be readily apparent. the original unprocessed, or minimally processed, data are usually the most difficult to understand or use by anyone otherthan the expert primary user. with every successive level of processing, the datatend to become more understandable and better documented for the nonexpertuser. one might therefore assume that it is the most highly processed data thathave the greatest value for longterm preservation and international exchange, asin the case of the laboratory sciences, because they are more easily understood bya broader spectrum of potential users. in fact, just the opposite is usually the casefor observational data, because it is only with the original unprocessed data that itwill be possible to recreate all other levels of processed data and data products.to do so, however, requires preservation of the necessary information about theprocessing steps and ancillary data.another important way to characterize scientific data in general is by quality,as indicated by their degree of acceptance in the scientific community. òprepublicationó data bear no certification whatsoever. such data would, for example, be considered by most scientists to be inappropriate as legal evidence.data accepted for publication in a refereed journal carry a certification that they,and the text that accompanies them, contain no obvious error and are admissibletopics of scientific discourse. published data, however, are often challenged, andoccasionally the data or their interpretations prove erroneous. when they havebeen thoroughly validated, data become dogma. values of natural constants, tobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues51some number of decimal places, are firmly established in this way. steps towardconfirmation of the soccerball structure of the molecule c60 illustrate this progression in acceptance and endorsement of data and their interpretation. at firstit was conjectured, prior to publication; then the proposed structure was published and shown to be consistent with other evidence then available. when amethod appeared for preparing the substance in macroscopic quantities, newexperiments, notably xray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance, and infraredspectroscopy, gave unassailable proof that the molecule is indeed shaped like asoccer ball. since then, nobody would think of questioning that structure.particular uses of data and characteristics of disciplines in the natural sciences influence needs for and conditions affecting global access to information inthose areas of research. examples of successful international data exchangeactivities in each of these areas are given in appendix c.laboratory physical sciencesthe laboratory physical sciences comprise an interrelated set of disciplinesthat includes chemistry, materials science, physics, and the subdisciplines andapplications of each of these. the primary users of most of the data generatedand exchanged in these fields are other physical scientists, although data fromresearch in chemistry, materials science, and condensedmatter and polymer physics find heavy secondary use in manufacturing and engineering applications.recognition of potential new or changed applications often stimulates the generation of new data and concepts from basic science in these areas; the flow ofstimuli as well as data runs both ways, between applied and basic sides of thesesciences.the laboratory physical sciences generate data largely from experiments,simulations, or theoretical computations.4 (in the observational sciences, the datatypically describe single, unique events, such as the weather on a particular dayor the explosion of a supernova.) although experiments in the physical sciencescan be repeated, it is often the case that due to the size of the apparatus, the extentof the collaboration, the rarity or uniqueness of the test material, and the expenseinvolved, the results of a single experiment are adopted and exchanged.5 insteadof simply repeating experiments, scientists in these fields generally learn of a newadvance and quickly use it as a steppingstone to go beyond that advance, frequently by modifying the technique or the apparatus. in the case of less complexlaboratory research, scientists typically repeat the previous experiments, as muchto validate the new approach as to check the previous results. the researchresults and the underlying data from basic experimental research are not limitedby national boundaries. information presented in an international meeting, aseminar by a foreign visitor, or an electronically circulated preprint is at least aslikely as a new publication in an international journal to stimulate a new line ofwork. when scientists are engaged in international collaboration and exchangebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52bits of powerdata that are not yet ready for publication, the national boundaries separating thecollaborators are even more transparent.another characteristic of the physical sciences is associated with the established theoretical framework of many of the subdisciplines. the data derivedfrom the theoretical numerical simulations in many cases look like experimental data, and often are replicated. these simulations, particularly animations,may not be part of the conventional manuscripts that report the results, but thiskind of information is now exchanged globally on a variety of media. exchanging data from simulations is a process vulnerable to the congestion problems of the internet, described in chapter 2, especially as the volume of suchdata grows.like all other scientific disciplines today, the physical sciences use electronicnetworks to coordinate, collect, compile, and distribute nonproprietary data throughinformal and formal means. projects to evaluate data on particular topics, such asthe thermodynamic or spectroscopic properties of a set of closely related substances, typically involve small international collaborations that communicate byinternet. more complex efforts, such as determining the òbestó values of naturalconstants, require more formal cooperative working arrangements and regular dataexchange. one such effort is the maintenance of the evaluated nuclear structuredata file (ensdf), an electronic database of evaluated data on properties ofatomic nuclei and on radiation produced by decay of unstable nuclei. the databasehas existed in electronic form for about 25 years. an international network ofindividuals carries out its evaluations. within the united states, this work iscoordinated and supervised by the national nuclear data center at brookhavennational laboratory; internationally, the international atomic energy agency performs these functions. the ensdf effort collects data from publications and othersources and then evaluates and distributes the data in a variety of formats as userscall for it. prior to the internet, these data came to ensdf on magnetic tapes, butnow they arrive via electronic network, primarily by file transfer protocol, a convenient and widely used mode of transferring data electronically at moderately highspeed. the dissemination effort is truly worldwide, with active online accounts inapproximately 40 countries, on six continents. this system is described in moredetail in appendix c.physical scientists, in general, seek the most timely, lowestcost, and mostwidely effective means for disseminating their results and for obtaining those ofothers, as long as proper citation is not compromised. apart from proprietarydata associated with commercial products, data in the physical sciences tend to bereadily available, through journals, government publications, and books, andincreasingly, through electronically available databases. the databases in thelaboratory physical sciences may seem large in comparison with, for example,dictionaries; nonetheless, among the four areas of natural science considered inthis report, the laboratory physical sciences typically have the smallest databases.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues53astronomy and space sciencesthe primary needs for and uses of data from space are in fundamental research, but there are many collateral applications, such as precise positioning,mapping of the earth, navigation, education, and even entertainment, as the public interest in comet shoemakerlevy demonstrated. astronomy is indeed interesting to the public. as such, its data must not only be collected, but also beinterpreted and made available for formal and informal educational purposes, aswell as for the advancement of our knowledge about the universe.most data in astronomy and space sciences come from observations madefrom earthõs surface or from spacecraft;6 a modest fraction of the data comesfrom laboratory experiments. the data from experiments, terrestrial or in spacecraft, conform closely in character to data in the laboratory physical sciences.usually, an individual observer or observing project collects the data and distributes them to other individuals as soon as they have been taken. these datafrequently have significant value to other researchers and for purposes other thanthose for which they were gathered. it is useful, for example, to compare datataken by different observers in different wavelength bands or to compare observations at different times in order to interpret variable objects. hence it is important to store space science data in a form readily available to other researchers.most astronomical data archives, which are open to all scientists, do so. use ofthese archives is limited only by ease and cost of access. consequently, thiscommunity has had to adopt efficient data management practices throughout thelife cycle of the data, to permit effective access by the entire community, nationaland international.research in astronomy and space sciences is collaborative and, inherently,deeply international; it requires multinational efforts to collect data and to implement efficient transnational exchange of data. electronic links now provide therequisite efficient communications and exchange of data. the scientific reasonsfor this international character include the following:¥groundbased observatories must be located at optimal observing sites,such as mountaintops with good observing conditions, which are found only incertain countries;¥some experiments require simultaneous observations at several points,such as longbaseline radiointerferometry;¥only parts of the sky can be seen from any single location; and¥some observations, such as those in the xray and farultraviolet regions,can be made only from outside the atmosphere, and hence require orbitingobservatories, while others require sending probes to other planets, which createsa need for collaboration with scientists in nations that have space programs.an economic driving force for the internationalization of space science is thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54bits of powerhigh cost of large new facilities; this encourages international collaboration as ameans of costsharing. thus, the hubble space telescope was developed and isoperated as a partnership of nasa and the european space agency (esa), withaccess available to astronomers from all over the world. the gemini project,building two 8meter telescopes, one in hawaii and one in chile, is a partnershipof the united states, the united kingdom, canada, chile, argentina, and brazil.even without explicit or formal collaboration, international sharing of astronomical data generally enhances the field. recent examples include the impactof comet shoemakerlevy on jupiter, the international halley watch, the observations of comet hyakutake, and the observations of supernova 1987a. still lessorganized research projects are enabled daily by accessing archived data forhistorical and multiwavelength comparisons and by facilitating communicationamong collaborating astronomers.astronomers and space scientists establish research strategies and prioritiesfor data collection in their subdisciplines. in the united states, this is usuallydone within the national research council, for example, under the decadal astronomy survey committees or the space studies boardõs planetary and spacephysics science strategy panels, or by nasa or national science foundation(nsf) science working groups or ad hoc science community studies. othernations and international organizations develop similar research strategies, forexample, the esaõs horizon 2000, plans for the european southern observatory,and the international gemini project. such planning efforts are becoming moreinternational and effectively identify data needs and policies in support of theprojects.earth sciencesin the broadest terms, earth science data are fundamental to the discoveryand creation of knowledge concerning the interactions among matter, energy, andliving organisms.7 development of this knowledge is essential for ensuring theprospect for humanity on our finite planet in the face of rapid demographic andeconomic growth. between 1820 and 1992, the world population increased 5times and the gross domestic product per person grew 8 times, with a resultingglobal economy growth rate of 40 times. world trade grew more than 500 times.8the best estimate at this time is that the increase in population over the next50 years will be greater in real numbers than the increase over the last 170 years,accompanied by further large increases in economic activity and world trade.9this situation will bring to the fore new environmental issues and problems thatwill press us ever more urgently to ameliorate the impact of humankind on theenvironment.within the purview of the physical earth sciences are natural phenomena atall spatial and temporal scales that present major scientific challenges for understanding and prediction. these phenomena include natural hazards such as hurbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues55ricanes, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions. besides the societal impacts associated with climate, natural hazards, and natural resources, thereare numerous manmade hazards that are coupled with natural phenomena thatare the subject of earth science research. examples include the prediction andmitigation of pollution plumes in ground water or the atmosphere (e.g., chemicalsor radioactive materials), the factors involved in stratospheric ozone depletion,and the monitoring of treaties that ban underground nuclear testing (e.g., insupport of the comprehensive test ban treaty).the physical, chemical, and biological processes that shape the world inwhich we live are complex and interdependent. to understand them requiresobservations with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution and coverage to characterize the phenomena of interest and to constrain theoretical predictions that arebased on conceptual or quantitative models. therefore, the lifeblood of researchin most of the earth sciences is observational data, sometimes global in coverage,and taken repeatedly over time. many of these data also must be integrated withdata from experimental manipulations, or from other disciplines.an example is atmospheric circulation, which controls weather over theentire earth with significant variations on time scales ranging from hours todecades or longer, and spatial scales ranging from less than 1 km to thousands ofkilometers. weather forecasts for more than a day at a time require the rapid andrepeated acquisition, processing, and interpretation of very large amounts ofsynoptic observations on at least a continental scale. satellite systems that gatherthe necessary data have been and are being developed, but timely access to thedata gathered by different organizations or countries is a major concern. climatestudies require many of the same observations as for weather prediction, but alsodata on the oceans, land surface, and cryosphere for the entire earth. therefore,international sharing of very large volumes of global atmospheric circulation datais essential for meaningful scientific investigation of past and present climates.scientific knowledge in the various subdisciplines of the earth sciences hasadvanced to the point where important, multidisciplinary globalscale problemscan be tackled with insight and scientific rigor, provided that highquality globalobservations are available and that computational resources are adequate to process and interpret large and diverse data sets. major examples of interdisciplinary and integrating research programs in the earth sciences are the world climate research program of the world meteorological organization (wmo) andthe international council of scientific unions (icsu), the internationalgeospherebiosphere programme organized under the auspices of icsu, and,nationally, the u.s. global change research program.10 these are major initiatives, begun in the 1980s to understand the driving mechanisms (both natural andhuman) that cause significant changes in the earth system. these efforts involvecollecting and analyzing massive data sets from earthobserving satellites andintegrating them with multiplearea or sitespecific data all over the earth, including developing countries. significant progress in these types of complexbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56bits of powerresearch programs can be made only if there is effective transnational flow ofdata and information.biological sciencesthe breadth of the kinds of data in the biological sciences is probably thewidest among the four areas described in this report.11 the subjects of the dataencompass types and modes of propagation of life forms, modes of provision offood and fiber, conservation of the planetõs biota, public health and safety, themolecular bases of life processes, and biotechnology. data in the biologicalsciences differ somewhat from those in the physical sciences, have some characteristics in common with the other observational sciences, and have some uniquecharacteristics. biologists have no fundamental constants or periodic table. theydo share with chemists the data specifying structures of molecules, such as nuclearmagnetic resonance spectra and xray diffraction patterns, as well as the inferredstructural parameters themselves. however, many biological data specify rangesof incidence or of values of some properties. such data require textual descriptions, which become part of the databases. collections of such data requiremodes of access that are different from and frequently more complex than thosethat serve well in the physical sciences. analysis by computing associations andsimilarities, rather than by direct, experimental, causal assessment, is characteristic of biology.concepts are sometimes less well defined in biology than in the physicalsciences, and so clarity can be compromised when terms with even slightlydifferent definitions, explicit or implied, are used to classify and describe whatshould be commonly understood data. even the concept of òspeciesó causesproblems. for example, there are questions regarding the variabilities foundwithin and between species and regarding whether species should be definedaccording to dna sequences, with no distinctions within the species, or according to taxonomy, with differentiations made among subspecies. this issue iselaborated in greater detail below in this chapter.biologists use some large databases, particularly those of nucleic acid sequences that form the fastgrowing genome databases. efforts to build, maintain,and distribute the information in these databases are highly international andcollaborative. centers around the world collect data from contributing scientistsand immediately share them, incorporating them as they accumulate into a coordinated database. in this respect, biologists share certain problems with theobservational sciences. proprietary concerns probably arise at least as frequentlyin the biological sciences as in the laboratory physical sciences or the earthsciences, but much more frequently than in the space sciences.a somewhat unique characteristic of many biological data, especially regarding distributions of species, is that they are very locationspecific. consequently, in order to protect fauna or flora in a given location, or the privacy orbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues57property rights of the people who live there, barriers unrelated to the researchitself sometimes arise that inhibit the flow, particularly the international exchange, of biological data.data trends, opportunities, and challenges in thenatural sciencesthe increasing use of electronic means for data collection, storage, manipulation, and dissemination is one of a number of broad and interrelated trends thathave significant implications for access to data in the natural sciences. thesetrends include the following:¥rapid growth of the body of scientific data;¥development of large international research programs;¥insufficient funding for data management and preservation activitiesworldwide;¥decentralization of data management and distribution;¥electronic publication; and¥increasing use of simulations and animations as scientific data.the discussion in this section addresses these broad trends as well as theopportunities and challenges they present. some discipline or fieldspecificissues are discussed in the next section.rapid growth of the body of scientific datain every area of the sciences, both the volumes and the types of data havegrown at rates unforeseeable 30 years ago. this growth has been especially rapidprimarily because of vast improvements in and increasing availability of imagingdetector arrays at most wavelength ranges. for example, in the earth sciences,new technology allows data to be collected repetitively with high spatial resolution. remote sensing systems are generating immense volumes of data that arepushing the limits of our ability to store, retrieve, and analyze those data. forinstance, the introduction of groundbased doppler radar and new satellite systems is significantly increasing the data volumes within the atmospheric sciences.table 3.1 shows a selection of land remote sensing data sets and their anticipatedvolumes that are archived by the earth resources observation systems (eros)data center operated by the u.s. geological survey in sioux falls, south dakota. in seismology, new initiatives both in the united states and in othercountries have resulted in continuous, broadband digital recording at high sampling rates. special studies using up to 1,000 sensors generate very large data setsfor each experiment. table 3.2 illustrates the actual and projected growth in datavolumes at the incorporated research institutions for seismology (iris) databits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58bits of powertable 3.1projected volume (in terabytes) of satellite remote sensingdata holdings at the u.s. geological surveyõs earth resources observationsystems (eros) data center, 1997 to 2005data sourceby 1997by 1998by 1999by 2000by 2001by 2005landsats 15120.5122.5122.5122.5122.5122.5avhrra12.516.520.524.528.540.0sircb20.090.090.090.090.090.0landsat 7ñ20.070.0120.0170.0170.0srtmcññ112.0113.0114.0117.0modisdñ10.036.062.088.0166.0astereñ15.060.0110.0160.0310.0total153.0274.0511.0642.0773.01,215.5aavhrrñadvanced very high resolution radiometerbsircñshuttle imaging radarccsrtmñshuttle radar topography missiondmodisñmoderateresolution imaging spectroradiometereasterñadvanced spaceborne thermal emission and reflection radiometersource: u.s. geological survey, national mapping division.management center. table 3.3 provides a representative sample of astrophysicsdata archived by nasa and demonstrates a similar trend in the space sciences.technology for data storage and computation continues to improve at a rateconsistent with the capability to handle the rapid growth of accumulated data inthe observational sciences. scientists worldwide will have to adapt their researchstrategies to make effective use of these new data.12 although stateoftheartprojects can manage the increasingly large data volumes, perhaps with difficulty,other users, especially in developing countries, are unlikely to be able to access oreffectively use such data for their own research.development of large international research programsas the previous discussion indicates, basic scientific research has becomeever more internationalized as a result of several factors: the expanding capabilities of communication and computation networks, the capabilities for conductinghighquality science in increasing numbers of countries, and the economic driving force for sharing the high costs of large projects. these factors have led to theformation of new organizational paradigms and methods of data management.consequences of this internationalization have been more and higherqualityscience, faster progress, and ever more international involvement. these opportunities have appeared at all levels, from individual investigator and smallgroupscience to largescale òbig scienceó projects.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues59recent years have seen several new multibilliondollar international projects,and multimilliondollar international efforts have become almost commonplace.these òmegaprojectsó or òmegascienceó programs have a number of commoncharacteristics. they require longterm funding commitments; they may necessitate the building of new large facilities or instruments, which then require largeexpenditures for operating funds; they typically involve teams of researchersworking on different aspects of the project, with the consequent requirement forinternational communication and data exchange; and, with the current state oftechnology, their scientific objectives cannot be fulfilled by using a smallerscaleresearch format.13in 1991 the u.s. congressional budget office identified 80 projects fundedby the u.s. government that each cost at least $25 million (in 1984 dollars)during the period from 1980 to 1986.14 many of these involved significantinternational participation. in contrast, there were only a handful of such nonmilitary largescale research projects in the 1950s and 1960s.table 3.2summary of actual and projected data volumes archived in theincorporated research institutions for seismology (iris) data managementcenter, 1994 to 2000data volumes (gigabytes/year)datanumber ofsourceinstrumentsa1994199519961997199819992000gsn1001,1592,3593,9596,0038,04710,09112,281fdsn1463706701,0701,5302,0502,6703,416jsp arrays51,0952,1903,6505,4757,3009,12510,950osn30001558218498936passcalbb5001,3182,2773,5565,1547,0739,31211,867passcalrr5005428851,3411,9122,5973,3974,310regionaltrig5001502904907301,0301,3901,755total1,7814,6348,67114,08120,86228,31536,48345,515note:abbreviations are as follows:gsnñglobal seismic network (iris)fdsnñfederation of digital seismic networksjspñjoint seismic program (with the former soviet union) (iris)osnñocean seismic networkpasscalbbñprogram for array studies of the continental lithosphereñbroadband(iris)passcalrrñprogram for array studies of the continental lithosphereñregional recordings (iris)regionaltrigñregional triggered recordingsaprojected for the year 2000.source: iris data management center, private communication, 1994.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60bits of powertable 3.3 a representative sample of nasa astrophysics archives, by satellite missionhigh energyinternationalinfrared astronomicalcompton gamma rayastrophysical observatory 2ultraviolet explorersatellitehubble space telescopeobservatorydata typexray dataultraviolet datainfrared dataoptical/ultraviolet datagammaray datayear of launch19781978198319901990duration2.5 yearsongoing300 daysongoingongoingtotal data volume~100~100~150~5,500 by year 2005~10,00 by year 2000(gigabytes)data centereinstein observatory datacenter, cambridge,massachusettssource: nasa; reprinted from national research council (1995) preserving scientific data on our physical universe: a new strategy for archiving thenationõs scientific information resources, national academy press, washington, d.c.national space sciencedata center,greenbelt,marylandinfrared dataanalysis center,pasadena,californianational spacescience datacenter, greenbelt,marylandspace telescopescience institute,baltimore, marylandbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues61for the purpose of this discussion, it is useful to identify several types oflarge international scientific projects and programs:15¥experimental facilities for neutron beam, synchrotron radiation sources,lasers, highenergy particle physics, highfield magnet laboratories, and fusionexperiments.¥fixed observational facilities such as optical and radio groundbasedtelescopes, environmental remote sensors (e.g., lidars and radars), and deep oceandrilling projects.¥space science observational satellites, including space telescopes forastronomy and astrophysics, space physics observatories, and planetary missions.¥earth observation satellites for collecting data about earthõs atmosphere,oceans, land surface, and geophysics.¥distributed observational programs that collect data in many differentlocations as part of an internationally organized research program. examples ofthis include the global seismic network, the international geospherebiosphereprogramme, the human genome project, and the new biodiversitas project.it is the latter two types of scientific research initiatives that pose the greatestdata management challenges for effective international exchange, as discussedbelow in this chapter.insufficient funding for data management and preservationdespite the vast increases in recent years in the amount of data collected andstored, and the very large augmentations in the funding allocated to new observatories and experimental facilities in ambitious international research programs,there has not been a commensurate increase in the funding for data managementand preservation. at the same time, the costs associated with data retention anddistribution are typically far less than the costs of reacquisition (in those cases inwhich reacquisition is even physically possible). although the committee did notperform comprehensive research on the actual funding levels worldwide, themembers of the committee believe this to be a problem common to most disciplines, in many research programs, on both domestic and international levels.in the laboratory sciences, funding agencies focus their support on researchand tend to overlook the fact that data compilations and data access are key toprogress across the research spectrum. furthermore, the sheer volume of datanow available makes it increasingly difficult for individual compilers in thetradition of ptolemy and beilstein to fill this need as a pro bono activity, or for thework to be done as merely ancillary to some funded research program. in addition, society fellowship and award committees generally do not place much valueon the contributions their applicants may make to the infrastructure of science inthe form of data compilation, organization, and evaluation work. funding agenbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62bits of powercies have an opportunity to enhance the international aspect of these activities bysupporting scientists from developing countries who tend to be welleducated butunderemployed. such a policy could be very costeffective in that it would notrequire high initial capital costs for facilities, but only labor and data access costs.the funding situation in the observational sciences tends to be even moredifficult, with potentially more significant negative effects, given the dataintensive nature of such research. experience indicates that scientists associated withnew observatories get much more support than those handling data from old ones,even though the payoff from optimal utilization of existing data sometimes isgreater. for instance, according to figures supplied by noaa, the agencyõsbudget for its national data centers in fy 1980 was $24.6 million, and their totaldata volume was approximately 1 terabyte. in fy 1994, the budget was only$22.0 million (not adjusted for inflation), while the volume of their combineddata holdings was about 230 terabytes! during this same period, the overallnoaa budget increased from $827.5 million to $1.86 billion, mostly to fund theacquisition of new observational data.an example of insufficient funding for data management and preservation isthe national land remote sensing satellite data archive at the eros datacenter. this national archive was established by congress16 in 1992 and endorsed by the 1996 national space policy without the provision of any newfunding to support its expanded mission.although improvements and significant cost reductions in data storage andprocessing technologies have enabled government data managers to keep up withthe demands in most cases, the pressures from chronic underfunding occasionallyhave led to illconsidered attempts to commercialize or privatize the data management and dissemination functions (as discussed in chapters 4 and 5). in othercases, these financial difficulties have led to inadequate preservation and accessprovisions, which sometimes result in the partial or total loss of irreplaceable datasets.17 the challenge is to develop data management and archiving infrastructureand procedures that can handle the rapid increases in the volumes of scientificdata, and at the same time maintain older archived data in an easily accessible,usable form. an important part of this challenge is to persuade policymakers thatscientific data are indeed a precious resource that should be preserved and usedbroadly to advance science and to benefit society.18decentralization of data management and distributiondata collection, management, and distribution over the long term depend ona variety of institutions, that is, organizations that transcend the interest of individuals or ad hoc groups of scientists. these institutions have various roles,missions, and funding responsibilities that affect use of and access to scientificdata. many have direct responsibilities or objectives regarding data generated bypublicly funded research, including, in particular, the following institutions:bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues63¥government science agencies and academies of science;¥intergovernmental scientific organizations and coordinating bodies;¥publicly funded data management institutions, including data centersand libraries;¥publicly funded research institutions, primarily in academia;¥national and international nongovernmental organizations, such as scientific and engineering societies, library associations, and information industryassociations;¥commercial publishers; and¥governmental policymaking and regulatory bodies.the information technology revolution has changed the roles of some ofthese institutions and brought about the establishment of new entities. for scientific data management at both the national and the international level, the technological changes have supported the development of organizations with the following attributes:19¥widely distributed responsibility. new telecommunications, datamanagement, and standardized technology is leading to highly reliable distributed data management capabilities. the growing availability of informationtechnology professionals (along with the lower technical skill levels actuallyneeded by end users) is enhancing the ability to distribute data more broadly andincrease user participation. such distribution of data and their ownership (whetheractual or implied) by user groups improve the utility of the data and help createimportant support for longterm retention.¥highvalue peertopeer communication. with online access to dataand people, a variety of new collaborative relationships can develop. informationcan be broadcast to interested individuals in a timely fashion. data can beprovided directly to field researchers to focus new data collection. physicalproximity and formal lines of communication are no longer vital to effectiveorganizational operation. indeed, closed, highly structured organizations oftenwill be uncompetitive or unable to take full advantage of innovation.¥specialized data functions. when resources and capabilities are distributed, some specific locations can make an effective contribution by specializing.specialized groups can be created in a scientific discipline or in some aspect ofdata management, archiving, or standard setting. such centers can achieve significant economies of scale, reducing overall costs while enhancing the effectiveness of certain functions for the benefit of all.the national nuclear data center (nndc) is one of many examples of theevolution from sole source to distributed network. under an international agreement, nndc at brookhaven national laboratory is the u.s. source for the international distribution of evaluated nuclear data files (see appendix c). when thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64bits of powerprimary forms of distribution were hardcopy books or published tables, the solesource was obviousñthe printed pages generated at nndc. when online access to the databases became available in the mid1980s, the files had to bemirrored for easier access overseas. with the advent of the world wide web,individuals gained the ability to manipulate the databases, which today still resideat nndc, using overlay programs that (physically) reside at another data center,possibly in europe.in the future the user probably will be unaware of where the data file beingaccessed physically resides and will be able to link to the journal article (published by a commercial publisher, for example) in which the data originallyappeared. the electronic journal article could have links to the original datatables of the authors. nndc has evolved from a collector of evaluated data files,which were formatted into cameraready pages for hardcopy publication, to acenter that maintains online access to a few databases via a variety of overlayprograms (no longer is there a single, static format). it is one of many centersaround the world, now common in most scientific disciplines, that develops new,electronic forms of networked data dissemination.electronic publicationthe development and acceptance of electronic networks as a means of communicating, searching for data and information, and accessing information rapidly and directly have driven the increase in electronic publications of all types,and scientific publications in particular.20 although not all publishers of scientific journals are moving to completely electronic form, there is a distinct trend toprovide alternative paper and electronic versions of many publications. forexample, the american institute of physics is working to provide its libraryclients by early 1997 with electronic access to every one of its journals to whichthe library subscribes. in addition, it now offers some of its journals in cdromform as a spacesaving alternative or supplement to its subscribers.21 the institute of physics in the united kingdom also provides subscribers with electronicaccess to all 33 of its journals.22nasa is sponsoring an allelectronic peerreviewed journal, earth interactions. 23 it is only available electronically and allows color representations ofphenomena, including timelapsed video clips of observations to show time variations. mathematical calculations on subsets of original data can be carried out bythe reader as well, providing both indepth understanding of the material and acheck on the validity of the authorõs results. this new journal is the product ofthree professional societiesñthe american meteorological society, the american geophysical union, and the association of american geographersñwithadditional support from the ecological society of america and the oceanographic society of america. these societies have a combined membership ofapproximately 45,000, and so this form of electronic publication will soon bebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues65available to a substantial segment of the earth sciences community. submission,editing, and peer review will all be done electronically.there is increased attention to electronic publication of astronomical research papers and data as well (see box 3.1). most conference proceedings arecollated from electronic submissions in standard (e.g., tex, latex) formats.abstracts of papers in most space science disciplines are now available online,24and several journals are publishing electronic versions.this trend is likely to accelerate and to open new opportunities for communicating research results to all scientists. electronic publication will not justreplace paper, howeverñit will alter the sociology of science. writing, refereeing, and reviewing of a publication are now discrete and strictly ordered events,but they need not be in the electronic world. there, annotation, critique, elaboration, and revision can all go on iteratively and indefinitely, and in some instancesno doubt they will. some publications likely will become òliving documents,óunder revision until they are no longer of interest. even though our current socialnorms for attribution are based on the static publication model, it is doubtful thatthe scientific community would retain that model in order to preserve thesenorms. the value of a dynamic discourse is too great.25many electronic journals will not be òprintableó in any meaningful sense. itis not just that they will contain motion and sound, but will incorporate also richcontextual links to the primary materials. clicking on a graph will give the readeraccess to the data on which it is based, allowing alternative models and interpretations to be explored. a related important benefit of electronic publications isthat results based on observations and modeling can be checked and validated byboth reviewers and readers; restrictions on article length in paper journals andlimited access to original data and software currently preclude any meaningfulchecks of the validity of published results based on observational data. a òcopyóof the bits in an astronomical òplateó is as good as the original.publications also will become òactiveó agents, rather than passive stacks ofpaper. the term òprogramó has some of the wrong connotations, but nonethelessfuture publications will include executing programsñnot ones that can be executed, but that are executingñautonomously gathering data, making predictions, becoming richer and more valuable as time passes.in short, the internet and world wide web are far more rapid and enablingmeans of communicating results, ideas, and other aspects of research than paperpublications. many changes in the conduct and dissemination of scientific research, from the individual to the international scale, may be expected to arisefrom these developments.26increasing use of simulations and animations as scientific datarelated to the trend in electronic publishing is the increasing use of simulations and animations in research.27 largescale computation arose in part from abits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66bits of powerbox 3.1space science data and electronic publishingthe space science community has been at the forefront of electronic publishing.scientific societies, such as the american astronomical society (aas), have beenleaders in this type of information exchange. for example, aas collects all of itsmeeting abstracts electronically and publishes the aas job register online. inaddition, aas pioneered the development of effective electronic journals with its online publication of the astrophysical journal. what started out as an experiment hasturned into a success story in electronic publication.1supported in part by a grant from the national science foundation, the aas incooperation with the university of chicago press first developed an electronic versionof the letters portion of the astrophysical journal (eapj).2 produced in two versions(html for screen reading and pdf for local printing), this journal goes well beyond theelectronic delivery of paper manuscripts typical of most òelectronicó journals.the eapj has references tied into the nasasupported bibliographic databasemaintained by the astrophysics data system (ads; see <http://adswww.harvard.edu>), which provides abstracts of most references and is developing an archive ofpage images of several of the most useful astronomical scholarly journals.the eapj uses urns instead of urls (names instead of locations) as link targets, and so the links will remain valid indefinitely. both the ads and the eapj usea standardized notation for naming articles, which enables links and pointers to begenerated automatically during the publishing process. as part of the sophisticatedset of links associated with this journal, the eapj includes a capacity for forwardreferencing whereby each article carries with it an updated set of references toarticles that refer to itñan automated electronic citation service. before the fullastrophysical journal came online in november 1996, the aas made arrangementsto establish mirror sites in great britain, europe, australia, and (possibly) japan toensure relatively rapid response times.the success of the eapj is propelling the astronomical publishers to bring theirliterature online rapidly. over 95 percent of the worldõs peerreviewed astronomicalliterature is expected to be online by mid1997. standard protocols, conventions,and procedures will be absolutely critical if this networked system of literature anddata is to be effective for the working scientist.electronic publishing in this area has also enhanced data access and archiving.the astronomical data center, located in strasbourg, france, has an agreementwith the publishers of astronomy and astrophysics òto provide all data files from theirpublications.ó the astronomical data center at goddard has a similar arrangementwith the aas, which includes icarus and the publications of the astronomical societyof the pacific, as well as aas publications. this type of arrangement òpermits thetwo centers to archive a major portion of the international astronomical data withoutindividual requests to the authorsó of journal publications.31response by peter boyce, american astronomical society, to the committeeõs òinquiry tointerested partiesó (see appendix d).2the full journal is now available online at <http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/apj/>.3response by nancy g. roman, nasa goddard space flight center, to the committeeõsòinquiry to interested partiesó (see appendix d).bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues67need to simulate reactive hydrodynamic flows. such problems still help drive thedevelopment of increasingly powerful computers. however, during the pastthree decades, simulations have become integrated elements of the toolboxes ofexperimentalists and theorists in many of the physical and biological sciences.the increasing importance of modeling and simulation is evidenced for thematerials science field by the recent (1992) inauguration of two new journalsdevoted exclusively to this topic: computational materials science (elsevier)and modeling and simulation in materials science and engineering (institute ofphysics publishing). materials data modeling encompasses two quite differentareas: materials r&d (both theoretical and experimental) and data handling andapplication activities (continuum level design calculations, process modeling,service behavior modeling, and compression, extrapolation, and interpolation ofdata). other research areas in which computer simulations have become standardare in the design of optics for electromagnetic radiation and of beams of electronsand ions; flow of fluids; folding of protein molecules; interaction of enzymemolecules with their substrates, the species on which they act; melting and freezing, at the atomic level; the motions of individual atoms during reactive collisionsof molecules; and collisions of gaseous atoms and molecules with surfaces.many simulations require repeated solution of equations of motion of thesystem by computer. these equations may be simple or complex, but howeversimple they are, the ability to solve them over and over, many millions of times,as the system they describe evolves, is a consequence of the power of electroniccomputers. the simulation results may be reduced to only a few summarynumbers, which was the usual practice in the early years of computers. now it iscommon for the results to include numerical information about entire time histories, information that can be put into tables and graphs.perhaps the most dramatic advance in simulations, however, has been the useof graphics, particularly animations. the information in an animation can giveinsights into a scientific phenomenon that could not be guessed from individualsnapshot images or numerical indicators. time may serve as a surrogate for aspatial dimension, allowing the investigator to visualize the behavior of a function of three independent variables. animations are useful when an investigatoruses a preconception to decide what indicators would be best to compute and itturns out that the situation does not correspond to that preconception. for example, one study examined the high degree of solidlike, cooperative, and collective motion of most, but not all, of the atoms in the supposedly liquid surfacelayer of a cluster of atoms. instead of an amorphous swarm of atoms swirling onthe surface, the outer, òmoltenó layer of the cluster showed organized, collective(but loose) vibrations by all but a few of the surface atoms. all the quantitativeindicators showing liquidlike character arose from a few atoms displaced fromthe surface so that they were free to float just outside it, in almostfree fashion.the consequence of seeing the animation was the construction of a theoreticalbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68bits of powermodel very different from the one the investigators had been planning to use. inshort, animations have become real tools of research, not just pedagogic devices.the data in animations cannot yet be stored or exchanged in conventionaljournals. however, electronic storage and transmission over the internet and theworld wide web make it possible for scientists to share not only their tables andstill figures, but also their animations. a few published papers include referencesto web addresses that provide animations of material discussed in the papers.such data are still in a form that is primitive compared with what one can foresee.now it is possible to play an animation, even a multiwindow display that showsseveral characteristics evolving simultaneously, and sometimes to stop the motion to study an individual frame. in the future, it will be possible for the viewerto stop an animation and examine the image or images from all sides, perhapseven to carry out manipulative operations on that image that correspond to simulations of physical processes. the capacity for such data manipulations willadvance as the bandwidth available for data transmission increases, as data storage becomes cheaper and faster, and as the software for generating, storing, anddisplaying animations and more elaborate time histories becomes more userfriendly. it is already inevitable that scientists will generate image sets for molecular phenomena analogous to the computerbased òtoursó of towns and citiesthat allow the viewer to choose any path through the area. for example, it ispossible for a pharmacological researcher to òflyó a molecule of a potential newdrug to a conjectured target receptor site, say in the brain, to judge whether it is atopological fit.the capability to share images from animations has a number of advantages.however, images require more storage space, and the user must have considerably larger bandwidth capabilities to allow electronic transmission of the animations than typically are required for exchange of numerical or symbolic data.disciplinespecific data issuesover the past two decades, the national research council and other groupshave issued numerous reports that have addressed scientific management issuesfor digital observational data in the earth and space sciences.28 more recently,several studies have examined such issues in the biological sciences.29 most ofthese reports have focused quite narrowly on the data management problems ofspecific disciplines or agencies; however, many of their recommendations havebroader validity and may be applied to other disciplines and institutions in theobservational sciences in the international context.as noted above in this chapter, the very large scale environmental observational research programs in the earth and biological sciences pose the greatestdata management challenges and the most difficult public policy issues. this isso not only because of the complexity of the scientific questions in those disciplines and their dataintensive nature, but also because of their inseparable linkbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues69ages to major socioeconomic issues, the potential for privatesector exploitationof the data and related research results, and their relevance to other major government concerns such as national security, trade, and foreign policy objectives.although the focus of this study is on issues in the transnational flow of scientificdata for use in basic research and not on the role of scientific data in these other,much broader contexts, it is at the interface of scientific use of data and theirbroader potential applications that the most vexing public policy issues ariseñatopic addressed in some of the discussion below in this report. the sectionsimmediately following, however, focus on some of the more specific disciplinerelated challenges and opportunities in providing broad international access toscientific data.observational environmental sciencesmeasuring and monitoring systemsthe data now available on a global basis are inadequate to document andunderstand many environmental and health problems, or to anticipate problemsthat may arise because of the increasing influence of human activity. what isrequired is a comprehensive and longterm effort to observe, understand, assess,and predict the global environmentña world environmental watch.significant progress has been made toward this end, beginning with a seriesof national research council studies in the 1980s that outlined the rationale anddata requirements for a new branch of scientific inquiry called earth systemscience.30 this in turn led to the formation of ambitious international globalresearch programs, such as the international geospherebiosphere programmeand the u.s. global change research program. a set of international complementary observing systems has been proposed, elements of which are in variousstages of deployment and development. included in this set are the globalclimate observing system (which includes the world weather watch and theglobal atmospheric watch), the global ocean observing system, and the global terrestrial observing system.31 these internationally coordinated effortswill integrate observations from multiple satellites and airborne and in situ sensors deployed worldwide.the global ocean observing system and the global terrestrial observingsystem are in earlier stages of development than the world weather watch andglobal atmospheric watch and the associated global climate observing system(see appendix c for a description of the world weather watch). however, forearthõs land surface, substantial observing systems exist within many countries,and for the oceans, observing systems have been developed by countries to aconsiderable extent for the coastal oceans and to a limited degree for the openocean through international collaboration.one of the oldest international observing systems (over 100 years old) is thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70bits of powervolunteer ship observing program coordinated by the wmo and the intergovernmental oceanographic commission. through this program involving thousandsof ships from many countries, weather and sea surface temperature observationshave been available to all countries in real time. it also has provided data on theclimatology of the ocean area for many decades and still does in conjunction withmeteorological satellites.more recently, an extensive observational network for measuring the upperocean was put in place in the western pacific ocean as part of the tropical oceanglobal atmosphere program. the ocean data from this network and the datafrom the world weather watch global observing system provide the basis forthe development of atmosphereocean coupled models, which have formed thefoundation for experimental forecasts in seasonal to interannual predictions.extensive plans also have been formulated for the components of the globalocean observing system to support the study of climate more generally.the global terrestrial observing system has several major components forthe land surface, surface and ground water, and seismology. most nations havedeveloped hydrologic observational networks for both the surface and the subsurface water. river stage observations are taken in most countries, both for floodforecasting and for water resource management. the further development ofthese observational systems is essential if the nations of the world are to copewith the wide range of environmental changes that are occurring and can beenvisaged.in the biological environmental sciences, monitoring systems are much lessfully developed than in the earth sciences. carefully planned and coordinatedglobal monitoring systems for new and emerging diseases and ecological monitoring and biodiversity surveys are needed. an epidemiological system now inplace determines which strains of influenza virus are emerging each year. thecomposition of each yearõs vaccine depends on effective monitoring and earlywarning. recent outbreaks of ebola virus in africa indicate the need for moremonitoring information that combines epidemiological and ecological data.an example of a lack of ecological monitoring comes from consideration ofthe worldõs island ecosystems. we know a great deal about animals and plants inspecial habitats such as the galapagos islands, but essentially nothing about theirmicrobiota. we do not know the similarities and differences in microbial ecologybetween the galapagos islands and, for example, the cape verde islands, despitetheir geological similarities.given the nature of the regional and global problems and the interdisciplinary nature of the environmental and health sciences, research on a specificproblem often requires the use of data from several observing systems. therefore, important requirements are observational consistency in space and time,with accurate georeferencing to the maximum degree possible; thorough documentation of data attributes; and substantial institutional commitments to thelongterm continuity of key observational programs.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues71quality control and assurancequality control operates smoothly and almost transparently in those sciencesin which experiments are readily reproducible or lead to subsequent experimentsthat validate the original ones. in the observational sciences, implementing effective quality control for data requires the use of an audit trail system that includesanomaly detection, reporting, and correction, as well as the rigorous refereeing ofmanuscripts for publication.quality assurance, the mechanism used by management to assure that thequality of work is as claimed by those doing it, typically plays a far smaller rolein basic science than in applied science and especially in manufacturing. however, one can interpret any mechanism to assure scientific integrity as a kind ofquality assurance procedure. this concept would thus include the mechanisms todetect and investigate scientific fraud. such òquality assuranceó efforts are carried out in universities and at the national institutes of health, for example.in recent years, some organizations, such as the carbon dioxide informationanalysis center (cdiac) at oak ridge national laboratory have devoted significant efforts to producing high quality global earth science data sets whoseaccuracy and reliability have been determined, accompanied by the descriptive(metadata) documentation needed for their use. the cdiac has qualityassuredand documented several key global change databases on such diverse topics asconcentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,carbon fluxes from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere resulting fromchanges in land use, carbon chemistry in the oceans, and longterm climate trendsin the united states.32 these valueadded data sets are certified as valid by theprimary users who collected the data, or by those who subsequently carried outthe qualitycontrol checks of the data. this is a somewhat costly, but successful,approach for assuring secondary users of the quality of relevant data sets.33preservation of historical data setsthe trend toward bigger, more complex, and more expensive facilities andprograms in the observational sciences, and toward attendant international collaboration, has brought about greater attention to and incentives for effectivelyarchiving data. it also has encouraged the development and maintenance of acuratorial infrastructure necessary to manage the data better, to provide moreuniform processing and documentation, and to make retrospective data moreeasily accessible and usable.34research using archived data has grown in scope and importance, especiallyin enabling the comparison of observations taken at different wavelengths and atdifferent sites. in the space sciences, there are efforts to coordinate data catalogsand indices, facilitating discovery of what data are available (e.g., nasaõs astrophysics data system and its extragalactic database, simbad). space asbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72bits of powertronomy in the united states has been at the forefront of archiving and distributing data electronically. archives are an integral part of all u.s. space astronomymissions and are now typically being planned for groundbased observatories andfor other countriesõ space missions as well. the archiving technologies areopenly available and shared, and data sets from new and different observationsare incorporated increasingly in existing archives. comprehensive catalogs andgood useraccess tools are recognized as very important, as are properly maintained and preserved duplicate data sets. some major archives are also duplicatedat different sites to reduce communication loads and to promote innovation andallow different uses.in the earth sciences, the study of earth processes involves timedependentbehavior over time scales ranging from seconds to millions of years. for relatively short time scales (years or less), observational data from a common observing platform may be available from a single database. for longer time scales(decades to centuries to many thousands of years), it is necessary to scrutinize allof the retrospective observations available and to use proxy data preserved in thegeologic record or in written records. research on global change and on naturalhazards, for example, whose goal is improved prediction of future conditions orevents, depends heavily on accurately reconstructing the record of the past. box3.2 provides several examples of interesting data reconstruction projects in china.because there has been an increasing awareness of the great value of retrospective earth science data, some conscientious efforts to rescue and preserveolder data are being made both nationally and internationally. in the unitedstates for example, the national climatic data center and the national geophysical data center have devoted time and resources to data rescue in recentyears and now have a policy of transferring all their digital data holdings to newstorage media at least once every 10 years.many specialized observational databases requiring longterm retention exist in biology as well. these include such diverse subjects as agricultural recordsof many types, including experimental field tests going back to the last century;museum, zoo, herbaria, and microbial culture collection records; hospital andother medical records; ecological data; breeding histories of domestic animalsand plants; macromolecular sequences and their accompanying annotations; taxonomic treatments, toxicological information; folk medicine; and characterizationof biological products such as food, fiber, and fine and bulk chemicals. some ofthese data are in computers, but require normalization for consistency and readability. others could be transformed into machinereadable form to make themgenerally accessible. these two tasks are labor intensive and require a largecomponent of highly skilled labor. such undertakings require careful prior evaluation for potential worth. selective evaluation and support is necessary not onlyto enhance the intellectual effort to maintain existing databases, but also enablethe creation of new ones.once the primary data are analyzed and used to publish research results, thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues73authoring scientist may be reluctant or inattentive about placing the unpublishedprimary data in a publicly accessible database or archive. rather, the scientist islikely to concentrate on creating new data to be interpreted and summarized foradditional printed publications. no incentives exist in most biological disciplinesto encourage the contribution of primary data to databases. the few exceptionsmostly involve data on biological macromolecules such as proteins, dna, rna,and complex carbohydrates. no crediting mechanism, however, adds to professional standing in the same way as a printed publication. the result is the loss ofa great deal of useful data.the longterm retention of biological databases also is being funded andmanaged in a haphazard, uncoordinated fashion throughout the world. thischaotic situation is unnecessary. the worldwide cooperation in establishingdna and rna genetic sequence databanks pointed out in appendix c demonstrates what can be done. the worldõs information science community, togetherwith the worldõs biologists, now have the combined skills and much of the infrastructure to preserve and to make basic biological information resources broadlyavailable.35 the scientific base and technology exist to produce much neededinformation structures that are the biological equivalent of the global weatherbox 3.2examples of digitizing historical environmental datain the peopleõs republic of china the following efforts have led to the digitizingof these historical records, among others:¥a joint study between the chinese academy of sciences and the u.s. department of energy used proxy records for grain harvests to extend theannual rainfall data for beijing back to 1260 a.d.1¥computer analysis of ancient chinese sunrise eclipse records showed thatthe length of the day was 70 milliseconds shorter in 1876 b.c. than now.2¥information on medicinal plants from chinese pharmacopia from thousandsof years ago, as well as other folk medicine records, are being computerized in an effort to identify active ingredients that might form the basis formodern drugs.31f.a. koomanoff, ye duzheng, zhao jianping, m.r. riches, wc. wang, and tao shivan(1988), òthe united states department of energy and the peopleõs republic of china academy of sciences joint research on the greenhouse effect,ó bull. am. meteorol. soc.,69:1301.2k.d. pang, k. yau, h.h. chou, and r. wolff (1988), òcomputer analysis of some ancientchinese sunrise eclipse records to determine the earthõs rotation rate,ó vistas in astronomy, 31:833847.3senliang li (1990), òdata acquisition of the chinese medicinal plant database,ó presentation at the codata international conference, columbus, ohio.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74bits of powermonitoring system. the critical biological problems the worldõs population facesin such areas as medicine, agriculture, sustainable ecology, food production, andwater quality know no political boundaries and require effective informationtransfer and access to archival or baseline data.the fact that observational data are unique and not reproducible leads to theconclusion that they should be preserved as part of the historical record of thedynamic behavior of earth and its inhabitants. the intrinsic, longterm value ofobservational scientific data was emphasized and discussed in detail in a recentnational research council (nrc) study.36 a major point made there was thatsuch data are an invaluable national (and by inference international) resource thatshould be preserved and utilized to advance the state of knowledge about ournatural environment.if this view becomes widely accepted by national and international organizations and governmental bodies, the traditional practices of allowing older data tobecome increasingly inaccessible or destroying them will be supplanted by policies and procedures to preserve retrospective data in accessible and usable forms.it should be noted that the data volumes of all previously collected data in a givenarea of the observational sciences typically are modest or insignificant in comparison with the volumes that the current data collection systems produce; if therewere a policy of preserving older data indefinitely into the future, all prior datawould be transferred to new storage media in compatible formats as new storageand retrieval technology is adopted.despite the ability of data storage and computational technology to keeppace with the data volumes being generated, there may be instances in whichsufficient resources may not be available to preserve all the useful data from aresearch program or a science agency. in the unlikely event that a suitable longterm repository cannot be found, the decision regarding what data to purge shouldbe made by representatives of the primary discipline and other major user groups.data integration for interdisciplinary researchthe improvements in technological capabilities have led to new opportunities to address important scientific problems that earlier were either obscure orconsidered intractable. although a considerable amount of research in the observational sciences continues to be done by individual investigators in specialtyareas, there are now many more multidisciplinary, multiinvestigator studies involving complex natural processes in space and time. attendant to this evolutionis the need to access diverse types of complementary observations made by manydifferent scientists and organizations around the world.the large international initiatives in global change research mentioned earlier provide good examples of programs in which success is critically dependenton the transnational flow of scientific data and information. the observationaldata necessary to obtain meaningful results in most areas of investigation includebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues75in situ (point or local) measurements, regional observations using various observing platforms (e.g., balloons, remotely piloted vehicles, airplanes), and satelliteremote sensing.a major earth science initiative involving significant transnational flow ofscientific data is the international decade of natural disaster reduction.37 thefocus of this initiative is on understanding the dynamic processes that causemajor natural disasters (e.g., earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, floods,hurricanes, tornadoes) and mitigating their effects through enhanced predictioncapabilities and precautionary safety measures. all of these phenomena occurglobally, and their study involves comparisons of many different types of observations. commonly, cooperative studies are carried out by scientists from several countries and through agreements among countries or institutions. international sharing of a wide variety of observational data, including demographicdata documenting human and economic effects, is essential for improving ourknowledge of these natural hazards.a particularly challenging problem is accessing and merging relatively sparse,lowerresolution, retrospective observations with the higherresolution current observational data to document changes occurring in the environment. a recent nrcreport, finding the forest in the trees: the challenge of combining diverseenvironmental data, provided possible solutions for integrating multiple environmental data sets at different spatial and temporal scales. this report considered in detail six case studies to elucidate the problems of interfacing diversetypes of geophysical and ecological data to address important environmentalproblems in a global context. the lessons learned from these case studies provided the basis for a set of recommendations to overcome barriers deriving fromthe data themselves, from usersõ needs, from organizational interactions, andfrom system considerations. the committee endorses those recommendationsand incorporates them here by reference.38the interfacing of several different environmental data sets in a single researchproject can be difficult because the data layers are not coregistered to a universaltemplate and therefore do not òstackó perfectly. the misalignment of only a fewtenths of a degree in longitude or latitude creates major problems and leads tomisinterpretations. for example, regions of the world with complex coastlines arevery difficult to study when coregistration of data layers is not perfect.an important tool is geographic information system (gis) software, whichenables all types of data to be correlated or compared geographically. thiscapability greatly facilitates multidisciplinary research that involves many different types of observational data and disparate scales of sampling ranging frompoint measurements to repeated, synoptic, highresolution satellite imagery. untilrecently, most gis software was geared toward spatial data, but now the timedimension is being incorporated more formally through fourdimensional assimilation techniques. gis is being used routinely both for fundamental scientificresearch and for applications in the earth sciences, although many problemsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76bits of powerremain.39 box 3.3 summarizes some of the barriers encountered in an international environmental assessment project using gis.documentation to support secondary users of observational dataas discussed above, research in the observational sciences increasingly involves the integration of multiple, diverse data sets, most or all of which were notcollected by the end users. the primary researchers who collect the data often donot make the effort to include the documentation that secondary users need.these secondary users,40 who frequently are less knowledgeable or technicallysophisticated, must have sufficient information about the data (i.e., metadata) inorder to avoid possible misuse and misinterpretation. of course, if the data areused improperly, incorrect results and interpretations are likely to result, andthese, in turn, may be propagated through the scientific community of secondaryusers, thereby spawning still more erroneous interpretations.therefore, a key component of effective international and interdisciplinarybox 3.3barriers encountered in international environmentalassessments using geographic information systemsòi have been working for five years on an epasupported project developinggeographic data and geographic information systems for environmental assessment on the mexicou.s. border. this effort has required the acquisition, verification and enhancement of various types of geographic, earth science and demographic data from mexico, the us and several international agencies.òduring this binational project, i have encountered several major issues associated with geographic data. at the conceptual level, these issues involve the cognitive representation of the landscape used to capture the data and to represent itin the digital domain. additionally, standardization of data acquisition methods,geographic scale, resolution, spatial accuracy, feature (attribute) definition andmetadata presentation are some of the technical issues that lead to a lack of comparability and impair maximum utility in a binational setting. i have found that thedefinition and resolution of the conceptual and the technical issues are influencedgreatly by the differences in culture (scientific, political, philosophical), language,economic development, etc. seldom is the reality of the earthõs surface represented identically in the mental maps of two individuals. the translation of this perceived reality to digital maps distorts the variation even more. unlike other types ofdata, the wide variety of distinct applications for individual geographic and earthscience data sets compounds the potential for misunderstanding and misuse byvarious user groups.ósource: george f. hepner, university of utah, personal communication, january 18, 1996.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues77use of scientific data is the associated metadata that describe where and how thedata were collected, the calibrations that convert raw data into physical units,corrections that have been made, the quality and reliability of the data, the dataformat(s) and any other information or caveats concerning the proper use of thedata.41for example, research on global change is in large part being carried out bysecondary users. past observations of the temperature at earthõs surface, gathered at many locations globally for weather, agriculture, or environmental studies, provide a longterm record that is being investigated to determine whetherglobal warming is taking place. in other cases, one type of observation may bethe proxy for another parameter that has not been adequately observed (e.g.,cloud cover as a proxy for precipitation). a remote sensing example is theoriginal landsat, which was designed for looking at vegetation, crops, and otheragricultural purposes but has been extensively used for geological studies; likewise, the seasat synthetic aperture radar imagery was taken to study the seasurface, but it has provided a new type of observational data to study geologicalfeatures on land, particularly faults and other geological boundaries, surface textures, and soil moisture. past climates are being inferred from paleontologicaldata on fossil spores and pollens originally collected for biological studies oflimited local areas.the research community does not now have a coordinated effort to indexthese and other extant data sets and to distribute and update this index in the formof an electronic directory. not knowing what data are available is clearly abarrier to international research in global change science. efforts are currentlyunder way to address this issue. for example, the international geospherebiosphere programmeõs data and information system has proposed identifyingdata sets at three levels: (1) by directories, identifying the existence of data sets;(2) by guides, containing information about their quality and other characteristics; and (3) by inventories, specifying the individual items that are present.42declassification of environmental data at the end of the cold warobservational data collected for military or espionage purposes are necessarily kept secret for some prescribed period of time, at least until the documentedevents, or the inherent evidence of the data collection techniques and technological capabilities themselves, can no longer compromise national security. someof these data sets contain valuable historical data, particularly observations ofcertain locations or phenomena that are collected on a consistent, repetitive basisfor many years, or even decades.in recent years, both in the united states and especially in the countries ofthe former soviet union, the end of the cold war has led to the release into thepublic domain of many of these data. an example is seismic data gathered for thepurpose of underground nuclear test monitoring. until the end of the cold war,bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78bits of powerno regional recordings of soviet nuclear explosions were available, nor weresoviet recordings of u.s. or other countriesõ test explosions. now there is accessto large amounts of these data by scientists outside the former soviet union.other types of soviet earth science data, such as gravity and magnetics observations and arctic oceanographic observations, also have been made available tothe scientific community. 43 likewise, u.s. data from some previously classifiedobservational programs, including reconnaissance satellites44 and undersea sensors,45 have been made publicly available. the international availability of useful earth science data has increased significantly with these data declassifications,and the committee encourages all governments to undertake similar reviews ofclassified retrospective data sets.improving international access to scientific data in the observationalenvironmental sciencesa striking example of the benefits of extensive data collection and researchfor international management of environmental problems is evident in agreementby the nations of the world on a clear strategy for mitigating depletion of ozonein the stratosphere.46 not only was agreement reached in a limited period oftime, but substitute substances and technologies also have been developed rapidly without a large economic impact on society.unfortunately, not all of the many global environmental and health problemscan be confronted in the same way as was done for stratospheric ozone. in fact,many of the underlying research issues are extremely complex and interrelated.in the case of reducing the uncertainties regarding the much publicized globalwarming trend, extensive geophysical and biological data on the atmosphere,ocean, land surface, and cryosphere will be required on a global basis for longperiods of time. the role of the ocean in the global carbon cycles and in theenergetics of the atmosphere, the impacts of deforestation and desertification, thefull implication of the radiatively active gases, and a host of interrelated naturalprocesses need to be understood. such understanding can be gained only byacquiring and analyzing comprehensive data sets on a global basis, with theactive involvement of most, if not all, nations, and with the best efforts of theworldõs scientific community. but we do know from the stratospheric ozoneproblem that international agreement can be reached when adequate data andunderstanding of the problem are available to policymakers throughout the world.it is therefore essential that environmental and health data and information capable of describing our global atmosphere, ocean, and terrestrial system be fullyand openly available. moreover, making such basic data broadly available isfundamental to ascertaining the veracity and validity of the scientific process andof the resulting conclusions. if the data supporting the conclusions are not readilybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues79available to others for independent analysis, then the confidence in the researchprocess and results will be undermined.this is not to say, however, that all data must be made widely available assoon as they are generated. indeed, an important reason for some period of delayis to ascertain the accuracy and integrity of the data and to prepare them forbroader use, as discussed in the previous sections. the difficulties inherent in thecollection and proper documentation of data by field researchers, or in the processing and organizing of large and complex data sets, can make a delay in therelease of those data not only justified, but prudent. in addition, it is customary inmany cases for a funding agency to provide the principal investigator or originating research group with the right to withhold public release of their data for aprescribed period of proprietary use, not only to adequately prepare the data forbroader dissemination and use, but also to give the principal investigator anopportunity to analyze the data and to publish the first results. at the same time,there may be legitimate countervailing public policy reasons for early or evenimmediate availability of data, for example, data collected in publicly fundedgovernment programs such as meteorological satellite systems, which have bothimmediate operational and longerterm research applications.while the availability of scientific data as soon as is reasonably possibleshould be the presumption, a single, uniform time period for the release of all datais neither sensible nor desirable. what is important is that the funding agencytogether with the community of scientists make a thorough evaluation of thecompeting interests guiding the release of its data prior to the initiation of everymajor data collection program, to establish the terms and conditions of dataavailability in consultation with the principal research and data user communities, and to subsequently enforce compliance. the 1996 nasa science policyguide provides a good example of a data availability policy for nonproprietaryscientific data obtained through public funds (see box 3.4).from a broader policy standpoint, the committee believes that the u.s. datamanagement policy established for the u.s. global change research program in1991 (commonly referred to as òthe bromley principlesó in reference to d. allanbromley, the presidentõs advisor for science and technology at that time) provides an excellent model for all major aspects of data availability and access.box 3.5 contains the main points of that policy. the committee adapts thedefinition of òfull and open exchange of data,ó subsequently developed by thenrcõs committee on geophysical and environmental data,47 as data and information are made available with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution.unfortunately, the international exchange of data between research groups,government agencies, and scientific data centers, including the world data centers, is rapidly becoming more complicated, just at a time when full and openexchange is most needed to make progress on major global environmental problems. a growing number of government data centers outside the united statesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80bits of powerbox 3.4nasaõs data availability policyready access to data from nasa research programs and missions (via modern data archiving and communications technologies) by researchers not directlyinvolved in the program increases the return on nasa research investments. it istherefore nasa policy that nonproprietary scientific data obtained fromnasa programs and missions will be made publicly available in usable formas quickly as possible. (nonproprietary data are data that may be distributedwithout violating patent, trade secret, or copyright laws or nasaõs ability to obtainand protect u.s. government intellectual property rights.) such data constitute anational resource that can be used by scientists, policymakers, and the publicthroughout the country to undertake new scientific studies, permit wider assessment of the validity of the results and conclusions from nasa missions, and facilitate broader public understanding of the value of nasa programs and missions.the issue of data rights is a complex one that involves consideration of a widerange of competing factors including:¥the right of public access to data which has been obtained at public expense;¥the need to protect the original ideas which form the basis for competitivelyselected research (there is a strong tradition and body of law in the unitedstates concerning the protection of intellectual property rights);¥the principle of fairness to investigators to allow them to pursue originalideas and hypotheses and to carry out the scientific investigations for whichthey were selected;¥the need to avoid the premature release of misleading results;¥the need to verify data prior to public release;¥the need for early release of data when such early release is critical tonational needs or required for overarching public policy reasons;¥the need for early release of data for educational and public informationpurposes; and¥the need to protect data which may have a proprietary commercial application which may confer a competitive advantage, particularly to u.s. industries competing in the international marketplace.a wide variety of approaches to data rights have been used:¥virtually immediate release for scientific and public information purposes.ñ shoemakerlevy 9 observations¥release of data as soon practical when data are considered reliable forgeneral use.ñ earth observing system¥restricted use of data during a limited calibration and verification period,after which verified data are deposited in a public archive.ñ magellan¥restricted use of data for a limited period of time (typically one year), afterwhich verified data are deposited into an archive for general use.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues81ñ most past solar system exploration missionsñ compton gamma ray observatoryñ hubble space telescopeñ life and microgravity sciences researchñ inspace technology experiments (2 years)¥restricted use of data for an extended period to carry out investigationsrequiring the acquisition of data over a long interval of time; data are eventually archived.ñ cosmic background explorer¥stringent restrictions placed on access to data on the basis of privacy act orother considerations.ñ human research datañ proprietary data obtained through the use of nasa facilities such a wind tunnel test resultsñ restrictions that result from data purchase agreementsit is nasa policy that all nonproprietary scientific mission data be madepublicly available after the shortest reasonable time in forms which permit awide range of users to derive scientific, technical, and other benefits. however, it appears that neither nasa nor the research community would be wellserved by the rigid adoption of a single uniform policy on the distribution and dissemination of data. rather, the policy should be established for each mission orresearch program on a casebycase basis. wellunderstood and widely circulated criteria for making such determinations must be established. the approach tobe taken for each program or mission will be spelled out in announcements ofopportunity, research announcements, or other competitive mechanisms so thatprospective participants understand the conditions of participation. mechanismsmay also have to be developed to assess adherence to nasa policies concerningthe general availability of data. if a change is necessary in a previously agreedtoapproach to data rights, nasa will consult the investigators affected to develop amutually agreeable plan that meets the spirit of the principles set forth here.source: reprinted from nasa science policy guide (1996), available online at <http://dlt.gsfc.nasa.gov/cordova/guide.html>.charge high prices for data and impose various dissemination and use restrictions.ad hoc bilateral agreements between data centers and government science agencies are becoming commonplace. these agreements take on many forms and canlead to a situation in which individual scientists will no longer be able to obtaindata for their projects without a major effort or large expense. additional legalconstraints on access to scientific data of all types are currently being implemented or considered, as discussed in depth in chapter 5.the committee thus recommends that internationally, in both intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, the full and open exchange of scientific data from publicly funded research be adopted as a fundamental principle.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82bits of powerbox 3.5the òbromley principlesó regarding full andopen access to òglobal changeó datathe overall purpose of these policy statements is to facilitate full and openaccess to quality data for global change research. they were prepared in consonance with the goal of the u.s. global change research program and representthe u.s. governmentõs position on access to global change research data.¥the global change research program requires an early and continuingcommitment to the establishment, maintenance, validation, description, accessibility, and distribution of highquality, longterm data sets.¥full and open sharing of the full suite of global data sets for all global changeresearchers is a fundamental objective.¥preservation of all data needed for longterm global change research isrequired. for each and every global change data parameter, there shouldbe at least one explicitly designated archive. procedures and criteria forsetting priorities for data acquisition, retention, and purging should be developed by participating agencies, both nationally and internationally. aclearinghouse process should be established to prevent the purging andloss of important data sets.¥data archives must include easily accessible information about the dataholdings, including quality assessments, supporting ancillary information,and guidance and aids for locating and obtaining the data.¥national and international standards should be used to the greatest extentpossible for media and for processing and communication of global datasets.¥data should be provided at the lowest possible cost to global change researchers in the interest of full and open access to data. this cost should,as a first principle, be no more than the marginal cost of filling a specificuser request. agencies should act to streamline administrative arrangements for exchanging data among researchers.¥for those programs in which selected principal investigators have initialperiods of exclusive data use, data should be made openly available assoon as they become widely useful. in each case, the funding agencyshould explicitly define the duration of any exclusive use period.source: data management for global change research policy statements, u.s. globalchange research program, july 1991.the committee believes that such an agreement would significantly improve theability of researchers to develop an adequate scientific understanding of ournatural environment and the human condition, to address major problems facingthe world community, and to broaden and enrich the knowledge base of allhumanity.given that scientific data in all the disciplinesñnot just the observationalbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues83sciencesñare widely distributed globally in different archives or databases andthat significant changes in data collection, storage, retrieval, and disseminationare steadily taking place, it is clear that some form of distributed data management strategy will be required to assure effective and efficient access by thescientific community. considering the trends outlined in this chapter, and theimperative for broad and sustained international cooperation in environmentalresearch, the committee concludes that the most viable and effective approach forthe transnational flow of scientific data and information is through a system ofconnected international networks, each of which is the gateway to particulartypes of information. these data exchange networks, building on the successfulmodels presented in appendix c, would connect peer institutions for mutuallybeneficial rewards and collaborations, and provide data access to the research andeducation communities. the committee recommends the continued evolution ofthe existing distributed network of data centers as part of the global informationinfrastructure, with coordinated standards and procedures to provide unrestrictedaccess at zero or low costs to data required for the study of regional and globalproblems.48 this ònetwork of networksó would provide connectivity to multipledata archives internationally and would serve as a coordinated source for important scientific data and information. significant savings in research time, effort,and cost, as well as an overall enhancement of results, could be realized by usingsuch a resource.terminology and nomenclature in biology and related fieldsa significant barrier to sharing of information in the natural sciences is thatsubfields within disciplines have different languages, jargon, and usage. withoutclear means for bridging resulting gaps in understanding, communication can bedifficult. moreover, lack of precision in terms themselves or in their use can leadto fundamental problems in searching for and interpreting data. a biologist, forexample, may use the common name of an organism in recording and transmitting data without taking into consideration the limitations of the term or differences in usage. òmouseó can signify any of a large number of small rodents.peanuts are not nuts. hospital records that indicate òatypical e. colió withoutincluding the original observations justifying the label òatypicaló do not communicate as much information as may be needed for treatment of a patient or forsubsequent studies.the complexity of what is being observed can also complicate precise description. although the largest epidemiological studies describe far fewer events thandoes a short span of infrared satellite data, for example, the resulting biologicaldatabase typically will have many more attributes associated with each event thanare associated with, say, astronomical events. likewise, a patientõs hospital recordoften contains hundreds of different kinds of observations generated in the courseof a diagnostic workup, and even a routine blood sample can yield data of at least abits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84bits of powerdozen kinds. variability in the interpretation of each observation and associativereasoning play key roles in subsequently understanding the information.a fundamental problem related to transfer of biological information in particular is the lack of a consultative body to standardize definitions for the wordsused to describe features of organisms. dictionariesõ coverage often is limited tonarrow groups of organisms. there is no universal language of biology. thechemist knows with great precision what the term òsodium chlorideó means;determining precise descriptors for aspects of biological entities presents challenges of another magnitude.consider, for instance, the term òsporeó as used in a description of microorganisms. sporeforming microorganisms consistently turn up in microbial biodiversityand bioconservation studies. but the taxonomy of these organisms is complex.spore formation occurs in bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and algae, and the range oftypes of spores is also wide. currently, the definitions and descriptions of sporetypes are very confusing but must be taken into account. because of the lack of acomprehensive, authoritative treatment of the description of spores and sporetypes, many biodiversity studies are either in error or not understandable owing tomisidentifications or confusing descriptions. furthermore, the lack of a consistent vocabulary with respect to spores has legal and regulatory consequences.intellectual property rights concerning strains of microorganisms require strictdefinitions and accurate, understandable descriptions of the properties of thestrains, especially if a strain or its use is to be patented. scientists, governmentregulators, patent officials, and industry lawyers, among others, all require agreedupon definitions and standards for describing the various forms of spores andsporerelated anatomical features of microorganisms.the difficulties associated with describing and defining spores applies tomany other descriptors used in biology. further, as biologists adapt words fromother disciplines and branches of biology, the meanings can drift. terms developed by botanists to describe the shapes of leaves are also used in describing cellshapes in microorganisms, albeit with subtle or even major changes in meaning.òobpyriformó signifies a pearshaped leaf with the stem coming out of the bluntend. applied to algae, the same term indicates pearshaped cells with the bluntend in the forward direction in swimming. in addition, although òpearshapedóassumes as a model the common commercial pear sold in most of the world, it isalso the case that asian òpearsó have no obvious narrow end.problems of nomenclature extend to largescale biological studies as well.for example, the lack of consistent classification schemes for landcover vegetation and soils hampers international data exchange and can lead to errors ofinterpretation, especially by nonexpert users. current approaches to classifyingland cover include the physiognomic, floristic, and ecosystematic approaches. itis generally agreed that existing landcover maps cannot provide a globally consistent and uptodate database for global change studies.49 satellite remotesensing is the only viable approach to developing a map of vegetation that isbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues85useful for global change research, and several satellite remote sensing activitiesnow are addressing data requirements for characterizing land cover.50for soils, as for land cover, there is no agreedupon classification scheme.soil is a threedimensional dynamic entity whose propertiesñphysical, chemical, and biologicalñvary dramatically in time and space. observations of thecauses and effects of these variations provide a valuable historical record of thecomponents and processes that have produced current soil characteristics andconditions. with todayõs focus on research to understand humaninduced changesand rates of change in the earth system, the challenge to the soil science community is to provide a globally credible, compatible, and usable soil and terraininformation system that can be integrated with information about other components of the earth system. only with open access to essential terrestrial information can intelligent decisions be derived about the earth system and what, if any,human intervention is needed to protect it. box 3.6 provides an overview of someof the nomenclature problems in this complex area.the need for improved standardization of terminology, however, is not confined to biological or soil science databases. in any field, use of standardizedterminology in a computerized database is vital in structuring the database, indigitizing data captured from printed sources, in accessing the database, and ininterchange of data. the inflexibility and inexorable logic of the computer putnew emphasis on control of terminology and on valueadded system featuressuch as thesauri, synonym files, and expanders for abbreviations and collectivesterms. without these aids, valuable information in databases may become inaccessible or incorrect, and incomplete or misleading information may be retrieved.51terminologyrelated barriers to understanding of data can be addressed onlythrough internationally coordinated actions. some efforts exist, such as thesoter project described in box 3.6. another notable effort, a workshop toinitiate mapping of the correspondence in terms associated with spores across allof microbiology, was supported with modest funding from the united nationsenvironment programme, the committee on data for science and technology(codata), and the u.s. national science foundation. the comprehensivedictionary of the fungi52 is a widely accepted compendium of terms and theirdefinitions. however, the systematized nomenclature of pathology,53 developedin the 1960s for computer entry of data, has not been widely adopted, either inthe united states or in the rest of the world.an important activity in the biological area has been codataõs commission on standardized terminology for access to biological data banks. thecommissionõs encouragement led to the international union of pharmacologyõsestablishment of a body to standardize the nomenclature for receptors for drugs.the international committee on the taxonomy of viruses collaborates with thecommission in its efforts to standardize the descriptors for viruses. the commission also is participating with the international union of biological sciences andbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86bits of powerbox 3.6incompatible soil and terrain information systemstoday there is a critical need for detailed, universally compatible soil and terrain information for use in such applications as global change modeling, nationalresource planning and development, and plant breeding. between 1960 and 1980the food and agriculture organization (fao) of the united nations, working withall nations, generated a soil map of the world, at a scale of 1:5,000,000, andpublished it jointly with unesco.1 this major accomplishment provided a basison which more current and detailed maps suitable for global change modelingmight be built. a soil and terrain map at a scale of 1:1,000,000 is critically neededto study and model rates of change related to human activity in terrestrial ecosystems.2for the industrialized countries, much more detailed soil maps exist at scalesranging from 1:10,000 to 1:500,000. however, for many of the less developedcountries, the faounesco soil map of the world may be the only soil mapavailable for the whole country, although some countries may have detailed mapsfor some areas. because of its lack of detail and the inadequacy of its originaldata, the use of the soil map of the world for national resource planning anddevelopment is often questionable. unfortunately, fao has no plans to produce amore detailed soil map of the world.since 1950, many agricultural and resource development programs have beenimplemented throughout the developing world, with technical and financial assistance from the united nations and governmental and private agencies from industrialized countries. these assistance programs have included a number of localized soil mapping projects. as a result, in many of these countries soils have beenmapped according to different soil classification systems. often no attempt hasbeen made to integrate one system with another. this situation has resulted ingreat confusion in many countries. the significant differences among classificationsystems confound the interpretation of these soil maps for national resource management, and make it difficult, if not impossible, to derive a credible national qualityassessment of soil and land resources.in 1986 the international society of soil science embarked on an ambitiousproject to develop the world soils and terrain (soter) digital database at a scaleof 1:1,000,000.3 the first task was to develop a universal legend for describingboth the cartographic units and the descriptive data for different soil and terraincategories. the second task was to develop a set of procedures that would makeit possible to translate and correlate soil and terrain data (cartographic and descriptive) from any soil classification system to the universal soter database.4during 8 years of effort in several countries many improvements have been madein the soter procedures, but the number of constraints to progress remains formidable.one of the greatest technical constraints is that there is no universally acceptedsoil classification system. three of the major systems in use (i.e., systems thathave been applied in relatively large areas) are the soil taxonomy system (a u.s.system developed with broad international collaboration), the french system, andthe russian system. these systems have been applied widely in specific projectsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues87in countries where the united states, france, and russia have had collaborativedevelopment projects or strong ties. soter attempts to address this constraintby providing a universal legend under which any existing soil and terrain map ofacceptable quality may be translated and correlated with the soter legend andentered into the soter database. in this process the data set for any country orclassification system can retain its original identity.measurements of physical, chemical, and biological characteristics are essential for quantifying soil quality. one of the technical constraints in the measurementof soil properties is the lack of uniformity or standardization of analytical procedures. another constraint on the comparison of soil properties from one classification system to another is that for many soil properties, different class limits areassigned for ranges of soil parameters used for classification purposes. examplesare the lack of uniformity in the classification of soil texture, that is, the amountsand distribution of different sizes of soil particles, and the absence of a universallyaccepted definition of slopeñnonetoslight, slight, moderate, steep, very steep.another barrier to access to comparable soil and terrain data sets across international boundaries is the disparity in the conceptual use of quantitative data todelineate mappable soil differences. some classification systems integrate muchmore quantitative analytic data into these delineations than do other systems.finally, there are intradisciplinary and interdisciplinary constraints. within theapplied discipline of soil science, there are many òsubdisciplines,ó including soilphysics, soil chemistry, soil mineralogy, soil microbiology, soil bioremediation, soilgenesis, soil classification and survey, and soil degradation and reclamation.these groups often work in relative isolation from each other and may developtheir own jargon, which may hinder access to data within the soil science community itself.efforts have been made in recent years to òconnectó soil scientists with specialists in other disciplines, such as crop geneticists. much more could be done,however, to remove the constraints to better use of soils information by plant breeders in the development of crops more suitable to prevailing soil conditions, such ascultivators of maize or rice that are tolerant (or resistant) to aluminum toxicity,which is prevalent in acid soils of the tropics. many other scientists, land useplanners, resource managers, civil engineers, environmental engineers, attorneys,resource economists, and others require specific kinds of information about soilsand soil properties. unfortunately, it continues to be very difficult for the nonsoilscientist to effectively access and use the data.1food and agriculture organization (1980), fao/unesco soil map of the world, foodand agriculture organization of the united nations, rome.2m.f. baumgardner (1993), òthe critical need for a world soils database for globalchange modeling,ó in proceedings of international workshop on soils and global modeling,international geospherebiosphere programme, stockholm.3international society of soil science (1986), òworld soils and terrain digital databasesat a scale of 1:1m (soter),ó project proposal, m.f. baumgardner (ed.), isss, wageningen,the netherlands.4international soil reference and information centre (1993), global and national soilsand terrain digital databases: procedures manual, isric, wageningen, the netherlands.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88bits of powerthe international union of microbiological sciences to establish the system 2000network to assemble a database of scientific names of all biota.all these efforts, however, represent a small part of what needs to be done tomake data and results more accessible. the mechanisms for establishing standardsfor words, formats, and storage and retrieval conventions in biological informationmanagement need to be improved. to be effective and accepted, this must be doneon a truly global basis. in general, standardization of terms in science today iseither carried out or validated by the appropriate icsu body. for example, thecodata task group on fundamental constants is the recognized authority innomenclature for fundamental constants. in biology, the codes of nomenclatureare promulgated by icsu components appropriate to the discipline.the committee suggests that the codata commission on standardizedterminology for access to biological data banks be enhanced into a true consultative body for this purpose. the commission would need funds sufficient toprovide effective standardsetting services to the biological community. expansion of personnel and increased collaboration with other icsu and outside scientific organizations would be necessary for both functional and political reasons.this should be an icsu function, coordinated by codata, because there is noother established international source of such standard setting in the biologicalsciences.data compatibility in the laboratory physical sciencesthe barriers to the international exchange of scientific data in the laboratorysciences generally are not as complex as those in the observational sciences,partly because of the difference in the volumes of data accumulated and used indaytoday research and partly because of the ways in which the disciplines haveevolved. in the physical and the laboratory biological sciences, for example, fullcompilations of data have always been published in textbooks and in articles inprofessional journals available throughout the world, whereas the data of theobservational sciences in many cases have been accumulated only in governmentrecords.barriers to international data exchange in the laboratory sciences concernease of access to data and the use of those data. today, the effective exchange ofvirtually all scientific data requires that they be in electronic format. for manuscripts, exchange can be straightforward if scientists adopt a common wordprocessing language such as tex or latex, now used worldwide in many communities in the physical sciences. scientists need to be able both to generate acomputerreadable manuscript that can be decoded and read on all computerplatforms and to decode and read whatever other scientists may similarly provide. establishing a common set of tools to ensure such compatibility can bedifficult, more so for simulations and animations than for text. because of thevolume of data they involve, simulations and animations need to be compressedbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues89for storage and transmission, a problem that should be easy to resolve since theyinvariably originate in computer format. however, making them accessible toarbitrary platforms requires either considerable sophistication or standardization,or both.converting databases created in hard copy to electronic format can be a costlyenterprise, but is nevertheless far cheaper than erecting library buildings. considerable care is needed to ensure that the original data are not compromised in theprocess of generating the electronic version.54 in recent years, most data transferred automatically from paper to computer have been captured and stored asimages of the printed pages. the alternative is to store the data as text, apart fromcomponents that are true images, such as molecular structures; the increasing availability of optical characterreading software is making textual storage practical andeconomical. the large number of databases in the physical sciences that have beendeveloped by the national institute of standards and technology (nist) havetraditionally been available only in relatively expensive, hardcopy books. nistplans to provide online access to all data it collects and compiles and recently hasdeveloped online access, with search capabilities, to databases critical to researchin chemistry and physics.55 there is a great difference between data stored electronically as images, which cannot be manipulated by the user, and data stored asdigitized alphanumeric information, which can be treated as normal text and tables.data in most modern databases in the physical sciences are generally not static,especially when the databases are stored electronically and hence can be updated asthe information improves. thus there is always a continuing responsibility andexpense to maintain and disseminate those databases as they evolve. if the data arestored only as images, such maintenance is difficult and costly. storage, maintenance, and distribution become vastly easier and more efficient if the information isin the form of a true relational database, in alphanumerics, with userfriendly searchcapabilities, qualities that require expense and technical sophistication to implement.in some areas of the physical sciences, notably materials science and chemistry, the fragmentation of the data into numerous, autonomous, and often incompatible databases continues to be a considerable barrier to access. many smalldata files exist, often maintained by individuals, with a plethora of formats and arange of quality levels. when there are several databases, many means of accessto them, and inadequate directories to locate and search them, it is difficult toknow what information a particular system of databases includes, how to locatesources for information that they do not cover, and how to assess the quality ofthe data. the problem is further exacerbated when some data are in journal form,others in hardcopy manuals, and still others in a variety of electronic databases,each of which may be on a different platform, often with limited search capabilities. this is in contrast to situations in areas such as atomic and nuclear physics,in which data have traditionally been compiled and disseminated from a singlesource, or at least in a standardized format. the dissemination of materialsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90bits of powerscience and chemistry databases remains fragmented, and the broad range ofresearchers in these fields still need better access to them.most of the data in the databases of the physical sciences are needed to carryon the basic research that the funding agencies support. just as the fundingagencies support the hardware necessary to do research, these agencies also carrya responsibility to support the data components of the infrastructure necessary toconduct research. also, just as support for basic research needs to be protectedbecause of the likelihood of long time intervals between the conduct of theresearch and its eventual applications, so should the development and maintenance of databases be protected from shortterm fluctuations in budgets or varying needs for the data in industrial applications. the development of databasesincludes the compilation and evaluation of data from the variety of sources of thedata. once developed, it is critical that databases be maintained and continuouslyupdated as new, relevant data become available. the dissemination should be viaa variety of platforms and should be in userfriendly forms, with crossreferencing to files maintained by other agencies, or available via other electronic media.the committee believes that science agencies should maintain responsibilityeither directly or under subcontract for the development, management, retention,and dissemination of electronic databases that are the product of their researchprograms. within the united states, the office of science and technologypolicy should develop an overall policy for the longterm retention of scientificdata, including a contingency plan for protecting those data that may becomethreatened with the loss of their institutional home.56access to scientific data in developing countriesthe international exchange of scientific data has a scope beyond that of thelarge scientific communities in the technically and economically developed partsof the world. while much of this report reflects the research atmosphere in whichits contributors work, it is especially important to address aspects of the subjectassociated with disparities of wealth and resources among nations, the culturaldifferences with which nations address their societal problems, and the varyingways nations assign their priorities.the differences in priorities are especially marked in the spectrum of ways inwhich nations, from one end to the other of the scale of development, considerscientific and technical matters. more industrialized and wealthier nations chooseto invest discretionary public funds in basic sciences, such as highenergy physics and astronomy, as well as in applied and developmental science and technology. nations toward the other end of the developmental scale put little emphasison sciences with longterm publicgood payback and put most of the resourcesthey have into applied sciences such as agriculture, aquaculture, medicine, and,recently, biotechnology.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues91as a consequence of the availability of discretionary resources, scientists inmore industrialized nations traditionally have been able to obtain reliable, uptodate research equipment, computers, communications infrastructure, and information resources. the scientific communities in developing countries have nothad such advantages. in the context of this report, this has meant that the scientists in developed nations have had much better access to data and to the underlying means of communication than their colleagues in other nations, who consequently have not been able to take full advantage of their talents.one of the great challenges in the advancement of science that now faces theinternational community is to use electronic acquisition, management, storage,and distribution of scientific data to reduce the gap between those who have hadeasy access to the fruits of scientific progress and those who have not. because ofthe decreasing costs of electronic technology, compared with the rising costs oftraditional means of storing and transmitting scientific data, the opportunity isnow opening to make advances in bringing scientists in developing countriesmuch more deeply into the circle of their colleagues in developed countries.there will be problems and outright barriers to confront in the process of reducing this gap, but the situation now offers brighter possibilities than at any timesince science became a major, worldwide enterprise.in this section, the committee reviews some of the issues in data access in thecontext of this asymmetrical relationship between the developed and developingworld. the constraints to data access within developing countries are consideredfirst. these include both the limited capability to generate new scientific data andthe problems facing indigenous scientists who want ready access to data fromoutside sources. such limitations lead to underutilization of the talents of thosescientists because they cannot easily stay abreast of advances in their fields. thecommittee then examines the ability of scientists in developed countries to obtainuseful data based on work in developing countries.constraints on data access within developing countriesbasic to any consideration of constraints on access to data is the economicsituation in developing nations. economic limitations on access to scientific dataare manifest primarily in the inadequacy of communications infrastructure andrelated research equipment (pointed out in chapter 2), as well as in insufficientresources for training and education. another important set of constraints not asdeeply affected by the lack of resources is organizational inadequacies.in many developing countries today, gaining and maintaining access to international sources of scientific data and literature are very difficult. universitylibraries and research institutes in these countries cannot afford to subscribe tothe major scientific journals, publications that tend to be readily available toscientists in wealthy nations. databases that are available even at very low rates,such as the marginal cost of reproduction, can be prohibitively expensive. conbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92bits of powertact and sharing by scientists in nonindustrial nations with scientific colleaguesin other countries can be extremely limited. although there have been somenotable efforts on the part of organizations such as the american association forthe advancement of science and unesco to provide scientists in developingcountries with printed copies of scientific data and information,57 much morecould and should be done to improve such sharing of information. the committee therefore recommends that until affordable and ubiquitous electronic networkservices are available, national and international scientific societies and foreignaid agencies should establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocksof scientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developing countries that need them.training and education considerationsthe governments of most countries recognize that education, particularlyhigher education, is vital for the creation of a solid national base for scientificendeavors and economic growth. the poorest nations typically send their studentsabroad for advanced education and specialized training, often in applied disciplinesdeemed most useful upon the studentsõ return. following completion of theirpostgraduate education and research abroad, however, a large number of thesehighly skilled scientists do not return to their home countries, effectively negatingfor the home country the immediate broader benefits of their training.58 many ofthese countries cannot provide a sufficiently supportive environment, including thenecessary research infrastructure and funding, to attract and keep scientists. further, lack of ready access to current information leads to professional obsolescence.the òbrain drainó from the poorer to the wealthier nations is a serious constraint tothe generation of new knowledge in the developing countries.in addition to the limitations of the available data management and communications technology, training in the use of available technology is limited aswell. the growing sophistication of both hardware and software tends to maketheir use more efficient and eases the training burden in some ways, but it increases it in others. basic functions of the computer system are becoming increasingly automated. however, the functional power of the systems increasesthe demand for and use of more complicated techniques for management, analysis, and dissemination. an important related problem is a lack of adequatelytrained personnel for servicing such complex equipment.at the most basic level is the lack of instructional support for the neophytecomputer user. for example, in courses taught under united nations auspices ontopics such as use of computers in microbiology, the students in developingnations overwhelmingly request supplemental training in the use of computersfor data management and analysis, and in online access to data and informationresources. generally speaking, much more instructional outreach in basic computer data management and communication skills is needed.59bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues93the committee recommends that international development organizations,together with professional societies, provide targeted training programs for scientists in the use of computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data inspecific disciplines.organizational issuesthere are many organizations that provide bilateral and multilateral assistance to scientists in developing countries, although few are focused primarily orexclusively on scientific data issues. these organizations support scientiststhrough a variety of mechanisms. some provide scientific data and servicesdirectly to researchers in developing countries, others provide access to datathrough journal subscriptions and travel grants to international scientific conferences, some provide internet connections and information technology services,and others promote and provide training and education. examples of nationaland international government institutions, nongovernmental organizations, notforprofit organizations, professional societies, and privatesector firms that provide these types of services are described briefly below:60¥u.s. government. within the united states, the federal government,primarily through the u.s. agency for international development (usaid), provides foreign assistance for activities of scientists and engineers in less developednations.61 other federal agencies such as nasa and the department of agriculture assist scientists by providing data resources and data management services.62finally, the department of state, through its bureau on oceans, environment,and science, indirectly provides assistance through negotiating and monitoringenvironmental agreements and conventions that have significant cooperative research and data exchange provisions.63¥intergovernmental organizations. many intergovernmental organizationsprovide assistance to scientists and researchers in developing countries by providing data and information, training and education, and assistance with informationtechnology. the lead player in this arena is the united nations, primarily throughthe united nations educational, scientific, and cultural organization (unesco),united nations development programme (undp), united nations environmentprogramme (unep), food and agriculture organization (fao), world healthorganization (who), world meteorological organization (wmo), and the worldbank.4regional organizations, such as the organization of american states(oas)65 and the pan american health organization, also promote science andtechnology in developing countries through regional activities. the europeancommunity pursues scientific and technological cooperation with developingcountries as well, particularly with the aim of generating knowledge and technologies needed to help achieve sustainable development.66bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94bits of powerfinally, various ad hoc intergovernmental groups and committees havebeen organized to coordinate activities related to major international researchprograms as discussed above in this chapter. many of these groups have subgroups devoted to different data management issues, including activities focusedon developing countries. for example, the committee on earth observationsatellites (ceos) coordinates all spaceborne earth observation missions amongthe spacefaring nations. ceos has established a òplan of action for support todeveloping country activities by ceos participants.ó67 box 3.7 presents anumber of useful òlessons learnedó by ceos participants in providing support todeveloping countries.¥nongovernmental organizations (ngos). international ngos, such as thethird world academy of sciences,68 the international council of scientificunions,69 and the international foundation for science,70 collaborate with u.n.programs and agencies to provide scientific and technological support to developing countries.the consortium for international earth sciences information network(ciesin) is an example of a national ngo, with broad international scope, thatprovides data and services to scientists in the developing countries. in addition toproviding òglobal and regional network development, science data management,decision support, and training, education, and technical consultation services,óciesin is the world data center a for human interactions with the environment.71many national and international notforprofit organizations also assistscientists in developing countries via different mechanisms. the sabrefoundationõs scientific assistance project provides educational materials in theform of books and journal subscriptions and an internetbased technical assistanceprogram to institutions and individuals in the former soviet union and easterneurope.72 the international science foundation was established by george sorosin 1992 to assist scientists in the former soviet union and the baltic states bypromoting contacts with the international scientific community, providing accessto scientific data and information, and establishing international communicationslinks.73 the international research and exchange (irex) board promotes academic exchanges between the united states and the former soviet union andprovides professional training, technical assistance, and policy programs.74 otherorganizations, such as the volunteers in technical assistance (vita), contributeinformation services and technology to developing countries to improve theirquality of life.75national and international scientific and engineering societies and associations play an important role as well. for example, in addition to the africanlibraries program described above, the american association for the advancement of science has promoted regional collaborations between scientists in developing countries.76 some professional organizations provide travel grants toallow individual scientists from developing countries to attend international scibits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues95box 3.7ceos òlessons learnedó regarding support todeveloping countriesthe committee on earth observation satellites (ceos) compiled the followinglist of principles based on the experiences of its members in providing technicalassistance to developing nations:¥development projects should be planned in partnership between donorsand local institutions in response to real needs of incountry decisionmakers. decisionmakers need to be convinced of the utility of such activities inorder to create the appropriate environment for sustainable operation.¥projects supported by joint efforts of space agencies with development assistance organizations can benefit from combining important skills in bothscience/technology and sustainable development.¥pilot projects should be selected with their later operational requirements inmind. to be considered successful, a pilot project will provide the foundation for ongoing routine application of the demonstrated capability. this suggests the use of affordable technology and readily available data. projectsaimed at improving indigenous capability to perform already ongoing operations are more likely to succeed.¥documentation prepared for use by developing country users should beavailable in a language readily understood locally, using minimal technicaljargon, to be easily understandable by the target audience.¥data and information for developing countries should be on media appropriate for the users, avoiding electronic formats requiring equipment that is notavailable. easily reproducible text and imagery will often be more readilyusable than sophisticated digital products. at the same time, considerationshould be given to improving local infrastructure so that media such as cdroms can progressively be used in developing country applications.¥expertise in developing countries must not only be created but also be sustained. this suggests holding local training courses and emphasizing òtrainingthe trainer.ó improving existing educational institutions rather than creating newtraining centers can enhance the sustainability of the educational process.¥local reception of satellite data can be an effective tool in identifying practical applications and demonstrating the value of the data in the local environment. equipment installed in developing countries must be designed tobe rugged and easily maintained with locally available capabilities.¥satellite data alone will not contribute to development unless it is transformed into useful information and disseminated.¥countries that have successfully applied satellite technology to development problems can serve as examples and share their experience and expertise within their regions and more broadly. their experience may be morerelevant and more applicable to other developing country situations thanthe approaches used in industrialized countries.¥development assistance projects should be structured with sufficient flexibility to respond to the unexpected events that often occur.source: ceos; available online at <http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/0xc06afc3d0x000291f2;internal$sk=041858e7>.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96bits of powerentific and technical conferences. other efforts include the american society formechanical engineersõ partnership with the mechanical engineering researchinstitute of the russian academy of sciences to promote the application ofenvironmental and energyrelated technologies to establish a technology transfermechanism between the two organizations.¥private sector. a number of private sector organizations also provideassistance to scientists in developing countries. this assistance is usually indirect, through the financial support of international ngos such as the third worldacademy of sciences and icsu.many of the problems cited above in this section are exacerbated by a lack ofeffective organizational structures or institutional mechanisms for involving scientists within developing countries in the decisionmaking process regardingscientific research, much less data access issues. however, foreign aid agenciesin the developed countries and intergovernmental development organizations areknown not to involve scientists in their decisionmaking process either. forexample, u.n. funding agencies respond almost exclusively to requests from theforeign ministries of member countries. the foreign ministries in developingcountries almost never utilize scientists in decisions. the result is a dearth offunding applications for scientific infrastructure capacity building, which is essential not only to support indigenous scientific research efforts, but also toencourage economic development. an analogous situation is evolving in usaid,where science once flourished, but where the involvement of scientists in internalplanning and funding decisions is eroding rapidly.of course, some success stories do exist. for example, vietnam, concernedabout environmental pollution as well as the need to build biotechnology capacity, arranged for scientists at many levels to collaborate in developing a nationalplan in microbiology and biotechnology infrastructure capacity building for submission to the global environment facility of the u.n. through the united nations industrial development organization.with regard to improving access to scientific data in developing countries,the committee makes the following recommendations:¥scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organize topromote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their own countries,as well as to make their data available internationally.¥foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientists indeveloping countries more direct, peerreviewed grants that include support foraccess to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists in such nations intheir own countriesõ capacitybuilding initiatives, research policy decisions, andnational database construction efforts.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues97constraints on access to data from developing countriesthe constraints caused by inequities among nations in access to scientificdata are felt most severely in those sciences concerned with inherently international issues, such as food production, biodiversity, the prevention and cure ofcommunicable diseases, global climate change, and other earth system processes.each of these areas of concern requires international research and approaches toproblem solving. as discussed above in this chapter, developing this essentialunderstanding requires the generation of globally compatible, accessible, andusable data sets related to terrestrial ecosystems, the physical environment, andhuman activities. collaboration of the scientific community in every nation, richand poor, in the generation of global observational data sets and the subsequentfull and open transnational flow of those data is imperative; its need cannot beemphasized too strongly.for example, in the earth and environmental sciences, particularly in globalchange research, it is essential to integrate remote sensing data with ògroundtruthó in situ observational data in the creation of consistent and valid data sets.without this integration, the value of the data products and research results can beundermined considerably. the in situ data are generated by individual workersand organizations in many different countries. maintaining cooperative activitiesthrough which the in situ data are reliably supplied is essential for the success ofinternational research projects. many of the gaps in the collection and dissemination of in situ data occur in developing countries, where a lack of resources andother barriers make such cooperative activities difficult.as this report documents, the more wealthy industrialized nations have developed a broad range of international research initiatives, largely supported by apolicy of full and open access to scientific data. although significant problemsremain and new barriers to effective collaboration continue to arise, there aresufficient incentives and resources for sharing of data by scientists in the developed world. however, the sharing of scientific datañparticularly data for fundamental researchñtends to be a much lower priority for many of the less wealthy,nonindustrialized nations. success in ensuring full and open transnational flowof scientific data among these nations may depend on the degree to which theindustrialized nations are responsive to the needs of the nonindustrialized nationsand can provide incentives for their participation. an example of such a needinvolves the inability of developing nations to pay for largescale disease treatment programs. box 3.8 describes the mutual benefits possible in collaborativedata sharing.as discussed above, incentives for participation by developing nations mightinclude assistance in the development of human resources, the provision of equipment, and the general improvement of the research and communications infrastructure. significant efforts should be made by the scientific community of thewealthier nations to include scientists from the nonindustrialized nations as partbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98bits of powerners in the global scientific enterprise, particularly in research initiatives that arefundamentally dependent on the availability of global data sets or in studiesaddressing basic needs such as disease control and prevention.for example, some attention is being paid to the searching of genomic information useful for preventing tropical diseases,77 and some of this research isbeing carried out in developed nations. however, greater emphasis on understanding such diseases would follow from enhancement of the infrastructure forexpertise in biology and biotechnology in developing nations. developed countriesõ promotion of such advances would not be purely altruistic. leishmaniasis,a disease usually associated with the tropics, infected troops in desert storm andis present on both sides of the texasmexico border. tuberculosis usually is notperceived as a tropical disease, per se, yet resistant strains of the bacteria from thetropics have found their way into populations in the developed nations. themotivation for trying to identify and locate genes possibly conferring resistancein populations where the diseases are common would be deepened by researchersõ proximity to and familiarity with the effects of such diseases, if the resourcesand personnel were available in the affected countries. economic constraintsmight also be lessened for studies in developing nations, where labor costs, evenfor highly trained research scientists, are much lower.another barrier to the collection of data is evident in field studies related tobiodiversity in developing countries. it is well known that the greatest concentrations of the planetõs biodiversity occur in developing countries. however, theresources to study and exploit the diverse gene pools for biotechnology lie largelyin the developed nations. in this area, as in all of science and technology,professionals in developing countries generally lack access to all the data andinformation needed to support their work. further, considerations regardingintellectual property are more complicated in biology than in most other discibox 3.8examples of successful transnational data collaborationsthe world data centers (wdcs) have sponsored several òdata rescueóprojects in developing countries. in some cases, modest funds and sometimesequipment have been provided to help local scientists digitize older timeseriesdata as part of the effort to build the international geospherebiosphere programmeõs and other studiesõ global digital databases to document trends andchanges. local scientists thus get their own data back in digital form on diskettesor cdroms, depending on the technology they have. these efforts further notonly their own work, but also the work of global change researchers internationally.also, the wdca oceanography (nodc/noaa) data rescue project provides theopportunity for local research groups to help to produce for the first time historicaland highly useful analyses and maps of global ocean climatic changes.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues99plines, because the biological materials themselves are repositories for scientificinformation. for this reason, bioprospecting for new gene pools in tropicalcountries by commercial and other interests from industrialized nations has become a contentious issue on a global scale.78 for example, brazil will no longerallow the sampling of biota by nonbrazilians and will not allow export of biota.79in such cases, the study of these materials is limited to what the country can dowith local resources. data that are produced in this way are sequestered ratherthan shared with the general scientific community. other unanticipated problemscan arise in this context as well, as boxes 3.9 and 3.10 illustrate.with regard to in situ data collection efforts in developing countries, thecommittee recommends the following actions: the icsu, together with fundingagencies and nongovernmental bodies, should strengthen its efforts to assist developing countries in undertaking their own scientific studies and encouragescientists engaged in such studies to take active roles in the international scientific community, where their efforts can be appreciated and used. legal andprocedural protocols must be developed to provide for fair and equitable sharingof any resulting intellectual property. this would not only help create indigenousbox 3.9a hobsonõs choicethe following example of a tradeoff between two unpalatable options was provided by the consortium for international earth sciences information network(ciesin) in response to the committeeõs òinquiry to interested partiesó:one unexpected experience is in the balancing of data access privileges with theaccess of researchers to pursue their research in specific countries. our experienceincludes an instance where a multiyear program to collect and integrate socioeconomic and environmental data in an african country was successfully completed, thedata conveyed to ciesin for sustaining access, then the government of the subjectnation was ousted through a violent and protracted coup. the successor governmentdid not agree with the predecessor government, in terms of allowing open access tothose data collected and provided by its agencies to the ciesinsponsored researchers. thus, they wanted to prohibit future release of data already out of their physicalcustody.the clear implication was that failure to comply with these newly implementedrestrictions would cause further restrictions of followon research projects of the typeciesin initially supported with unep [united nations environment programme] andothers. the trade off between restricting data access and restricting research accessfor future collection is an unsavory and unforeseen challenge that is likely to recur inthat region and elsewhere, as political instability ensues. future governments maydecline to honor the information sharing policies of their country. this dilemmathreatens the free and open access of data on a sustaining basis and raises significant questions about where the locus of ownership of data is after governments arereplaced, peacefully or through violent actions.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100bits of powerbox 3.10can data be too accurate?the following is an excerpt from a message that is part of a discussion on theinternet list server, <biodiv1@bdt.org.br>. this discussion group emphasizes global biodiversity, conservation of habitat and biota, and information regarding theseareas. the author of this message is jeff waldon. the message illustrates animportant but little appreciated aspect of the tension between free dissemination ofinformation and commercial and nonscientific private interests: the debate is whether release or restriction of sensitive locational information isthe best thing for conservation. there are cases of collectors using such informationto decimate rare and endangered species at a site (e.g., the recent arrest of butterflypoachers that targeted national parks in the western united states). on the otherhand, there are other examples of species protection because the landowner wasinformed of the existence of a rare animal or plant. i have been involved in thedevelopment of information systems for about 10 years, and i have heard both sidesargued strenuously. my personal feeling is that the òboogie manó collector is real, butin most cases we overreact to his presence. we are losing many more populations ofthreatened and endangered species because of ignorance rather than malice. we have developed a compromise in our systems whereby we release sensitiveinformation on species, but the locational data accuracy is reduced to help reduce thelikelihood that a collector might successfully collect at that site. if a developmentproject for the public is reviewed, and more accurate information is required, thatinformation is provided at the discretion of the biologist working with the requester. icome from the academic school of thought that relies on the free interchange ofinformation, and this compromise strikes me as still too restrictive at times. on theother hand, government employees are bound by laws and policies that make themaccountable for their actions including the consequences of releasing information onthe location of threatened and endangered species, and i see their dilemma.source: jeff waldon, personal communication, 1995, used with permission.data resources and promote a greater interest within nations of the developingworld in obtaining a more thorough understanding of their own resources, butalso lead to more fruitful international cooperative research.recommendations on data issues in thenatural sciencesthe recommendations set forth below are addressed to all individuals andorganizations with responsibilities for managing scientific data acquired withpublic funds.1.governmental science agencies and intergovernmental organizationsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues101should adopt as a fundamental operating principle the full and open exchange ofscientific data. by òfull and open exchangeó the committee means that the dataand information derived from publicly funded research are made available withas few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than thecost of reproduction and distribution.2.the international council of scientific unions (icsu), together with thescientific specialized agencies of the united nations, the organisation for economic cooperation and development megascience forum, and the national science agencies and professional societies of member countries, should considerdeveloping a distributed international network of data centers. such a networkshould draw on the strengths of successful examples of international data exchangeactivities as described in appendix c of this report, including, in particular, theicsu world data centers, and become a prominent part of the global information infrastructure that has been proposed by the ògroup of sevenó nations. tofacilitate the international dissemination and interdisciplinary use of scientificdata, all public scientific data activities, including the network of data centers,should plan for and commit to providing the human and financial resourcessufficient for carrying out the following functions:a.involve experts from the relevant disciplines, together with information resource managers and technical specialists, in the active managementand preservation of the data;b.develop and maintain uptodate, comprehensive, online directoriesof data sources and protocols for access;c.provide documentation (metadata) adequate to ensure that each dataset can be properly used and understood, with special attention given tomaking the data usable by individuals outside the core discipline area. thisproblem is particularly acute within the biological sciences, in which imprecision and variations in taxonomic definitions and nomenclature pose significant barriers to communication, even among the biological subdisciplines.the committee suggests that the codata commission on standardizedterminology for access to biological data banks be enhanced into a trueinternational consultative body and that similar mechanisms be developedfor other disciplines, as needed;d.incorporate advances in technology to facilitate access to and use ofscientific data, while overcoming incompatibilities in formats, media, andother technical attributes through vigorous coordination and standardizationefforts;e.institute effective programs of quality control and peer review of datasets; andf.digitize all key historical data sets and ensure that every importantcondition for the longterm retention of data be met, including the adoptionbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102bits of powerof appropriate retention and purging criteria and the timely transfer of alldata sets to new media to prevent their deterioration or obsolescence.3.the icsu and other professional scientific societies should encouragethe study of, and publication of peerreviewed papers on, effective data management and preservation practices, as well as promote the teaching of those practices in all institutions of higher learning.4.all scientists conducting publicly funded research should make theirdata available immediately, or following a reasonable period of time for proprietary use. the maximum length of any proprietary period should be expresslyestablished by the particular scientific communities, and compliance should bemonitored subsequently by the funding agency.5.as a corollary to recommendation 2.a above, publicly funded scientificdatabases should be maintained either directly or under subcontract by the government science agencies with the requisite discipline mission and need. in theunited states, the office of science and technology policy should develop anoverall policy for the longterm retention of scientific data, including a contingency plan for protecting those data that may become threatened with the loss oftheir institutional home.806.with regard to improving access to scientific data in developing countries, the committee makes the following recommendations:a.international development organizations, together with professionalsocieties, should provide targeted training programs for scientists in the useof computers, with emphasis on the management of digital data in specificdisciplines.b.foreign aid agencies should (i) make available to individual scientistsin developing countries more direct, peerreviewed grants that include support for access to data, and (ii) facilitate the involvement of scientists in suchnations in their own countriesõ capacitybuilding initiatives, research policydecisions, and national database construction efforts.c.scientists in developing countries should be encouraged to organize topromote the policy of full and open access to scientific data in their owncountries, as well as to make their data available internationally.d.the icsu, together with funding agencies and nongovernmental bodies, should strengthen its efforts to assist developing countries in undertakingtheir own scientific studies and encourage scientists engaged in such studiesto take active roles in the international scientific community, where theirefforts can be appreciated and used. legal and procedural protocols must bedeveloped to provide for fair and equitable sharing of any resulting intellectual property.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues103e.until affordable and ubiquitous electronic network services are available, national and international scientific societies and foreign aid agenciesshould establish or improve their existing efforts to send extra stocks ofscientific publications to libraries and research institutions in developingcountries that need them.7.finally, the icsu, together with the principal national and internationalscientific organizations mentioned in recommendation 2 above, should convenea series of major international meetings to initiate meaningful action on theserecommendations.notes1.privacy issues, which become especially important in the social sciences and clinical research,were judged to be of only tertiary concern in the context of most of the disciplines examined inthis study, and thus are not addressed in any detail in this report.2.in some areas of the experimental sciences, it is standard practice for researchers to publishgeneral results, such as structures of protein molecules, but retain details, such as precisecoordinates of the atoms, for some limited period of time, during which they may pursue theimplications of their own measurements. in many instances, particularly in the observationalsciences, principal investigators are allowed to keep data sets proprietary for some specifiedperiod of time in order to be able to analyze them and publish their results first. this issue isdiscussed below in this chapter.3.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data on our physical universe: anew strategy for archiving the nationõs scientific information resources, national academypress, washington, d.c.4.cosmicray research is an exception here. while it is based largely on observations rather thanexperiments, it has been classified traditionally in physics, rather than astronomy or spacescience. it overlaps all of these, of course.5.for a more detailed discussion of the differences between experimental and observational data,see national research council (1995), preserving scientific data, note 3.6.for a comprehensive listing of most internationally available data sets from space missions, seethe nasa goddard space flight centerõs national space science data center home page at<http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ >.7.for a broad listing of international www servers covering all aspects of earth science data andinformation, see the nasa global change master directory at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgibin/pointers/>; see also <http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/>.8.a. maddison (1995), monitoring the world economy: 18201992, oecd, paris, 255 pp.9.t.f. malone (1995), òreflections on the human prospect,ó in annual review of energy and theenvironment (r.h. socolow, ed.) 20:129, annual reviews, palo alto, california.10.see <http://www.usgcrp.gov > for additional information on the u.s. global change researchprogram and related data activities, and <http://www.igbp.kva.se/index.html> for informationon the international geospherebiosphere programme.11.see the www virtual library for a comprehensive index of biological data and information at<http://golgi.harvard.edu/biopages>. see also a listing of sources of international biologicalinformation on the internet on the web site of the u.s. geological surveyõs biological resources division at <http://www.its.nbs.gov/nbii/iao/ibii.html>; and the biotechnology indusbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104bits of powertry organizationõs compilation of biotechnology databases at <http://www.bio.org/educ/dbasef.html>.12.see, for example, national research council (1996), statistical challenges and possible approaches in the analysis of massive data sets, national academy press, washington, d.c.13.genevieve j. knezo, (1994), òmajor science and technology programs: megaprojects andpresidential initiatives, trends through the fy 1995 request,ó congressional research service, washington, d.c., march 29, p. 1.14.congressional budget office, july (1991), òlarge nondefense r&d projects in the budget:19801986,ó cbo, washington, d.c. unfortunately, more recent statistics are not available.15.for a detailed review of the various large international research projects and programs currently under way, see organisation for economic cooperation and development, oecdmegascience forum (1993), megascience and its background, paris. see also the oecdmegascience forum web site at <http://www.oecd.org/dsti/mega/>.16.15 united states code, section 5652 (1992).17.see general accounting office (1990), environmental datañmajor effort is needed to improve noaaõs data management and archiving, washington, d.c.; and general accountingoffice (1990), space operationsñnasa is not archiving all potentially valuable data, washington, d.c. it should be noted that both agencies have taken significant measures to rectifythese past problems.18.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data, note 3.19.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data, note 3, at pp. 4748.20.see gary taubes, (1996), òscience journals go wired,ó science 271(february 9):764; andunesco expert conference on electronic publishing in science (1996), icsu press at<http://www.lmcp.jussieu.fr/~fabrice/icsu/information/index.html>. see also, steve hitchcock,leslie carr, and wendy hall, òa survey of stm online journals 199095: the calm beforethe storm,ó at <http://journals.ecs.soton.ac.uk/survey/survey.html>.21.<http://www.aip.org:80/>.22.<http://www.iop.org/>.23.see <http://eij.gsfc.nasa.gov>.24.see, for example, the nasafunded astrophysics data system abstract service at <http://adswww.harvard.edu/adsabstracts.html>.25.see richard t. kouzes, james d. myers, and william a. wulf (1996), òcollaboratories: doing science on the internet,ó ieee computer 29(8):4046.26.for additional insights in this area, see the proceedings of the ô96 unesco conference onelectronic publishing in science, held at the unesco headquarters in paris, february 1923,1996. a summary of the results from that conference was presented by d.f. shaw (1996),òelectronic publishing in science,ó science international, icsu paris, may, pp. 13.27.see nahum gershon and judith r. brown (1996), òcomputer graphics and visualization in theglobal information infrastructure,ó a special report in ieee computer graphics and applications, march, pp. 6075; and robert braham (1995), òmath & visualization: new tools, newfrontiers,ó a focus report in ieee spectrum, november, pp. 1965.28.canadian global change program (1996), òdata policy and barriers to data access in canada:issues for global change research,ó the royal society of canada, ottawa. national researchcouncil (1993), 1992 review of the world data center a for rockets and satellites, nationalspace science data center, board on earth sciences and resources, national academy press,washington, d.c.; national research council (1992), toward a coordinated spatial datainfrastructure for the nation, board on earth sciences and resources, national academypress, washington, d.c.; national academy of public administration (1991), the archives ofthe future: archival strategies for the treatment of electronic databases, a report for thenational archives and records administration; general accounting office (1990), environmental datañmajor effort is needed to improve noaaõs data management and archiving,bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues105washington, d.c.; general accounting office (1990), space operationsñnasa is notarchiving all potentially valuable data, washington, d.c.; national research council (1990),spatial data needs: the future of the national mapping program, board on earth sciencesand resources, national academy press, washington, d.c.; national research council (1988),geophysical data: policy issues, committee on geophysical data,, national academy press,washington, d.c.; national research council (1988), selected issues in space science datamanagement and computation, space science board, national academy press, washington,d.c.; national research council (1986), atmospheric climate data: problems and promises,board on atmospheric sciences and climate, national academy press, washington, d.c.;national research council (1986), issues and recommendations associated with distributedcomputation and data management systems for the space sciences, space science board,national academy press, washington, d.c.; j.k. haas, h.w. samuels, and b.t. simmons(1985), appraising the records of modern science and technology: a guide, massachusettsinstitute of technology, cambridge, mass.; national research council (1984), solarterrestrial data access, distribution and archiving, space science board and board on atmosphericsciences and climate, national academy press, washington, d.c.; national research council(1982), selected issues in space science data management and computation, space scienceboard, national academy press, washington, d.c.29.committee on the future of longterm ecological data (fled),  (1995), final report of theecological society of america, katherine l. gross, chair, ecological society of america,washington, d.c.; national research council (1993), a biological survey for the nation,committee on the formation of the national biological survey, national academy press,washington, d.c.30.national research council (1986), toward a geospherebiosphere program, national academy press, washington, d.c.; national research council (1988), toward an understanding ofglobal change: initial priorities for u.s. contributions to the international geospherebiosphere program, national academy press, washington, d.c.; and national research council(1990), research strategies for the u.s. global change research program, national academypress, washington, d.c.31.additional information on the global climate observing system can be found at the worldmeteorological organizationsõs web site at <http://www.wmo.ch/web/gcos/gcoshome.html>;and see <http://www.wmo.ch/web/www/www.html> for the world weather watch, and <http://www.wmo.ch/web/arep/gaw.html> for the global weather watch. see <http://www.unesco.org/ioc/goos/iocgoos.html> for the global ocean observing system and <http://www.wsl.ch/wsidb/gtos/gtos.html> for the global terrestrial observing system.32.see the carbon dioxide information analysis centerõs web site at <http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/cdiac>.33.for extensive discussion of data quality control and assurance procedures and recommendations in the context of interdisciplinary environmental research, see national research council(1995), finding the forest in the trees: the challenge of combining diverse environmentaldata, national academy press, washington, d.c.34.for a general overview of issues and requirements in archiving digital data and information, seetask force on archiving of digital information (1995), preserving digital information, thecommission on preservation and access and the research libraries group, inc., at http://lyra.rlg.org./arch tf/>.35.see, for example, committee on the future of longterm ecological data (fled), (1995),final report of the ecological society of america, katherine l. gross, chair, ecologicalsociety of america, washington, d.c.36.national research council (1995), preserving scientific data, note 3.37.national research council (1994), facing the challenge: the u.s. national report to theidndr world conference on natural disaster reduction, yokohama, japan, may 2327, 1994,bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106bits of poweru.s. national committee for the decade for natural disaster reduction, national academypress, washington, d.c.; national research council (1991), a safer future: reducing theimpacts of natural disasters, u.s. national committee for the decade for natural disasterreduction, national academy press, washington, d.c.38.national research council (1995), finding the forest in the trees, note 33.39.see, generally, national research council (1992), toward a coordinated spatial data infrastructure for the nation, board on earth sciences and resources, national academy press,washington, d.c.40.secondary users, such as researchers in other fields, policymakers, educators, and the generalpublic, do not collect and create data sets, but they perform tasks with, analyze, and interpretthe data. for a discussion of distinctions between user categories, see national researchcouncil (1995), study on the longterm retention of selected scientific and technical recordsof the federal governmentñworking papers, national academy press, washington, d.c.41.see national research council (1995), finding the forest in the trees, note 33, and preserving scientific data, note 3. for general information on metadata issues, see the lawrencelivermore national laboratory metadata and data management information page at <http://www.llnl.gov/livcomp/metadata/metadata.html>.42.for more information regarding igbpdis data activities, see <http://www.cnrm.meteo.fr:8000/igbp/outline.html>. additional information is provided in the òsummary report on the 7thigbpdis scientific steering committee meeting manualó (1996) at <http://www.cnrm.meteo.fr:8000/igbp/meetings summaryrepsscfeb96verhtml.html>. see also the nasa globalchange master directory for another example of a successful online indexing effort at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgibin/pointers/>.43.michael carlowicz (1997), ònew data from cold war treasure trove,ó eos, american geophysical union, vol. 78, no. 9, march 4, p. 93.44.see òcorona: americaõs first satellite programó (1995), kevin c. ruffner, ed., central intelligence agency history staff center for the study of intelligence, washington, d.c.; and roberta. mcdonald (1995), òopening the cold war sky to the public: declassifying satellite reconnaissance imagery,ó photogrammetric engineering and remote sensing, pp. 385390. for alisting of declassified satellite data products, including information about missions, dates, andresolution, see the united states geological surveyõs eros data center web site at <http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/glis/hyper/guide/disp>.45.see william j. broad (1996), òantisub seabed grid thrown open to eavesdropping,ó newyork times, july 2, p. c1.46.see national research council (1988), ozone depletion, greenhouse gases and climatechange: proceedings of a joint symposium by the board on atmospheric sciences and climateand the committee on global change, national academy press, washington, d.c.47.national research council (1995), on the full and open exchange of scientific data, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c. the appendix to the report also presents a collection ofother similar supporting policy statements.48.see information infrastructure task force (1994), the global information infrastructure:agenda for cooperation, washington, d.c., at <http://www.iitf.nist.gov/documents/docs/gii/giiagend.html>.49.j.r.g. townshend, c. justice, w. li, c. gurney, and j. mcmanus (1991), òglobal land coverclassification by remote sensing: present capabilities and future possibilities,ó remote sensing and the environment 35:243355.50.see t.r. loveland, j.w. merchant, d.o. ohlen, and j.f. brown (1991), òdevelopment of aland cover characteristics database for the conterminous u.s.,ó photogrammetric engineering and remote sensing 57:14531463.51.these points have been discussed in some detail for the field of materials databases, where thehigh volume and critical importance of metadata, the broad scope of the materials field, the richbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues107vocabulary of materials technology, and the international character of materials informationgive special importance to the subjects. see j.h. westbrook and w. grattidge (1992), òterminological standards for materials databases,ó in computerization and networking of materialsdatabases, vol. 3, t.j. barry and k.w. reynard, eds., american society for testing andmaterials, philadelphia, pp. 1533.52.d.l. hawksworth, b.c. sutton, and g.c. ainsworth (1983), dictionary of the fungi (includingthe lichens), seventh edition, commonwealth mycological institute, kew, surrey, england.53.college of american pathologists, committee on nomenclature and classification of disease(1965), systematized nomenclature of pathology, first edition, american cancer society andamerican medical association, chicago.54.a reference with numerous examples from the field of chemistry is j.h. westbrook (1993),òproblems in the computerization of chemical information: capture of tabular and graphicaldata,ó journal of chemical information and computer sciences 33:617.55.see <http://www.nist.gov/srd/>.56.see the recommendations in national research council (1995), preserving scientific data,note 3.57.for example, the american association for the advancement of science sponsors the projectfor african research libraries in partnership with u.s. scientific societies to provide subscriptions for core scientific and technical journals in 35 subsaharan african countries (see <http://www.aaas.org/international/ssa1.htm> for general information on international programs).for unescoõs programs on the advancement, transfer, and sharing of knowledge in the natural sciences, see also <http://www.unesco.org/chintern/programmes/science/highlights.html>.58.these statistics vary over time and according to country and discipline, and are available foronly a few major countries. see science & engineering indicators (1996), national scienceboard, washington, d.c., pp. 228 to 230. the statistics indicate that 35 to 75 percent offoreign graduate students surveyed intend to stay in the united states upon completion of theirstudies.59.for an overview of potential educational activities to improve the management of scientific andengineering data, see national research council (1986), improving the treatment of scientificand engineering data through education, national academy press, washington, d.c.60.this is not an exhaustive list of organizations that provide assistance to scientists in developingcountries. several organizations, such as the international development research centre library, provide extensive links to internet sites related to international development (see <http://www.irdc.ca/library/world/world.html>).61.usaid focuses on regional activities, such as the african data dissemination service (adds),which is conducted in conjunction with several private organizations, the office of arid landstudies at the university of arizona, nasa, and noaa. an example of an adds project isthe famine early warning system, which, with the help of the usgs eros data center,provides information about potential famine situations to allow for proactive initiatives toprevent famine (see <http://edcsnw4.cr.usgs.gov/adds/general/> for additional information onadds). other usaid activities, such as africalink and the leland initiative, provide network connections and information management to africa (see <http://www.info.usaid.gov/regions/afr/> for a description of these and other regional programs in africa). the usaidsponsored u.s.russian ngo cooperation project provides small grants and equipment forindividuals and institutions to link to an environmental email network in central asia and thewest newly independent states (see <gopher://gaia.info.usaid.gov:70/00...enisreg/nis.factsheet/enviro3.txt>).62.for example, the nasa pathfinder project uses landsat images to determine forest land coverand change for three quarters of the world. the usda foreign agriculture service providessupport to the consultative group on international agriculture research (cgiar) through theprediction of global production of major grains. for additional information on both programs,see the proceedings of a workshop on the use of remote sensing technologies and gisbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108bits of powerdatabase in cgiar centers (1995), environment and national resources information center(see <http://www.info.usaid.gov/environment/enric/special/cgiar.htm>).63.see <http://www.state.gov/www/global/oes/envir.html>.64.see <http://www.unsystem.org> for the official listing of the united nations system of organizationsõ internet servers. numerous initiatives within the u.n. programs and specialized agencies directly assist scientists in developing countries through a variety of mechanisms. oneexample is the sustainable development network programme of the undp, which links government organizations, the private sector, universities, ngos, and individuals in developingcountries through electronic networks for the purpose of exchanging information on sustainabledevelopment (see <http://www3.undp.org>). refer to the programsõ and agenciesõ home pagesfor further details on other u.n. initiatives.65.for example, the oas redhucyt program is a hemispherewide interuniversity scientific andtechnological information network created in 1991 with the objective to connect oas membercountries to the internet, òintegrating an electronic network for the exchange of scientific andtechnological information among professors, researchers, and specialists, at different universities in the member statesó (for additional information, see <http://www.oas.org/en/prog/red/covere.htm>). oas also sponsors a regional scientific and technological developmentprogram, which carries out a number of multinational and national projects that provide member states òwith an opportunity to share experiences, to provide . . . mutual support and toengage in joint activities to further the advancement of science and technology and to promoteintegral developmentó (see <http://www.oas.org/en/prog/pa26e.htm>).66.see the institute for baltic studiesõ web site at <http://www.ibs.ee/dollar/fw4/wp/dev.html>.67.<http://gds.esrin.esa.it:80/559de416/t0xc1cce6220x00029290>.68.the third world academy of sciences (twas) was founded in 1983 to support scientificresearch in developing countries through provision of research grants, spare parts for scientificequipment, books and journals, and fellowships. see <http://www.ictp.trieste.it/twas.html/>for a description of twas activities and programs. the organization not only is closely coupledwith the u.n., but also collaborates with the international council of scientific unions (seenext note).69.the international council of scientific unions (icsu) was founded in 1933 to òbring togethernatural scientists in international scientific endeavor.ó icsu works closely with unesco,wmo, fao, and unep through formal or ad hoc collaborations (see <http://www.lmcp.jussieu.fr/~fabrice/icsu/> for additional information on icsu). icsuõs committee on scienceand technology in developing countries (costed) was created in 1966 to stimulate international scientific and technological cooperation in developing countries. it is a joint initiativecosponsored by unesco and was merged with the international biosciences network, anactivity with similar objectives, in 1994. for additional information on costed and itsactivities, see g. thyagara (1995), òcooperative research for development is costedõsaim,ó the hindu online (<http://www.webpage.com/hindu/960113/22/0820a.html>). icsualso works to assist scientists in developing countries through its scientific unions and interdisciplinary committees; for example, codata recently established the task group on outreach, education, and communication, which promotes collaboration, scientific informationexchange, and technology transfer for individual scientists and technologists in developingnations.70.founded in 1972, the international foundation for science (ifs) provides support (in the formof research grants, equipment, regional workshops and training courses, and travel grants) toyoung scientists in developing countries in the following research areas: aquatic resources,animal production, crop science, forestry/agroforestry, food science, and natural products. see<http://ifs.plants.ox.ac.uk/ifs/> for additional information about ifs activities and programs.71.see <http://www/ciesin.org> for additional information about ciesinõs programs and services.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scientific issues10972.see <http://www.std.com/sabre/sap/sap.info.html> for additional information on the sabrefoundation.73.see <http://www.isf.ru/indexisf.html> for additional information about the international science foundation and its various programs that assist scientists, such as its library assistanceprogram and the telecommunications program.74.see <http://info.irex.org> for additional information about irex programs.75.see <http://vita.org>.76.see american association for the advancement of science, science and technology in theamericas: perspectives on pan american collaboration (1994), 2nd ed., e. jeffrey stann, ed.,aaas, washington, d.c.77.see james m. musser (1996), òmolecular population genetic analysis of emerged bacterialpathogens: selected insights,ó eid, 2(1), januarymarch.78.see biodiversity prospecting: using genetic resources for sustainable development (1993),reid et al., world resources institute, washington, d.c., 350 pp.; and òbioprospecting/biopiracy and indigenous peoplesó (1994) rafi communique, nov./dec.79.personal communication from a member of the staff of the brazilian embassy, washington,d.c., 1995.80.see the recommendations in national research council (1995), preserving scientific data,note 3.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110bits of powerthe most striking theme throughout this report is how progress in information technologies has changed the way science is accomplished. it has enabledthe generation, processing, storage, and distribution of quantities of data undreamed of even a decade ago.sensing systems (e.g., earth observation satellites, the hubble space telescope, groundbased radars) and other forms of automated data generation (e.g.,genome studies) produce enormous amounts of useful data, enabling scientists tostudy natural phenomena at a much greater level of detail and granularity thanwas hitherto possible. science and scientists have been the main drivers of thishighly sophisticated and often very expensive technology, using it to push forward the frontiers of knowledge in their respective disciplines. the continuousincreases in the processing power available to analyze the data are as crucial tothis evolution as the improvements in data generation capabilities. surprisingly,these increases have not come principally from more powerful supercomputers,but rather from cheaper, more powerful workstations and pcs available throughout the scientific community. the development of inexpensive mass storagemedia has ensured that the preservation of these vast quantities of data, bothprocessed and unprocessed, is both possible and affordable. finally, the mostprofound change in technology has been the worldwide growth of the internet,with its potential to make data from anywhere in the world available anywhereelse in the world, instantaneously, and, increasingly, in large quantities.these four factors, taken together, have revolutionized the way science isconducted, making it truly global. perhaps most interesting is that this progresshas changed the way scientists communicate with each other. physical scientists11045data from publicly funded researchñtheeconomic perspectivebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective111are leading the way among scholars in the publication of electronic journals,compressing the time between discovery and communication of the results. thisphenomenon is accelerating the already rapid pace of discovery and innovation,as the cycle time of discovery, communication, and next discovery is reduced.the committee uses the term òdigitization of scienceó as a shorthand for thisphenomenon.as a consequence, the flow of scientific data and information has beenimproved, as the cost of publication and of access to information has been drastically reduced. while not all scientists in every country have full access tomodern pcs and fast internet connections, these technologies are becoming widespread and are likely to be ubiquitous in the near future.this digitization of science has occurred contemporaneously (and coincidentally) with the demise of the great power rivalry of the cold war. russian andu.s. scientific relations have become less heavily dominated by security considerations, and this factor also has led to an increase in the availability and transferof scientific data, as noted in chapter 3.at the same time, there have been fundamental changes in how governments inmany countries see their role relative to markets. budget pressures, plus the evidentsuccess of market economies, have led many governments to privatize activitiespreviously delivered via the public sector, in hopes of relieving the burden ontaxpayers while improving the allocation of economic resources. these pressureshave begun to be felt in the area of scientific data; for example, in the united states,landsat remote sensing was privatized in the mid1980s, and some european countries have strongly urged limits on the sharing of meteorological and other data inorder to protect the data markets for their government monopolies.the trend toward marketsñgoodor bad for science?to researchers and educators in the natural sciences, this pressure towardprivatization and commercialization of scientific data is of great concern. manyfear that scientific data, the lifeblood of science, will be priced beyond theirmeans, especially in less developed countries. it is argued, correctly, that theconduct of scientific research, including the maintenance and distribution ofscientific data, is a public good, provided for by government funding (see box4.1). this traditional model1 has worked well in the past, and many scientists2 areof the view that privatizing the distribution of scientific data will impede scientific research.to the economist, this concern at first seems misplaced. while the conductof scientific research certainly is a public good, one might consider the maintenance and distribution of scientific data as the provision of one of the commodities used by scientists. this view makes scientific data analogous to the chemicals, computers, and travel that each scientist is free to buy or not, as they bestbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112bits of powerbox 4.1what is a public good?economic analysis recognizes that not all goods can be easily transactedthrough markets. there is an important class of economic goods, called publicgoods, in which markets may not work well. the term òpublic goodó does not referto something that is ògood for the public.ó it refers to a product or service possessed of certain properties that lead to collective consumption or production, rather than private consumption or production. a public good is characterized by twoattributes, nondepletability and nonexcludability (nonappropriability). nondepletability means that the product in question cannot be used up and is thus availableto additional persons. if i eat a slice of cheese, less remains available for others toconsume. however, if i use the latest statistics on the number of employees in thesteel industry or the number of persons infected by some disease, those statisticsremain just as available as before for use by othersñtheir supply is not depletedby additional use or additional users. nondepletability is the main reason economists conclude that free use of public goods can be justifiedñthere is no socialcost when another person uses them, and there is no justification for the disincentive to their use that is constituted by a substantial price for that use. this, then, isthe user side of the dilemma of provision of public goodsñeconomic efficiencycalls for a zero or very low price for their use, but private enterprise cannot beexpected to provide a costly and valuable service without charge.the second attribute, nonexcludability, is the supplier side of the problem. nonexcludability means that the good in question produces benefits from which otherscannot be excluded and which cannot easily be constrained only to those who pay.a classic case is that of national defense; defending one american involves defending all americans. one cannot supply the service to some people but excludeothers. information also possesses this attribute, although somewhat less fullythan national defense. once information is provided to some, it is likely, but notcertain, to leak out to others. absence of excludability makes it very difficult for theprovider of such a service to collect reimbursement for the cost of supplying theservice. that is why, economists conclude, it is often difficult for any supplier otherthan government to provide certain types of public goods.it is generally accepted that scientific research itself has strong publicgoodattributes, in that the knowledge produced by such research is freely available toall (i.e., nonexcludable) and provides social and economic benefits to members ofsociety far beyond those who produce it and those who pay for it. such goods areusually provided by governmentsñor they are not provided at all.the publicgood nature of science is not limited to any particular nation. thescientific endeavor has traditionally been and will continue to be a global enterprise; the success of this endeavor depends critically on the global community ofscientists, and their ability to work with innovators, implementers, and users. tothe extent that this global interchange is restricted or inhibited, the longrun contribution of science to the u.s. economy will decrease. thus, the united states hasan interest not only in a healthy domestic scientific community, but also in a robustglobal scientific community.however, the issue in this report is not scientific research, but rather the datathat science generates, either as input to scientific research (e.g., data from meteorological satellites) or as output from scientific research (e.g., description of abits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective113serve the scientistõs needs. in this traditional market model, both consumers andresearchers would be better served by suppliers anxious to survive by supplyingthe most desired data set traits: reliability, accuracy, timeliness, and so forth.instead of the government providing financial support to data centers, why notgive the funds to individual researchers, who can then make choices among datasuppliers who best serve their needs? to many economists, therefore,privatization appears at first blush to be a positive development for science.a more careful economic analysis of the maintenance and distribution ofscientific data, however, suggests that a somewhat different market model ismore appropriate here, for a number of reasons. in some cases, the (public good)scientific research is tightly tied to the collection, maintenance, and distributionof the data generated from the research. for example, the hubble space telescope (hst) project (and other space science observatories), clearly a publicgood, collects, maintains, and distributes the data from the hst as part and parcelof the project itself. in this case, the basic research is vertically integrated withdata distribution, and separating the two functions would create more difficultiesthan keeping them integrated.in other cases, frequently overlapping with the conditions described abovefor the hst project, the contributors of scientific data are the same as the consumers of the data, all of whom are members of the same relatively small researchcommunity. this is especially so in relatively esoteric areas of fundamentalresearch, such as highenergy physics or paleontology. this model is closer tothat of a family or clan, in which exchange is not monetized but depends on socialnorms specifying expected and wellunderstood levels of contribution. imposinga market price system in such a situation could not only be countercultural, butalso counterproductive. for example, administrative expenses of instituting sucha system might well be higher than the revenues realized. in yet other cases, themarket for scientific data is not large enough to support more than a singlesupplier, which would mean that the data either would not be provided by themarket or would be provided under monopoly conditions.gene sequence). clearly, scientific data have some aspects of a public good. onthe other hand, scholarly journals have been copyrighting scientific articles foryears (thereby privatizing them) without impeding the flow of science. certainly,the provision of scientific data has important spillovers: future researchers withinthe field benefit from these data, researchers in other fields also may benefit (e.g.,medical researchers benefit from the provision of biological research data), andcommercial firms (e.g., pharmaceutical firms) may benefit as well. unfortunately,uncertainty about who the ultimate beneficiaries are, which appears to be fundamental to science, precludes asking those beneficiaries of spillovers to pay.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114bits of poweran additional and more subtle difficulty arises from the nature of the fundingof scientific research. there is no question that the publicgood nature of fundamental scientific research requires public funding,3 and this includes ensuringthat researchers have the necessary inputs such as scientific data.4 privatizingdata distribution would not change the requirement that data acquisition be publicly funded; it would simply change the locus of funding from the supplier/distributor of data (i.e., publicly funded and operated data centers providing dataeither free or at low cost to researchers) to the consumer of data (i.e., the researchers would have a òdata budgetó as part of their grant, which they would use toshop among suppliers for their data needs).but are these two modes of funding equivalent? the second mode might bethought by economists to be superior, in that it puts the financial power in thehands of the consumer. however, the fact that both involve public funding,subject to yeartoyear political vagaries, suggests a different view. in the firstmode, funding is directed to government agencies or large research institutions,which thereby have an interest in continued funding and can make the case totheir legislators for such funding. in the second mode, funding is directed toindividual researchers, who, while they have an interest in ensuring continuedfunding for purchasing data, clearly do not have the political ability to protect thisfunding from political pressures to reduce or eliminate it. this inability is a majorfactor underlying scientistsõ concerns that if the distribution of scientific datawere privatized, the increases in research grants to enable their data purchaseswould soon disappear, leaving researchers and perhaps their universities to pickup the bill. the economic problem here is that government cannot commit tofuture funding of researchers for buying data. neither congress nor the administration can make credible commitments for future funding. ensuring that largeinstitutions have the means and the access to argue the political case for scientificdata will increase the likelihood that future funding of such data will be madeavailable.5 the committee believes that direct appropriation or block grant support to institutions with broad responsibilities for data management, retention,and distribution, while not assured, is typically more stable and secure, andfortified by an institutional memory to recognize and support the continued utilityof archived data. thus, a strong case can be made for funding (subsidizing)institutions to be data distributors as part of the infrastructure for governmentresearch in cases where both (1) the longterm availability of the data is essentialfor the conduct of research, and (2) there is no guarantee of continued financialsupport of the user community for acquiring data.determinants of the structure ofscientific data distributionhow best to distribute scientific data depends on several economic properties of the underlying science and scientific community that both generates andbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective115uses the data, as well as other uses for the data. to determine these properties, thekey questions are as follows:¥does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investment inone or more facilities that generate the data of interest? the hubble spacetelescope is a clear example of a single costly facility, the sole purpose of whichis to generate basic scientific data for its useful life. another example is weatheror other earth observing satellites, which constitute major facilities in their ownright, but that also contribute to a common broader research data set. in thesecases the data have significant nonresearch applications as well, which are a mixof public good and commercial uses. the collection, processing, and distributionof data typically are most efficiently vertically integrated in the same program.the costly observational facility is usually provided by government (e.g., noaa,nasa, esa), and so the distribution of the resulting data (at least the minimallyprocessed data) is best handled by the same agency.¥is the (nonfacilitiesbased) scientific research coordinated across researchers, possibly in different countries? an example of this situation is thehuman genome project. individual researchers throughout the world contributeto this effort; the results of each individual research project are made available toall researchers. in fact, the maintenance of common data sets available to all iswhat defines this as a project. in such cases, there typically is a lead governmentagency with responsibility for the entire project that also takes responsibility,either directly or indirectly, for providing for data collection and distribution.though not facilitiesbased, a common repository of information and scientificdata is essential to the conduct and usefulness of the entire project. an importantelement of such a repository is that it is the mechanism by which researcherscommunicate with each other. in some cases, such as paleoclimatological research, contributors and users are largely the same, and the repository acts solelyas the means of professional exchange. in this situation, ensuring that the data arefreely available is part of the project itself. the responsible agency may providethe distribution facility, or it may fund a university, consortium of universities, orother nongovernmental organizations (ngos) to operate the facility.¥is the community of users roughly the same as the community of contributors? as with the paleoclimatology or astronomy examples above, the distribution of scientific data is best viewed as a sharing of results within a community,rather than as a market opportunity. if the community of users is much broaderthan those making contributions, then distributing scientific data is also a publication function, possibly to private concerns. a good example of this situation isthe human genome project, for which the repository of research results is ofinterest to others beyond the immediate research community, such as pharmaceutical companies.in cases where the user community is much larger than the contributor community, governments or ngos may still wish to make the information availablebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116bits of powerto all at no cost. this was the case for the world meteorological organizationõsworld weather watch, discussed in the previous chapter. however, for budgetreasons nonscientific users may be required to pay for the data. under thisarrangement, some form of price discrimination or product differentiation may berequired, in which scientific researchers can acquire the data free or at very lowcost, while nonresearch users are charged for the data.6 this can be done by theresponsible agency itself. however, the agency first must determine whether thetransaction costs of establishing and maintaining discriminatory prices exceedany extra income so derived, particularly for data from narrowly focused basicresearch projects. obviously, an agency should implement a price discriminationscheme only if the efficiency gains (not just the revenue gains) outweigh thetransaction and administrative costs of doing so. price discrimination, in practice, will be worth the effort only with a sufficiently large commercial user base.¥is the user community large enough to support more than one data distributor? in many cases, a particular scientific data set is likely to be of interestto only a few scientists and practitioners, and a private7 market may support onlyone distributor, due to scale economies.8 in such cases, privatizing data distribution will result in a private monopoly with no incentive to support the publicinterest, replacing a public monopoly that does have such a commitment. ofcourse, government monopolies that do not sustain activities providing publicgoods are no better than private monopolies.as a quick reference, table 4.1 lists the relevant properties mentioned abovefor each of a number of diverse scientific data sets.privatization: when does it make sense?given the unique nature of scientific data, it might appear that government(or ngo subcontractor) distribution of such data is always the correct choice.however, there may be opportunities for private firms to reformat, enhance, andmarket these publicly available data in new, addedvalue forms. private firmsmay have capabilities not available to government agencies or ngos that wouldadd value for various end users. for example, noaa distributes weather data toall users on equal terms, including to commercial firms, some of which packagethis information and provide forecasting services to the public via mass media.while noaa clearly has a huge advantage in technology and meteorologicalscience, the commercial firms have an equally clear advantage in packaging theinformation for maximum public impact.9 thus, any private supplier who requests access to scientific data should be given it and should be permitted to gointo competition with other suppliers and with the government itself. the marketplace will then determine the best package of service, support, and reliable datafor users, including scientific researchers. 10 fortunately, there are many cases inaddition to that for weather data in which private sector distribution of valuebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective117table 4.1properties relevant to distribution for a number of scientific data setsno. of usersequal to (=)single/or greatermajorfacilitiesmultiplethan (>)observational/raw/national/commercialpricing basisabasedactivitiescontributors?experimentalprocessedglobalinterest?discrimination?genbankñnm>epgyesinternet accessnih/nlm/(submittal/retrievalfree; cdromncbisoftware)@mcgenome databaseñjohnsnm>epgyesfreehopkins university, fundedby doe, nih, japan s&thubble space telescopeñysopgno;freenasa/esa (operated(principallyoccasionalby aura)spaceuse byresearchers)publishersnational space scienceymor/pgno@mcdata centerñnasaeuropean space informationymopgnofreesystem(browser/imagingsoftware)national center forymor/pnlittle@mc;atmospheric researchñadditionalnotforprofit, nsf fundingservicesavailable(continues)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118bits of powertable 4.1continuedno. of usersequal to (=)single/or greatermajorfacilitiesmultiplethan (>)observational/raw/national/commercialpricing basisabasedactivitiescontributors?experimentalprocessedglobalinterest?discrimination?t2 nuclear informationymepgnofreeserviceñuc,b doeaustralian oceanographicym>, but mostlyopgsomefree as òpublicdata centreñaustralianresearchers(free software)good,ó @mcdept. of defensefor commercialesañinformation retrievalym>o and e;pg;perhapsappears to beserviceñeuropean unionincludesfocusedsome> icspace agencyfinancial dataoneuropeanunionearth resourcesym>or/pgsome; usedvaries; rangesobservation systemsñbyfrom freeusgs (doi)governmentto > icagenciesscripps institution ofym=opglittle@mcoceanographyñnotforprofitbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective119university of alaskaym>; mostlyornlittle@mcgeodata centerñpublicuniversity/state fundspaleoclimatology worldnm=or/pgnofree for directdata center añngdccontributors; @noaa/docmc otherwisenational climatic dataym>opgno@mc; carefulcenterñnoaa/docaccounting foranalysis todetermine mcincorporated researchym>opgnofreeinstitutions for seismology(iris)ñuniversityconsortium; nsf fundingproperties of intermetallicnm>epgyesprinted booksalloysñpurdue universityfairly expensive;cindas/miac (dod)higher cost forforeign usersevaluated nuclearnm>epgnofreedata file/b (doe)apricing basis: ic = incremental cost; mc = marginal cost, or cost of reproduction.babbreviations and acronyms are defined in appendix a.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120bits of poweradded data has worked to the benefit of science and the broader public. the fattyacid methyl ester (fame) database in microbiology (box 4.2) is a case in whicha private firm offers alternatives to the data available from government. thecommittee lists below some necessary conditions for the complete privatizationof scientific data distribution to be an appropriate option:¥can the distribution of data be separated easily from their generation? for thehst, the answer is ònoó; for the human genome project, the answer is likely òyes.ó¥is the scientific data set used by others beyond the research community?again, for the hst, the answer is ònoó; for the human genome project, theanswer is likely òyes.ó¥is the potential market large enough to support several data distributors?if so, then the resulting private market could be competitive, and privatizationcould be helpful to scientists and others. if not, then privatization could lead tomonopolization, which would likely be detrimental to the interests of science.¥is it easy to discriminate prices or differentiate products between scientific users and other users? if this is possible, can low prices be mandatedcontractually for governmentfunded data for scientific users? if so, then it islikely that scientists will obtain the needed data on more favorable terms thantheir colleagues in private industry with more resources.box 4.2fame: a privatepublic sector successan example of how a market can be made from subsidized data generation is thefatty acid methyl ester, or fame, system of identifying bacteria. the fatty acids areextracted from the bacteria to be identified, made volatile by methyl esterification,and subjected to chromatography. the resultant chromatogram yields a profile pattern that is analyzed statistically to identify the bacteria. the profiles and the statistics make up the database of interest. the original work was done, and the databasewas compiled, at the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) in atlanta,georgia. the cdc staff is augmenting and actively using the database in fulfilling itsmission. much of the database is included in a publication for use by bacteriologists,especially in clinical microbiology laboratories.1a commercial company, midi,2 adapted the cdc system, developed its ownproprietary database, and apparently has been successful in commercializing thesystem. the two databases have gone their separate ways, competing in theintellectual, but not the economic, marketplace.1w.s. weyant, c.w. moss, r.e. weaver, d.g. hollis, j.g. jordan, e.c. cook, and m.i.daneshvar (1996), identification of unusual pathogenic gramnegative aerobic and facultatively anaerobic bacteria, williams and wilkins, baltimore, md.2located at 115 barsdale professional center, newark, de 19711.source: micah krichevsky, bionomics international, bethesda, md.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective121¥is it costly to separate the distribution of data to scientists from theirdistribution to other users, such as commercial users? for small or esotericresearch communities, economies of scale in data distribution may make thisseparation costly.if all these questions can be answered òyes,ó then privatizing the distributionof scientific data should be an option to be considered. privatizing data distribution might appear to be attractive to a budgetconstrained government agency. itcertainly removes the cost of maintaining and distributing the data and may evenbring in revenues that can help the agency fulfill other aspects of its mission.box 4.3the failed privatization of landsatthe story of what happened to the landsat system when it was privatized isinstructive. landsat is a series of remote sensing satellites, the first of which waslaunched by nasa in 1972. the carter administration proposed the privatizationof landsat in 1978. this led in the early 1980s to a transfer of responsibility for thesystem to noaa, which attempted to build a customer base for landsatõs dataproducts. under both nasa and noaa management, landsat images were madeavailable to all users at the marginal cost of reproduction.the privatization process was accelerated during the reagan administration.congress passed the land remotesensing commercialization act in 1984, setting forth the general provisions for privatization of the system. in 1985, the earthobservation satellite (eosat) co. (a joint venture of hughes and rca) wasawarded the contract, along with an additional $250 million and a promise to payfor future satellite launches. eosat was thus given a de facto monopoly on alllandsat images, because there were no direct competitors. the governmentõspolicy of providing nondiscriminatory access to remote sensing data on a worldwide basis was interpreted by eosat to mean that as long as the companycharged the same (high) price to everyone, it was following the governmentõs nondiscriminatory access policy. the price of landsat images increased from approximately $400 per image to $4,400 per image, a price at which eosat was able toattract some commercial and federal government customers, but few academic orindependent researchers.in the early 1990s, the research community became anxious to use landsatdata for global change research, and nasa and noaa complained to congressabout the high prices. in response to those and other concerns, congress passedthe land remote sensing policy act of 1992, which returned the landsat systemto the public sector. nasa and eosat negotiated a price reduction to the u.s.government and affiliated users to $425 per image. however, nonfederal andforeign researchers still must pay the high image prices, effectively cutting off alarge segment of the research community that would benefit from the use of landsat images. this situation is expected to be rectified with the launch of landsat 7,the next satellite in the series, at which time nasa is supposed to make the dataavailable again to all users at the marginal cost of reproduction.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122bits of powerbox 4.4the impact of landsat privatization on researchfortyfive leading scientists were asked to describe the effects that their limitedaccess to landsat data has had on their work over the past decade.1 the list belowsummarizes their most important points:¥projects in the initial concept often are not proposed, or are drastically scaleddown, because the cost of the scenes is prohibitive.¥the development of state land cover maps for many different applied purposes has not been possible.¥important agricultural inventories were inhibited to the point where effortswere abandoned.¥the high costs of the data significantly hindered studies involving multipledates and scenes. developing appropriate and automated methods ofchange detection has been especially hindered. the conduct of seasonal orphenotypically related research was not possible. many remote sensing studies have involved analysis of a single scene, and the conclusions derivedrelate to that (and only that) scene. the repeatability of such conclusions isthus suspect. would the same observations have been derived using a dataset from a different time period? if a given technique does not work with ajuly data set, should one conclude that the technique does not work at all?only tests with a multitude of data sets will provide these answers, but highprices limit these rather basic tests.¥one impact of the continuing dilemma with landsat and privatization hasbeen that the technology is not the state of the art. for more than a decadethe united states has had no longterm commitment to land remote sensingat the national level. landsat 5, the highestresolution operational u.s. satellite and the only one available for civilian use, is more than 12 years old. theunited states has been struggling to develop and launch landsat 7 (withlandsat 6 having failed on launch). there is now increasing competition fromother nations that have committed to longterm operational continuity for theirland remote sensing systems and have stepped in to fill this void in u.s.policy.¥graduate students frequently are restricted in the landsat data available tothem. some students spend time writing miniproposals for funds just foracquiring data and these proposals are often rejected because of unavailability of funds.¥the ability to conduct lowcost basic research has been hampered. manytechnological innovations have come out of such research, but because ofthe cost of new imagery, these opportunities have been reduced or the research has been completed with older, archived data. while technology development is somewhat independent of the age of the data, applied researchand environmental managers become less interested when such efforts usedata long out of date. even now, there are numerous articles in the journalsusing data from the 1980s. techniques such as subpixel classification, research into periodicity patterns as they affect image quality, patterns of spectral mixing in patchy landscapes, and climate/microclimate/image calibrationare all significantly underresearched. thus, the high cost of imagery hasresulted in few, if any, innovations in the applications of this technology.¥the poor availability of landsat thematic mapper (tm) imagery is not onlydue to cost, but also to the practice of operating the satellite selectively forbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective123certain landsurface areas. the cost of imagery reduced the user base, andeosat had to determine which images would be most marketable prior toacquiring them. that left many scientists with a very limited, highcost archiveof tm data. thus, for certain areas of the globe there is extensive coverage,but for others it is very poor.in addition, the more detailed narrative of a senior soil scientist, a member of theinterdisciplinary laboratory for applications of remote sensing at purdue university, is revealing:during the mid to late 1970s and into the early 1980s, our research group washeavily involved in interdisciplinary research (involving electrical engineers, civil engineers, computer scientists, statisticians, meteorologists, crop physiologists, soil scientists, foresters, environmental specialists), collaborating with several federal agenciesand other universities. our research focused on the study of the relationships betweenthe data derived from the landsat multispectral scanner (mss) and thematic mapper,the characteristics of agricultural land surfaces, and the changes of these surfaces withtime. specific objectives were to determine the feasibility of using landsat mss andtm data for crop inventory and monitoring. some questions addressed were: whatquantitative changes occur in the spectral characteristics of crops (corn, soybeans,winter wheat, spring wheat, rice, many other crops) throughout phenological development? what spectral changes are a result of stress from drought, nutrient deficiency,disease, insect infestation, salinity of the soil, storm damage, wetness, and other causes? can these changes be identified and delineated by classical pattern recognitionanalysis applied to multispectral data obtained by aerospace sensors? many of thesequestions were addressed by our research during that period and at least partiallyanswered.one of the many areas of research that came to a complete halt when the price oftm data was increased manyfold was in the application of timesequential remotesensing data (e.g., mss, tm, advanced veryhighresolution radiometer (avhrr), andothers) to mapping and monitoring terrestrial ecosystems and to developing models toassess land quality, soil productivity and degradation, and erosion hazards. the anticipation that had begun to build for use of earth observation satellite data for integrationwith other data sets to provide national, continental, and global resource databaseswas suddenly dashed. it became impossible to develop the procedures, approaches,and models for doing any credible global monitoring and modeling, especially for terrestrial ecosystems, without such data. remote sensing research with agriculturalcrops slowed considerably, and much of it stopped completely as a result of the diminished support for civilian space research in the early 1980s and the subsequent commercialization of landsat, which resulted in exorbitant data costs. researchers inremote sensing laboratories and centers around the world, especially in universities,almost overnight went from a òdata richó situation to a condition of òdata poverty.ó manyof the basic questions that were being addressed in the early 1980s are still beingasked because the data became unaffordable to the research community addressingthese questions. the resulting nonavailability of data probably played a significant rolein the decline of and, in many cases, the closing of remote sensing programs at numerous universities.it is a pity that the commercialization occurred when it did. the scientific òhomeworkóhad not been completed or carried out to the point at which marketable products hadbeen sufficiently demonstrated. another few years of affordable data and public research support in this area might have made the commercialization process morefeasible and ultimately less painful.1compiled by michael d. jennings, national biological service, gap analysis program,university of idaho, moscow.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124bits of powerhowever, if not done in accord with the principles above, it can be disastrous forthe governmentõs basic scientific mission. such a situation occurred with theprivatization of the landsat system in 1985. the history of this case and itsimpact on science are described in boxes 4.3 and 4.4.it also should be noted in this context that the government producers ofscientific data are themselves in a potential position to act as exploitive monopolies, absent some formal restraints. in the united states, the prices that thefederal government can charge are heavily regulated by law (see the followingsection). this is not the case in all other countries, however; some governmentagency monopolies are allowed to sell their data commercially without the restraints of a competitive market.in summary, when privatization or commercialization leads to unregulatedmonopoly supply, it is not good public policy, and especially not good for science.when privatization leads to competitive supply to multiple user communities, itcould well be good public policy, especially if scientific users are assured access atreasonable prices and there is a net benefit to the public from such a transfer.pricing publicly funded scientific dataramsey pricing is a mechanism developed for regulated monopolies, whichin this context mean either government monopolies or monopolies acting asagents of the government. it was long ago proved by the british mathematician,frank ramsey,11 that where the optimal price for a good is zero or is insufficiently high to pay for the total cost of the product, economic efficiency requiresthe shortfall to be covered by differential prices, with the highest prices chargedto users with low elasticity of demand, that is, users whose usage will be reducedrelatively little by a given charge for the item. the reason is clear. a high priceto a user whose elasticity of demand is great will cause a large cut in that personõsuse of the itemña major deviation from that individualõs optimal use of the item.thus, any price that is likely to prevent scientists from using data because ofbudgetary problems means that the elasticity of demand of the scientist users ishigh. ramsey analysis then confirms that these scientists should not be chargeda substantial price for data. commercial users, in contrast, if they stand to makea considerable profit from the data, will acquire them even at a substantial price,meaning that their demand is relatively inelastic. welfare analysis confirms thatthese users should bear the bulk of the cost.there are several approaches to achieving socalled òramseyó prices. themost straightforward approach is pure price discrimination. the supplier canestablish different prices for different customer groups, using some means ofidentifying which customers are in which groups. for example, professionalsocieties and scientific journals often charge different dues or subscription pricesto libraries, to professors of various ranks, and to graduate students. since student discounts are generally quite deep, some form of identification is requiredbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective125for such discounts. usually, societies depend on selfreporting to discriminateamong full, associate, and assistant professors, or by income. naturally, there issome òleakageó due to false reporting, sharing of materials, and the like. however, these schemes generally are successful in reaching multiple user groupswhile maintaining revenues.in some cases, price discrimination based on observable customer characteristics is not feasible. a useful approach in such cases is for the supplier todevelop data product lines, consisting of somewhat different packages of dataand valueadded services at different prices, directed at different user segments.the price differentials cannot be so great as to encourage excessive leakage ofusers from one package to another because of price. in order to prevent this, pricedifferentials can be no greater than the value differentials among user segments.there are several methods of product line differentiation:¥time. users who demand uptotheminute (i.e., realtime or nearrealtime) data pay more than those willing to wait and use archived or retrospectivedata.¥customer support. users who demand full access to telephone supportand other types of support services pay more.¥sample size. users who want a higher sampling rate pay more.¥documentation. users who require full documentation of the data paymore.¥scope of coverage. are the data useful for a narrow user group or for abroader, more comprehensive audience?however, these methods do not address how much should be charged tovarious users of the scientific data. the appropriate guidelines are as follows:¥for the contributor and active researcher community, data acquisitionshould most likely be free, or, following much of current practice, available at themarginal cost of distribution. this guideline is based on the presumption that theindividual contributor is actually creating the value. in this case, the datadistributor is acting as a repository of the data for the active research community,which is both contributing and using the data.12 however, it is possible that freeaccess may generate such a great demand for service that congestion occurs, inwhich case some form of congestion pricing would be appropriate.¥for others, including commercial users, data acquisition should bepriced to cover the costs of serving those users.the two appropriate pricing methods, incremental and marginal cost pricing,differ as follows:¥incremental cost pricing. the price to secondary users is set so thatbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126bits of powerrevenues cover the cost to provide this incremental use, including recompilingthe data, perhaps maintaining a computer site for downloading, purchasing cdrom blanks, recording the data, shipping to the user, and customer support, butnot including costs for the core service.¥marginal cost pricing. the price to secondary users is set at the marginalcost of the specific unit sent to the user, including the cost of the cdrom blanksand postage and shipping. this price is lower than the incremental cost price, aslong as the cost of output per unit declines when volume increases. it is easiest toexpress the difference between these two ideas mathematically.assume that the total cost to supply the quantities q1 q2 0 of two goods isc (q1, q2) 0 , with c > 0; thenqimarginal cost of good 1 = c ;qiincremental cost of good 1 = c (q1, q2) ð c (0, q2) .q1the pricing policy specified in office of management and budget (omb)circular a130,13 which applies to all federal government agencies, correspondsto incremental cost pricing. the tradition in the research community, and thepricing level indicated by the òfull and open accessó policy, corresponds to marginal cost pricing.one can argue on the basis of public good benefits that the price floor shouldbe zero or the marginal cost. if avoiding undue subsidization were to become anoverriding concern, then incremental cost would be the appropriate price floor.14under the omb pricing policy for federal government data, however, the fullincremental cost is also the ceiling.electronic access and internet congestionperhaps the most profound change associated with the digitization of scienceis the ability to access scientific data worldwide from the desktop, via the internet.but new capabilities give rise to new problems. in this case, the recent congestion on the internet, particularly across the atlantic and the pacific, has reducedthe ability of scientists to access data around the world, and particularly to monitor experiments overseas in real time. once the exclusive preserve of scientists,the internet has attracted so much interest since the advent of the world wideweb that nonscience traffic now dwarfs scientific traffic. this phenomenon is aclassic example of a òtragedy of the commons,ó in which use of a commonproperty becomes so intense that its value and benefit to its users diminish,possibly even to the extent that the good becomes useless. many scientists seebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective127the congestion resulting from this popularization of the web as interfering withtheir ability to do science across the internet, as discussed in chapter 2.the internet congestion issue is a difficult one and is likely to be with us fora long time. prior to the popularity of the world wide web, the fairly low levelof usage imposed on the internet by scientists was well within the modest capacities of the network to function without discernible delay. scientific users perceived the network as having no capacity constraints, because they never encountered any. today, the situation is different; the use of the internet has increasedto the point that those modest capacities, even though they are expanding, arebeing reached (or even exceeded in peak periods) in many areas. delays are thenorm in some situations, such as the link to central europe during daytime hourson either side.what are those capacities? generally, capacity constraints exist within computers (servers) and the transmission pipes that connect them. these transmission pipes are leased telephone company lines and share the same physical facilities as all other telecommunications services. for example, there are severalphysical transmission facilities that span the north atlantic, the most importantof which are the undersea fiberoptic cables. all telephone traffic and leasedlines use these facilities, with the split being determined by how many lines havebeen leased for internet use.15 additionally, local òhot spotsó can occur, in whicha server that hosts a particularly popular web site becomes congested because ofincreased traffic. this in turn causes nearby servers to become congested withtraffic attempting to reach the busy server, so network congestion can spread.the solution is straightforward: the popular server must add capacity.note that the greatest strength of the internetñits decentralized characterñcan become its greatest weakness. in a fully decentralized network, the solutionto congestion relies on the implementation of decisions to expand capacity. unfortunately, congestion affects not only the party that causes the congestion butothers as well, so it becomes a classic òexternalityó problem. the owner of a sitemay be perfectly happy to live with congestion on his or her popular site (eventhough the siteõs visitors are not happy), but the ownerõs actions will causecongestion at nearby sites and perhaps even throughout the network, therebyimposing costs on others. furthermore, congestion can also be imposed whentwo parties cannot come to an agreement about expanding capacity. if the unitedstates and european countries cannot agree on how much capacity is needed toconnect their respective networks, or how to share the costs of that capacity, thenneeded expansion may not occur, to the detriment of users.how best to deal with this òtragedy of the commonsó? the usual solution tocongestion16 is to ensure that those who cause it bear its full cost, in the form ofcongestion prices. this is a mature theory in economics. the varian and mackiemason proposals for òsmart pricingó are the most welldeveloped in the contextof the internet and are specifically designed to cope with congestion problems.17it is sufficient for the committeeõs purpose here to note that such pricing schemesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128bits of powerwill generally involve some form of usagebased prices for realtime traffic (i.e.,traffic that cannot be delayed until congestion has eased). this could be a perpacket charge, for example, or a perminute charge differentiated by type oftraffic (e.g., telnet, video, internet, phone).18the effectiveness of congestion prices depends on two obvious, but critical,functions served by prices: (1) users will have an incentive to postpone traffic toless congested, lowercost periods if they are required to pay a high price duringpeak periods, and (2) suppliers will have an incentive to increase the capacity ofa server or a transmission route if traffic during the peak periods is highly profitable. the demandshift effect tends to reduce traffic, while the supply effecttends to increase capacity in the long run. additionally, users who require peakload use in the short run will, upon payment of the peakload price, be more likelyto obtain service under this regime than with underpriced peak service.one other possible means for dealing with congestion would involve investment in hardware and especially software and would follow a growing trend inbusiness. this would be the creation of one or more dedicated networks forscientific research, such as the internet ii now being developed with support fromthe national science foundation. such a network would function much like theòintranetsó being established by private firms. the committee urges that fundingagencies and professional societies begin to examine and evaluate this option ingreater detail.there is no question that congestion is also its own punishment. servers ornetwork administrators who generate congestion also suffer its consequences.however, those consequences extend to others, and the individual disincentiveswill not reflect the òexternaló costs imposed. current administrative mechanismsmay help alleviate congestion, as well. sufficient peer pressure from networkòpartnersó may induce managers of congestioncausing servers to increase theircapacity to keep their standing with their colleagues. in the long run, however, theòpartnershipó model of the past is unlikely to provide sufficient incentives to alleviate congestion, and the current situation can be interpreted as a transition to a newregime in which more formal mechanisms, such as congestion pricing, will berequired.recommendations regarding economicaspects of scientific datathe committee recommends that the economic aspects of facilities for storage and distribution of scientific data generated by publicly funded research beevaluated according to the following criteria:¥does the scientific research depend on a substantial public investmentin one or more facilities that generate the data of interest? if so, the databits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective129distribution facilities are most likely to benefit by being vertically integrated withthe observational or experimental facilities themselves.¥does the (nonfacilitiesbased) distributed scientific research involve coordination among researchers, possibly in different countries? if so, then datadistribution becomes a means of communication among contributing scientists, andfor this community, the price of the data alone should be zero. if the distributorsubsequently adds value to the data, then the price should be no higher than themarginal cost of adding value.19¥is the community of users roughly the same as the community of contributors? if so, then data distribution should be priced at zero (or at marginal cost, ifvalue is added). if there are many users who are not contributors, such as commercial customers, then some form of price discrimination to ensure zero or low pricesto contributing scientific users, with possibly higher prices to others, may be appropriate.¥is the user community large enough to support more than one data distributor? if so, then privatization of data distribution may be a viable policy option.if not, then privatization should occur only if the contractual arrangements areadequately protective of the needs of the scientific community. necessaryñbutnot necessarily sufficientñconditions for privatization to be desirable are as follows:ñthe distribution of data can be separated easily from their generation.ñthe scientific data set is used by others beyond the researchcommunity.ñit is easy to price discriminate/product differentiate between scientificusers and other users, and it is easy for the government to contractually mandatelow prices to scientific users for governmentfunded data.ñprivatization will not result in the unrestricted monopoly provision ofthe data.the appropriate price ceiling for nonscientific users of scientific data generated through government research is incremental cost, as defined in the sectionabove titled òpricing publicly funded scientific data.ó the price of scientific datato the contributing scientific community should be zero, or at most marginal cost.notes1.not all scientific data are maintained and distributed by public agencies or via public funding,although this is the norm. various notforprofit institutions and private firms are also providers of basic scientific data.2.throughout this section, the terms òscientistsó and òscientific researchersó are intended toinclude explicitly both u.s. and foreign scientists working in the natural sciences. scientificresearch is by its nature a global enterprise; actions by any single government are felt by theentire scientific community. however, the barriers to scientific information flow are exacerbated by the problem of unequal technological capabilities, important in virtually all the discibits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130bits of powerplinespecific contexts. this has at least two dimensions: individuals/institutions have differentlevels of computing and networking skills, and individuals/institutions have different levels ofaccessibility to hardware and software needed to exercise those skills. generally, scientists arerelatively sophisticated in their skill sets; the problem in science is the availability of tools, bothcomputing and networking. the digitization of science suggests that if individuals, institutions,or countries lack the tools to process, analyze, and share scientific data at the level typicallyenjoyed in the developed countries, they will be unable to participate fully in the scientificendeavor, to the detriment of science as a whole. the problem, of course, is not confined toscience, and involves the unequal distribution of wealth and income across the globe. at thislevel, it is highly unlikely that the expressed needs of scientists will have much effect inchanging this unequal distribution of income. however, specific scienceoriented activities canmake a difference; recycling hardware, for example, to scientists in developing countries maygreatly improve their ability to process data at almost no cost. while u.s. scientists may viewtwoyearold 486 pcs as hopelessly underpowered, these castoff computers may be a godsendto scientists in africa who currently have nothing. perhaps the best way to facilitate suchtransfers is via professional society programs and institutions, which are likely to be able toidentify both needs and donors efficiently, with relatively low levels of public financial support.3.the external benefits of fundamental or basic research are to be contrasted with the benefits ofdevelopment, generally of products and services for sale, in which the full benefits are capturedby the buyer and seller. generally, only basic research is acknowledged to be a public good,while development is seen as a private good, at least where there is effective patent protection.of course, the distinction between research and development is not as clean as this suggests,although it is often a useful distinction.4.of course, the committee recognizes that the acquisition of data by the government through itsresearch activities is neither a costless activity nor an activity requiring unfettered spending; itis, however, a part of the process of doing research that falls outside the charge of this study,which focuses on data distribution and access.5.an instructive lesson can be drawn from the shift in public policy regarding mental health inthe 1960s. the strategy was to shift from institutional care to communitybased care, withsubstantial deinstitutionalization of patients and a funding shift to community facilities. theunfortunate result was that funding for institutions dropped, but no funding was provided forcommunity care. it is claimed that this failure to provide for local funding has added substantially to the homeless population.6.a more extensive introduction to the complex topic of price discrimination/product differentiation is contained in the section òpricing publicly funded scientific data,ó below.7.the committeeõs use of the term òprivateó in this context includes only forprofit firms that arenot subsidized by the government; other private institutions such as universities, educationalconsortia, foundations, and other ngos are not included in this context.8.as a practical matter, one would expect scale economies of data distribution to be exhausted atrather low levels of demand. however, many scientific data sets may have demand lower thanthis threshold and thus be subject to a ònatural monopoly.ó9.in this case, of course, meteorologists still obtain their scientific data from noaa, not commercial firms, and so there are actually separate distribution channels for scientists and thepublic. the point here is that there are activities in which the private sector can outperform thepublic/ngo sector.10.implicit is the assumption that if the government and private suppliers (who may get their rawdata òwholesaleó from the government) are competing against one another in the marketplace,the government is constrained to set prices to recover its cost. see the section titled òpricingpublicly funded scientific data.ó11.f. ramsey (1927), òa contribution to the theory of taxation,ó econ. j., 35 (march):4761.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from publicly funded researchñthe economic perspective131see also m. boiteaux (1956), òsur la gestion des monopoles publics astreints a lõequilibrebudgetaire,ó econometrica (jan. 24): 2240, and w.j. baumol and d.f. bradford (1970), òoptimal departures from marginal cost pricing,ó am. econ. rev., 60 (june):265283.12.a zero price might seem too low to some; however, it is the contributions of this communitythat actually create the value in the first place. an instructive analogy is consumer banking:depositors with sufficiently large balances receive òfreeó checking from banks; the quid proquo is that the bank has the use of their money. similarly, the database provider could give freeaccess to contributors, with the quid pro quo being the contributions themselves. it also shouldbe noted that if the data were not supplied free, it is almost certain that some publicspiritedscientist with spare server capacity would have a graduate student maintain an ftp or wwwsite with the data on it for free downloading for interested colleagues.13.the omb circular a130 policy regarding federal government information dissemination practices was codified in the paperwork reduction act of 1995, p.l. 10413, which amended 44u.s.c. chapter 35, effective october 1, 1995.14.the original reference for this finding is gerald faulhaber (1975), òcross subsidization: pricing in public enterprises,ó am. econ. rev., 65:966977. later references, among many others,are j.c. panzar and r.d. willig (1977), òfree entry and the sustainability of natural monopoly,ó bell j. econ., 8 (spring):122, and w.j. baumol (1977), òon the proper cost tests fornatural monopoly in a multiproduct industry,ó am. econ. rev., 67 (december):809822.15.the current situation on the north atlantic route is that there is virtually no congestion forplacing telephone calls from europe to the united states, but serious congestion for internettraffic. the conclusion from this evidence is clear: there is plenty of capacity in the physicaltransmission facilities, but too little of that capacity is devoted to the internet. the simple (butexpensive) solution for the researcher in europe is to place a modem telephone call to the u.s.computer, or vice versa, and conduct the research via direct connection.16.there are, of course, a wide variety of engineering and queuingtheory solutions, priorityschemes, compression methods, and so forth. all such methods either reduce the capacityrequired or seek to allocate scarce capacity during congestion to more valued uses. ultimately,however, capacity is finite, and congestion may still occur, but at higher load levels.17.for a discussion of the economics of network pricing, see hal varian and jeff mackiemason(1995), òpricing the internet,ó in b. kahin and j. keller, eds., public access to the internet,mit press, cambridge, mass.; hal varian and jeff mackiemason (1995), òpricing congestiblenetwork resources,ó advances in the fundamentals of networking, ieee journal on selectedareas in communications, and gerald r. faulhaber (1992), òpricing internet: the efficientsubsidy,ó in b. kahin, ed., building information infrastructure, mcgrawhill, new york.18.another possibility for dealing with congestion is to offer a lower subscription charge to userswho are willing to postpone their use to offpeak times. currently, lexis/nexis offers universities a low subscription charge but denies access during peak times.19.by òadding valueó in this case is meant any transformation of the data beyond that necessaryfor scientific research that increases the value of the information for some or all potential usersof the data.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132bits of powerlaws and regulations, both national and international, affect the flow ofscientific information through electronic networks. among them are rules regarding liability for false or misleading information, laws protecting individualprivacy rights, and export controls. this chapter focuses on intellectual propertypolicies and their expression in laws and regulations affecting the contents ofdatabases, because changes are now afoot that may erode the relatively privilegedposition science has held within the existing legal framework.1 by restrictingscientistsõ full and open access to the data on which future advances depend (seebox 5.1), these changes could impede the progress of science and thus limit thecontributions that science can make to society, notwithstanding the constitutionalmandate that intellectual property rights should be limited in time and shouldadvance science and the useful arts.2one such change is that governments, including our own, are finding itincreasingly difficult to maintain the rate of growth that publicly funded sciencehas enjoyed over the past half century. when scientific research is supportedinstead by private funding, the end results and perhaps the research itself arelikely to be kept proprietary. furthermore, there are indications that the scientificdata management that governments continue to fund may well be carried out as ifit were proprietary, in the sense that fees for use of the data may exceed the costsof dissemination. as their tax bases decline and governments come to regardtheir data collections as possible sources of revenue, they have, in some instances, adopted the same shortterm, profitmaximizing strategies as privatefirms. yet today, when commercially valuable data of scientific importance aremade available in electronic form, they also become available for rapid, inexpen1325the trend toward strengthenedintellectual property rights: a potentialthreat to publicgood uses ofscientific databits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights133sive copying and manipulation. while this facilitates valueadding uses from oneperspective, from another, it undermines the data providerõs ability to recovercosts, much less to generate a profit.a second change is that, in many areas of research, the separation has diminished between basic research, where intellectual property rules are more concerned with attribution of ideas and findings than with the appropriation of published material, and applied research, where intellectual property and proprietaryconcerns predominate. this conjunction has been especially evident in computerbox 5.1effects of government support on u.s. research anddata activitiesthe ability of privatesector technological development in the united states tothrive without the kind of centrally organized institutional framework and industrialpolicy apparatus typical of the european community and many other nations1 hasstemmed in good measure from the large public investments in basic research anddevelopment that were made after the late 1950s, in response to cold war pressures and national security interests. in retrospect, the success of the u.s. innovation system, despite its apparent anarchical character, can be seen as linked topublic funding of academic institutions and specialized laboratories, whose research product has paved the way for private industrial applications.2 in this context, the fact that federal funding also largely defrayed the costs of collecting anddisseminating raw and elaborated scientific data merits particular attention.throughout the cold war period, and extending into the present, the u.s. government has reinforced its subsidies of fundamental research with a policy of openexchange of scientific data. this policy was promoted internationally through thegovernmentõs bilateral science and technology cooperative agreements and increasingly in recent years through both bilateral and multilateral agreements concerning various largescale research programs and projects. none of these agreements, however, has broadly encompassed all scientific research activities.instead, they typically have been limited to scientific cooperation and related protocols for the exchange of data according to the special interests of a geographicregion, scientific discipline or subdiscipline, or specific projects undertaken by theparties to the agreement. in the rise of the united states to become the worldõsleading producer of technological goods and scientific information, the governmentõs role in ensuring an open supply of data to the scientific community underfavorable economic conditions has been a constant stabilizing factor.1see, e.g., margaret sharp and keith pavitt (1993), òtechnology policy in the 1990s: oldtrends and new realities,ó j. common mkt. stud., 31:129, 13839, table 1.2see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council(1995), evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to supportthe nationõs infrastructure, national academy press, washington, d.c.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134bits of powerscience and biotechnology, where some basic advances are now virtually inseparable from their industrial applications. the granting of patents or other exclusive property rights in these industrial applications can affect the ability of otherresearchers to test and extend the theories underlying them.third, the revolutionary convergence of digital, computing, and telecommunications technologies has profoundly altered the preexisting status quo.3 thepotentially large gains and losses from the commercial exploitation of data underthese changing conditions have led to a concerted drive for new and strongerforms of legal protection for publishers of electronic databases in general, including compilations of scientific data that were heretofore treated as components ofthe public domain.4the current trend toward stronger and more enduring intellectual propertyrights, and fewer limitations on the rights of copyright holders vis‹vis publicgood uses of information, could reduce some of the limitations that have benefited scientists, and on which they have relied. government studies of the challenges that digital technologies pose for intellectual property law at both nationaland international levels have stimulated calls for strengthening intellectual property rules. in addition to legislation either adopted or still under consideration inthe united states and other nations, proposals to strengthen international copyright and related laws were a major focus of multilateral negotiations sponsoredby the world intellectual property organization (wipo) in december 1996,largely at the urging of the united states and the european union.one of the draft treaties currently being considered calls for worldwideadoption of a new form of intellectual property protection for the contents ofdatabases.5 although this treaty was scheduled for discussion and approval at thewipo diplomatic conference held in geneva, switzerland, on december 220,1996, the conference delegates decided that it required further study. futureadoption of a treaty with similar proposals would have such profound consequences for transnational exchanges of scientific data that the committee chose itas a principal focus of this chapter.this chapter begins by briefly describing the relevant legal infrastructureduring the predigital period and by identifying certain destabilizing factors, suchas the introduction of electronic photocopying machines. it then outlines digitaltechnologiesõ role in accelerating the rise of information as a commodity to bebought and sold and in thus upsetting the previous imperfect balance betweenunderprotection and overprotection of the rights of data creators and holders. thediscussion that follows examines the emerging legal responses to these phenomena. it describes the current legislative and treaty proposals in detail and exploresthe implications for science of new proprietary rights in databases. the chapterconcludes by proposing actions that groups representing the research and education communities should undertake to stimulate reformulation of the legislativeand treaty proposals, with a view to reconciling the need to protect the legitimatebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights135interests of database makers with the need to protect the activity of science and toensure its ongoing contribution to the public interest.salient features of the predigital status quobecause the creation, collection, and dissemination of scientific data in theunited states have in large part been subsidized by government funding, theyhave not depended on the balance between incentives to create and efforts topreserve free competition that intellectual property law normally governs. withinthis framework, most academic compilers or generators of scientific data weremore concerned about obtaining credit or recognition for their contributions thanabout securing the economic fruits of their efforts.6 only in cases where members of the scientific community authored discursive scientific works or otherwise participated in applied technological innovation, or where commercial publishers compiled valueadded databases, were they likely to be affected by legalrules governing commercial applications of data. in such cases, existing legalinstitutions proved relatively stable in the predigital epoch, and the scientificcommunity has taken this stability largely for granted.in the private sector, by contrast, commercial compilers of data have longsuffered from a risk of market failure owing to the intangible, ubiquitous, and,above all, indivisible nature of information goods and to the ease with which freeriders may have appropriated the fruits of the compilersõ investment, once theinformation goods were made available to the public in print media. despite thisrisk, the domestic and international intellectual property systems responded laconically, if not with indifference, to the compilersõ dilemma.7 this indifferencestemmed in part from the inability of the worldwide intellectual property systemto match compilations of data to the basic subject matter categories covered,respectively, by the paris convention for the protection of industrial property(1883) and the berne convention for the protection of literary and artisticworks (1886).8 it also stemmed from a concomitant reluctance to fetter the basicbuilding blocks of scientific and intellectual discourse with legal impediments.9notwithstanding these infirmities, the commercial exploitation of nonscientific data and of published compilations of information prospered in some developed countries, notably the united states and the united kingdom (where copyright protection is sometimes available). whether there would have been greatercommercial exploitation of scientific data in the past if publishers could haveinvoked stronger proprietary rights is a matter of conjecture. patents are seldomavailable for database contents because writings are not patentable subject matterand also because the largely incremental character of database development wouldtypically make it hard to meet eligibility requirements. even contract law hassignificant limitations when massmarket information products are sold to persons outside the scope of a contract.10bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136bits of powerdata as knowhow applied to industryto obtain some measure of protection, firms engaged in industrial applications of scientific discoveries have entrusted their commercially valuable data totrade secret law or to equivalent laws of confidential information. trade secretlaw (or equivalent laws of confidential information) provides innovators andinvestors with no exclusive property rights at all. rather, it permits third partiesto reverseengineer any unpatented industrial product by proper or honest meansin order to reveal the process by which it was obtained, and to use that process tomanufacture equivalent goods.11 to the extent that an innovative product isderived from commercial applications of scientific data kept under actual or legalsecrecy, a competitor always remained free to generate the same data and toapply it to similar products or uses.12trade secret law thus provides qualifying originators with no legal immunityfrom direct competition. it merely confers a òhead start,ó that is, an uncertainperiod of natural lead time, during which originators seek to recoup their investment in research and development while establishing their trademarks as symbolsof quality that consumers recognize. in this and other respects, trade secret lawoperates as a liability regime that discourages certain types of conduct rather than asan exclusive property right that may create a legal barrier to entry (see box 5.2).when scientific data are disseminated to the public in print media, theynormally forfeit the protection of trade secret law, or related laws of confidentiality, except insofar as twoparty contracts may otherwise provide. not surprisingly, commercial compilers in such cases have sometimes found it difficult toappropriate the fruits of their investment unless either copyright laws or unfaircompetition laws afford them a limited shelter against wholesale duplication bythird parties.copyright law as a cultural bargainthe advent of the printing press created for published literary and artisticworks markets that had previously existed only in a rudimentary form, owing tothe need to produce each copy of a work by hand from a single original. paradoxically, to promote markets for information goods and other literary and artistic works, the state intervened by erecting new monopoly rightsñintellectualproperty rightsñeven as it removed the royal privileges and guild monopoliespertaining to tangible goods that were handed down from the middle ages.information goods have the properties of socalled public goodsñthey arenondepletable and nonexcludable. a second comerõs use of a new informationgood does not diminish or exhaust it; once it is disclosed to the world, anyone canuse it without the originatorõs permission and without reimbursing him or her forthe costs of research and production. unless the state limits the ability of thirdparties to copy a given literary production, for example, and to sell the copiedbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights137good for less than the price charged by the originator, neither the author nor thepublisher may have sufficient incentives to create or invest in the disseminationof cultural and information goods.13the historical solution to this problem has been the mature copyright system,which charges both authors and their publishers a price for overcoming marketfailure. in effect, copyright law has enabled the state to impose òportable fencesóbox 5.2definitionsliability rule and exclusive property rightsa property right precludes third parties from appropriating the object of protection, whereas a liability rule regulates the means by which they can engage incertain potentially harmful acts on certain conditions.1 if one has òrightful possession of some thingñsuch as an automobile or a homeó under an exclusive property right, òanother person ordinarily cannot take it without permissionó; but a liabilityrule permits others to engage in acts that òcreate risks of harm and thus constituteprobabilistic invasions of property interestsó (such as nuisances), while obligatingthem to pay damages for harm under specified circumstances.2sui generissui generis means òof its own kind or classó (blackõs law dictionary 1434,west, 6th ed., 1990). the literature refers to specialpurpose intellectual propertylaws that deviate significantly from the classic patent and copyright paradigms asòsui generisó regimes. see, for example, pamela samuelson (1985), òcreating anew kind of intellectual property law: applying the lessons of the chip law tocomputer programs,ó minn. l. rev., 70:471 (discussing the sui generis characterof the semiconductor chip protection act).subpatentablea subpatentable innovation is novel in the sense of being new, but it representsa step in technical progress that an engineer might be expected to make in duecourse. by definition, a patentable invention must be ònonobviousó in the sensethat it represents a breakthrough beyond the capacity of a routine engineer tomake in due course.3in simpler terms, patents are supposed to reward extraordinary achievements,while subpatentable innovations are those that proceed in small, incremental steps.1see, e.g., guido calabresi and a. douglas melamed (1972), òproperty rules, liabilityrules, and inalienability: one view of the cathedral,ó harv. l. rev., 85:1089.2louis kaplow and steven shavell (1996), òproperty rules versus liability rules: aneconomic analysis,ó harv. l. rev., 109:713, 71315. for an analysis of trade secret law as adefault liability regime governing relations between originators and borrowers of subpatentableinnovations, see reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27.3see 35 united states code, section 103 (1996).bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138bits of powerthat accompany intangible creations and that limit what purchasers can do withthem, even though they possess the physical artifacts, such as books or printedtables of numbers, in which these intangible creations are embodied.14 in sodoing, the state also has imposed legal constraints on authors and publishersñacultural bargainñthat has attempted to balance incentives to create against thepublic interest in both free competition and access to the copyrighted culture.15for example, although copyright law protects an authorõs personal expression for a relatively long period of time, it attaches only to òoriginal works ofauthorship.ó in principle, this requirement excludes functionally dictated collections of data that fail to manifest a creative selection or arrangement.16 moreover, copyright law never prevents third parties from independently creating theirown versions of another authorõs unprotectable ideas or of the factual discoveriespresented in a given scientific publication. in other words, copyright law protectsonly a given authorõs style, not his or her factual or ideological content.the concept of fair usethe mature copyright paradigm further curbs even this limited monopoly byrelaxing the authorõs control over certain uses of great public interest. thus,numerous exceptions to and limitations on the copyright ownerõs bundle of exclusive rights favor facetoface teaching (e.g., by allowing limited duplication ofmaterials for classroom use), library and archival uses, and selected public interest pursuits,17 in addition to a general òfair useó exception òfor purposes such ascriticism, comment, news reporting, teaching . . . scholarship, or research.ó18while the availability and scope of statutory exceptions usually vary with thenature of the subject matter at issue, the fair use exception applies to all subjectmatter categories across the board. even so, overriding the copyright ownerõsexclusive rights in the name of fair use remains an atypical result contingent on ajudicial evaluation of the special òpurpose and characteró of the use, the ònatureof the copyrighted work,ó the òamount and substantiality of the portion used,óand the òeffect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.ó19in recent years, the advent of new technologiesñfrom photocopying machines to computer programs and optical scannersñhas unsettled the doctrine offair use20 by enabling even copies for private research uses to displace commercial markets,21 and also by making it possible to overcome most of the transactioncost problems that increasingly had been used to justify application of the fair useexception in practice.22protection affordedcopyright law will not protect the product of a compilerõs industrious effortsñi.e., of labor, skill, or investmentñif the selection or arrangement it embits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights139bodies does not rise to the level of an original work of authorship. moreover, amature copyright system usually affords protection only against wholesale copying of the original selection and arrangement underlying any eligible compilationof data. in the united states, this doctrine of weak or òthinó protection for factualworks has been reinforced by first amendment concerns, which some courts andcommentators viewed as mandating broad access to the disparate facts that resultfrom a compilerõs efforts.23 when these doctrines apply, they greatly diminishthe value of copyright protection even to database publishers who satisfy theeligibility criteria, because their exclusive reproduction and derivative workrightsñas construed by the supreme court in feist publications, inc. v. ruraltelephone service co.ñwill not normally prevent unauthorized extractions ofdisparate data for either competing or valueadding uses.24some federal appellate courts, however, have begun to rebel against the feistdecision and to reinstate stronger copyright protection for factual compilationsand databases by subtle doctrinal manipulation.25 whether state or federal unfaircompetition laws could also provide some supplementary relief against the unauthorized copying of commercially valuable data that are not protected by tradesecret or copyright laws remains an unsettled question, although such laws aresometimes invoked both here and abroad.26 in any event, this cyclical fluctuationbetween states of underprotection and overprotection is a characteristic trait ofborderline subject matter that fits imperfectly within the classical patent andcopyright paradigms, such as the contents of databases.27digital technologyñdisrupting the balance ofpublic and private interestsdespite (or perhaps because of) the relatively weak legal infrastructure governing use of data, a thriving market for compiled information has grown up, andu.s. publishers appear to play a dominant role in it,28 although it is important toemphasize that this market has been largely concerned with nonscientific dataand information. this industry seems largely characterized by niche marketerswho supply and dominate specific market segments. the limited size of thesesegments and the relatively high startup and servicing costs seem to deter secondcomers from readily entering such markets.29 in other words, once the thresholdlevel of investment has been crossed, the first comer tends to take the relevantmarket segment as a whole.the public sector nonetheless has remained largely immunized from thepotential abuses of market power inherent in this situation, owing both to itssubsidized status and to the longstanding legal tradition that denied copyrightprotection to works produced by u.s. government agencies.30 as a result, dataprovided by federally funded projects have flowed through the domestic innovation system with few legal impediments (see box 5.1), and legal disputes aboutbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140bits of powerownership or the exercise of proprietary rights in scientific data as such rarelyhave been ventilated before intellectual property tribunals.31by the late 1980s, however, digital technologies and new telecommunicationsnetworks had combined to produce òthe greatest changes in the way information isdistributed since the invention of printing by movable type in the 15th century.ó32the use of computers made it economically feasible to collect, store, manage, anddeliver huge amounts of data at a time when continuously expanding databaseshave become ever more prominent building blocks of knowledge, especially in theobservational sciences, as discussed in chapter 3. electronic databases further blurthe line between these collection and application functions by allowing users tomake their own tailormade extractions from the mass of data available in thecollection as a whole.33 these tools allow users to òadd . . . immense value to whatwould otherwise be masses of incoherent, disparate data.ó34moreover, the latest valueadded data products, once disseminated worldwide via the internet and other media, frequently lead to the rapid production ofnew technical innovations, which result in the generation of more data.35 electronic publishing thus broadly advances the revolutionary process that computerization began, and it makes both data and research results potentially available atvery low cost all over the world.36as this digital and telecommunications revolution has created vast new markets for electronic information goods and tools,37 it has outpaced the legal infrastructure, which remains geared to the slowermoving print media.38 this strainmanifests itself in two contradictory ways. sometimes digital technology aggravates the basic marketfailure characteristic of information goods and thus deepens a chronic state of underprotection. this can occur, for example, when secondcomers download the originatorõs data and enter the market with a competingproduct that freerides on the originatorõs investment.39 at other times, however,digital technology so thoroughly overcomes the threat of market failure that itendows the first to invest with abnormal market power that can result in a chronicstate of overprotection. this can occur, for example, when solesource dataproviders charge exorbitant prices or oblige libraries and research institutions toaccept terms and conditions that effectively waive both the special privileges andthe fair use exceptions set out in the copyright act of 1976.40the vulnerability of publicly distributed electronic databasesto the extent that government or universitygenerated data remainuncommercialized, their vulnerability to technically refined means of accessing,downloading, or duplication is only of relative importance. presumably, the originators want the broadest possible distribution of their data sets.41 even in thissituation, however, there are some concerns that are likely to grow over time. forbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights141example, government may impose costrecovery conditions on the use of data thatthird parties who obtain unauthorized access could avoid. users also mightinadvertently corrupt the original database and cause potential harm.moreover, over time, the distinction between basic, noncommercialized dataand data applied to industrial pursuits or other downstream uses seems likely tobreak down, as has already occurred in other disciplines, such as the earth sciences and biotechnology.42 universities and other research institutions may viewdata compilations generated in the course of their research as potential revenuesources, especially in an era of declining government support, just as they havedone with patentable inventions. as more scientific data are applied to commercial purposes for one reason or another, the data collectors must necessarilydistinguish between sources that are made publicly available without charge andthose that are not.43 otherwise, even the providers that do not charge for datacould disrupt contractually controlled applications of their own data downstream,not to mention the risk that the noncharging government or academic generatormight inadvertently infringe on third partiesõ proprietary domains.a related trend is for some governments to commercialize their data, regardless of whether other governments follow suit. the former will become concernedabout the vulnerability of their data even if the latter are not. by the same token,those providers that still choose not to charge for their services will increasinglycome into contact with (and, perhaps, conflict with) the legal and technical fencesthat states bent on commercializing data may erect. as one observer put it, òthedivision between the two regimesó could become òa dam over which informationwill not easily flow,ó to the possible detriment of scientific progress and globaleconomic growth, which seems to require that ò[m]ore than perhaps any othercommodity, data must be allowed to move without barriers.ó44to the extent that databases are commercialized, whatever their origin, therefined digital technologies that enhance the compilerõs power to collect anddisseminate data will enhance as well the freeriding competitorõs power to appropriate the fruits of the first comerõs investment.45 the second comer whopurchases the originatorõs product, say, in the form of a cdrom, may electronically extract and recompile the data in question at a fraction of their collectionand distribution costs. the second product may then be sold for less than thefirst, because its publisher has contributed nothing directly or indirectly to theresearch and production costs. digital technology also enables second comers toextract and recombine the originatorõs data into valueadded products that improve on the original, or that compete in different and sometimes distant marketsegments.46 in some cases, third parties may even extract the compilerõs data inorder to make them available over telecommunications networks, an act that candestroy any residual incentives to invest.47 in such cases, existing copyright lawsgenerally afford little or no relief, as explained above.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142bits of powerrelative invulnerability of many privately controlled databaseswhen the database maker is the sole source of the data in question, andsubstitute databases cannot readily be compiled from public domain sources,digital technology greatly strengthens a supplierõs market power. by restrictingaccess to identifiable, online subscribers, for example, and by òplacing conditions on access and [using technology] to monitor . . . customer usage,ó thepublisher can largely restore the power of the twoparty contractual deal that theadvent of the printing press had appeared to destroy.48 in effect, publishers in thisposition may not need copyright law at all, even if they qualified for protection.they may prefer to reject the stateimposed cultural bargain in order to overrideboth its fairuse provisions and its specific exemptions favoring the public interest in teaching and research.49moreover, electronic publishers may have virtually no transaction cost problems to overcome because digital technology now enables them to track andcharge for every instance of electronic access, even for browsing and scientificuses that were previously exempt.50 the resulting market power then enables thepublisher to impose monopoly prices and arbitrary terms on usersñincludinglibraries, educational institutions, and research centersñand to disregard the social consequences that ensue from the inability of such public organizations tofoot the bills.51how will the public interest be served in the information age?while many types of scientific data, like other forms of information, possesseconomic value under the appropriate circumstances, the sponsors of new proprietary rights explicitly contemplate a level of systematic commercialization of bothlarge and small units of data that is unprecedented. how these impending changesin the legal infrastructure will impinge on the research and educational communities has not been clearly worked out even by the european authorities responsiblefor the european unionõs recently adopted directive on the legal protection ofdatabases.52 a bill to enact a u.s. model of the european law, which was recentlyintroduced, is even more cryptic in this regard,53 while the wipo draft databasetreaty tried to finesse the issue.54 one can predict, nevertheless, that these legislative initiatives will greatly affect the scientific and educational communities if, aschapters 3 and 4 of this report have emphasized, they lead to a more marketdrivenenvironment with fewer government subsidies than before.whether contractual attempts to reduce usersõ access to scientific and cultural products that was promoted by copyright laws in the past will survive legalchallenges on such grounds as federal preemption of state law, or doctrines ofmisuse of copyrights (allied to antitrust law), remains controversial.55 anotherquestion is whether the economic and cultural bargain embodied in copyright lawremains appropriate for the digital environment (see box 5.3), given that tradedriven economic policies have otherwise weakened the consensus on which thatbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights143box 5.3copyright law in the information ageñtwo perspectivesthe application of domestic copyright laws to digital technologies that did not existat the time of drafting undoubtedly means that the statutory language will not always fitthe cyberspace dimension. the resulting ambiguities could give rise to legal uncertainty in a number of real or hypothetical situations. yet, the copyright act of 1976 wasdeliberately drafted with a view to accommodating future technologies, while the manner in which one seeks to resolve ambiguities that impartial observers find genuinelytroublesome, rather than merely pretextual, depends on oneõs allegiance to the òeconomic and cultural bargainó thought to lie at the core of prior law.1for example, bookstores do not charge customers for the privilege of browsingthrough the stacks prior to purchasing specific books, and this use would not violatethe copyright ownerõs exclusive reproduction rights, irrespective of any contractualrelations between booksellers and customers. once the work in question was converted to digital form and transmitted over telecommunications networks, however,publishers could monitor and charge for analogous uses if they fell within their exclusive rights to reproduce, adapt, publicly perform, distribute, or display copyrightedworks, or if a new òexclusive right of transmissionó were enacted, as the informationinfrastructure task forceõs white paper proposes. enactment of the white paperõsproposed òtransmissionó right could then explicitly or implicitly remove uses analogous to òbrowsingó from the prior òfair useó tradition, whereas reliance on existing lawwould leave the issue to casebycase judicial determination.however, the wipo copyright treaty that was opened for signature on december 20, 1996, created in article 8 a new right of communication to the publicthat gives authors the exclusive right to make available òto the public . . . [these]works in such a way that members of the public may access these works from aplace and at a time individually chosen by them.ó moreover, the agreed statements concerning this treaty explicitly carry over the preexisting fair uses recognized in state practice and allow for new instances of fair use for digital transmissions of copyrighted works over telecommunication networks.the copyright act of 1976 also allows one who purchases copies of most copyrighted literary works to give or lend them to others or even to resell them secondhand for profit without owing additional royalties to the owners of the copyrights inquestion.2 whether analogous acts are, or should be, permitted with regard todigitally transmitted works is open to question,3 as is the right of certain users to1see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤¤101 (definition of òliterary worksó and òcopiesó), 102(a), (b), 107(codification of fair use in terms of market interest); jaszi, note 15 in text (stressing òculturalbargainó underlying copyrighted tradition).2see 17 u.s.c. ¤¤106 (3) (exclusive distribution right), 109 (a) (first sale doctrine). however, unauthorized commercial lending of sound recordings and computer programs is prohibited in the united states, see 17 u.s.c. ¤109 (b) (1994), and the commercial lending ofbooks or films is subject to royalties under some foreign laws.3see, e.g., white paper, note 38 in text, at p. 92 (claiming that unauthorized distribution bytransmission necessarily entails electronic òcopyingó (not true of the print media) and therefore violates the reproduction right, which is not limited by first sale doctrineõs toleration oflending and resale); mcmanis, note 64 in text, at pp. 26972 (criticizing and rejecting thewhite paperõs interpretation of current law).(continues)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144bits of powerbox 5.3continuedstudy or download digitally transmitted works for private research and other noncommercial purposes without payment of royalties to the copyright owners. whilepublishers of print media had more or less grudgingly come to terms with suchprivate or fair uses, they do not believe the same exceptions apply (or ought toapply) to online or other forms of digital transmission.4while the advent of new technologies has always created a degree of legaluncertainty in intellectual property law, the tendency in the past was to allow thelaw slowly to catch up, despite the risk of some shortterm obsolescence. in contrast, the supporters of the currently proposed changes to the law contend that theopposite course of action is needed with respect to digitally conveyed knowledgeand information goods, and the major reforms set out in the white paper adhere tothis view.if one believes that the federal courts can apply existing copyright and unfaircompetition laws to the new technologies with relatively little friction, then one hasimplicitly opted for a waitandsee approach or at least for a minimalist approach,based on casebycase judicial decisions and a minimum amount of tinkering withthe statute as it stands.5 this approach leaves the traditional exemptions for scientific and educational users intact, but subject to casebycase evaluation.6 if, incontrast, one believes that gaps in the law leave online publishers too much atrisk, then proposals for statutory reform easily escalate into a campaign to rid theemerging information infrastructure of allegedly anachronistic vestiges of the cultural bargain that had heretofore protected users and second comers of works inprint and other media.74see, e.g., white paper, note 38 in text, at pp. 6568, 216; mcmanis, note 64, at pp. 26373 and note 258 (criticizing this position and identifying white paper with the view that ògiventhe availability of metering [by commercial digital content providers], systematic electronicbrowsing by academics should not be considered fair useó); pamela samuelson (1994),òlegally speaking: the nii intellectual property report,ó communications of the acm, 37:21,23 (dec.) (stating that òthe real purpose behind the proposed digital transmission right is toenable copyright owners to control all digital performances and displays of copyrighted works,without regard to whether they are public or privateó).5see also mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64, at pp. 6373 (disputingwhite paperõs interpretation of existing law and concluding that it òis highly selective aboutwhich uncertainties . . . it would like congress to address,ó which òmakes critics suspiciousabout . . . [its] motivation in proposing that the distribution right be amended so as to expressly apply to transmissionsó).6cf., american geophysical union v. texaco inc., 60 f.3d 913 (2d cir. 1995) (finding thatsystematic photocopying of an academic journal by a commercial research institute was notfair use where blanket licenses were available from a collection society); sega v. accolade(9th cir. 1992) (decompilation of computer programs to extract unprotected ideas was analytical fair use where ideas were not otherwise accessible and expression was not copied). seealso national basketball association vs. motorola, 1997 u.s. app. legis. 1527 (2nd cir. 1997)(holding that realtime transmission of nba game scores and statistics taken from tv and radiobroadcasts in progress to handheld pagers did not violate state unfair competition law).7see, e.g., mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64 in text, at pp. 26669;jaszi, note 15 in text.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights145cultural bargain previously depended.56 equally uncertain is the role that libraries will play once information providers òcan connect directly to the useró viadigital transmission over telecommunications networks.57 some observers seethe changing role of libraries as grounds for allowing publishers virtually unfettered discretion to impose contractual conditions on library access to networkedtransmissions.58 others see the dependence of users everywhere on digital transmissions for the future acquisition of scientific knowledge as grounds for generalizing some of todayõs library and fair use privileges to all online users.59 thereal question, then is how to recreate a òfair useó zone in cyberspace60 thatprotects the strong public interest in ensuring that certain uses and certain users,notably the research and educational communities, are not priced out of themarket or forced to cut back on the kind of basic research that has heretoforeplayed a crucial role in u.s. economic and technological growth.61the drive for legal protection ofnoncopyrightable databasesin response to the perceived gap in the worldwide intellectual property system,62 proposals are being put forward to protect noncopyrightable databases bymeans of ad hoc or sui generis intellectual property regimesñthat is, by specialintellectual property laws that deviate significantly from the classical patent andcopyright models63 that underlie the paris and berne conventions of 1883 and1886, respectively. the impetus for a sui generis database law has come from thecommission of the european communities, whose member countries have adopted,to varying degrees, a policy of commercializing governmentgenerated data.64 thatpolicy is contrary to the traditional policy of the united states, which has favoredfull and open access.starting in the late 1980s, the commission of the european communitiesbegan to reevaluate the legal status of databases, especially electronic databases, inthe process of formulating an overall strategy for information technologies knownas the information market policy action (impact) program.65 the commissionfound that european database producers had to overcome several comparativedisadvantages in order to expand their share of the world market and to catch upwith u.s. industry, which dominated the market and was growing at a faster ratethan its european counterpart. to overcome these disadvantages, the commissionstressed the need for a single, integrated market, undistorted by differing regulatoryapproaches, and for higher levels of intellectual property protection, tailored to theneeds of potential investors in database production, that might stimulate additionalinvestment in this sector.66 another likely premise in the commissionõs thinkingwas that privatizing the governmentõs role in the collection and distribution of datamight also generate income streams that could help to offset the shrinking availability of public funds for research and development.the commission decided both to harmonize the domestic copyright lawsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146bits of powerinsofar as they applied to compilations of data and to require that the memberstates adopt sui generis intellectual property laws to protect the contents ofnoncopyrightable electronic databases, a proposal that was subsequently extendedto databases in print media as well.67 in this regard, comparative law revealedthat the nordic countries were already experimenting with shortterm, copyrightlike protection of noncopyrightable compilations (known as the nordic cataloguerule), with a view to curbing commercial piracy without extending full copyrightprotection to borderline literary productions that lacked creative authorship.68accordingly, in 1992, the commission proposed an innovative directive to protect such databases, òloosely modeled on the nordic catalogue rule, [and that]more directly and strongly protects electronic information tools.ó69 a greatlyamended version of this proposal was adopted by the council of ministers andthe european parliament in july 1995,70 which became the final european directive on the legal protection of databases of march 11, 1996.71while the precise mesh of the 1996 directiveõs twotiered provisions inadministrative and judicial practice remains to be seen, its highly protectionistattributes are unmistakable. moreover, if all the pending legislative projects areimplemented as explained below, similar changes could be introduced into u.s.law andñvia a wipo database treatyñinto international law as well.development of the european approach to noncopyrightable databasescollections of data, including those relatively unstructured or unprocessedcollections of primary interest to scientists, have never fit comfortably within theromantic notion of authorship that once dominated european copyright law, oreven within the more pragmatic conceptions of òoriginalityó that pervade moderncopyright laws, such as that of the united states. behind this conceptual resistance there lies a profound concern, often expressed in judicial decisions and thewritings of jurists, that facts and ideas constitute building blocks of intellectualdiscourse that should not (and perhaps cannot constitutionally) be removed fromthe public domain. in this context, the scientific communityõs own commitmentto the full and unrestricted flow of data represents an important subchapter in alarger discourse that, in this country, at least, is rooted in the first amendment.72the commission of the european communities initially addressed with commendable caution the perceived need for legal incentives to spur investment inelectronic database production. the commission affirmed its preference for aregime based on modified liability principles, that is, one that would deter certaintypes of socially undesirable conduct without vesting exclusive property rights indata as such (see box 5.2).73 unfortunately, even the commissionõs earliestproposals along these lines were flawed by contradictory elements drawn fromthe exclusive rights model, while the final version became a much less balancedand potentially anticompetitive exclusive property right.74bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights147the european commissionõs initial projectthe european commissionõs initial approach was premised on the òabsenceof a harmonized system of unfair competition legislationó to safeguard òthe investment of considerable human, technical and financial resourcesó in the making of databases that òcan be copied or accessed at a fraction of the cost needed todesign them independently.ó75 the logical solution, therefore, was to codify anew type of unfair competition law. such a sui generis law, loosely modeled onexisting laws that already protected trade secrets or confidential information,would repress conduct amounting to the òmisappropriationó of an electronicdatabase producerõs investment without imposing either legal barriers to entry orthe social costs of actual or legal secrecy.76 to this end, the commission proposed simply to forbid the òunfair extractionó of data from an electronic databasefor commercial purposes without the second comerõs having expended independent effort to collect and verify similar information. the first draft directiveaccordingly provided a 10year period of lead time in which the database makercould recoup his or her investment in a noncopyrightable electronic databasewhile preventing copiers from engaging in forprofit extraction or reutilization ofthe factual contents, in whole or in substantial part.77the commissionõs òunfair extractionó criterion seemed to invite casebycase judicial distinctions between procompetitive activities, especially independent investment in the generation of a competing electronic database (which wasroughly analogous to reverseengineering by honest means), and marketdistorting forms of electronic copying (which were roughly comparable to industrialespionage, commercial bribery, and other types of òparasiticó or freeriding behavior that unfair competition laws interdict). it also may have opened the doorto casebycase judicial evaluation of unauthorized extractions deemed òfairóbecause they advanced noncommercial educational and scientific pursuits, although neither the draft directive nor the first explanatory memorandum specifically endorsed this proposition. in any event, the drafters further diluted thedatabase makerõs new right against òunfair extractionó by engrafting some express userõs rights upon it and by adopting explicit measures to safeguard thepublic interest in free competition.for example, the drafters apparently envisioned that lawful users of an electronic database could make a limited reuse of its contents even for some commercial purposes, as might occur in valueadding uses. there was also no clearmeans for database creators to extend the duration of control over the initialcompilation by making subsequent changes to it, although the extent to whichthis omission resulted from a drafting oversight remains unclear. moreover,price competition was directly encouraged. second comers could choose between independently compiling their own databases from scratch or invoking astatutory compulsory license against any solesource provider of data in electronic databases, with a view to competing against that provider while payingbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148bits of powerreasonable royalties for the use of the data thus extracted.78 the liability principles loosely embodied in the first draft of the directive thus created no legalbarriers to entry. arguably, these principles may even have lessened existingeconomic barriers to entry by empowering wouldbe competitors to borrow dataat reasonable rates when the cost of independently regenerating them appearedtoo costly or otherwise inefficient as a business strategy.79absent from this framework were any explicit exceptions favoring educational and scientific users (assuming these were not implicitly òfairó uses underthe basic òunfair extractionó criterion of the draft directive), an omission that theeuropean parliament singled out for criticism. although the legislative historydoes not explain why the drafters rejected this criticism,80 the reasonable inference from all the evidence is that the commission believed further exceptionsand immunities would unduly weaken the publishersõ incentives to invest under aregime that already implemented a procompetitive strategy. if so, the commission appears to have erred in at least two respects.first, it seems to have assumed that a competitive market would intrinsicallysatisfy the needs of the scientific and educational communities, whereas thisreport shows that basic science has organizational and operational needs thatoften differ from those a competitive market is geared to meet.81 indeed, experience demonstrates that basic science may not be able to pay the market rate evenwhen it is competitively determined. important research projects consequentlymay languish for lack of affordable data unless nonmarket mechanisms (such assubsidies) or legal constraints on publishers (such as fair use exceptions andcompulsory licenses) close the gap.second, the drafters apparently assumed that their concern for the publicinterest in free competition was still a paramount legislative value in developedmarket economies. unfortunately, such protection of the public interest that wasimplicit in their rudimentary liability framework ultimately gave way to a potentexclusive property right in which public interest safeguards were deemphasizedin favor of the protection of private interests.the european unionõs final productñthe 1996 directive on the legalprotection of databasesalthough the european commissionõs initial project had undergone transformation by the time that the amended proposal was put forward in 1993,82 itswholesale conversion from a relatively weak liability regime to a strong exclusive property right occurred during the closed proceedings of the european council of ministers, which produced the common position of july 10, 1995.83 thisversion, with minor technical alterations, became the final directive on databases, adopted on march 11, 1996, which the european union member statesmust now convert into domestic intellectual property laws and regulations.84the directive as finally adopted may be subdivided into five parts: (1) a listof 60 òrecitalsó or premises that underlie this legislation; (2) a small group ofbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights149definitional articles that apply across the board (articles 12); (3) a set of provisions harmonizing the treatment of databases under the member statesõ domesticcopyright laws (articles 36); (4) a set of provisions requiring these same statesto provide the new, sui generis intellectual property right for noncopyrightabledatabases (articles 711); and (5) a final group of òcommon provisionsó thatapply to both copyright and the sui generis laws (articles 1216).of these, the broad definition of òdatabaseó in article 1(2)85 constitutes animportant feature. whereas earlier proposals had limited sui generis protectionto electronic databases that were deemed particularly vulnerable to rapid duplication, the broadened definition now includes databases in print form that areaccessible to the human eye. in other words, no database circulating within theeuropean union will escape the regulatory effects of the 1996 directive, regardless of the medium in which it appears or the nature of its compilers.as finally enacted, the sui generis right conferred on qualifying databasemakers is no longer couched in terms of òunfairó or even òunauthorizedó acts oruses.86 rather, the database maker obtains an absolute exclusive òright to preventextraction and/or reutilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluatedqualitatively and/or quantitatively, of the contents of that database.ó87 this twopronged exclusive right, which now applies to both electronic and nonelectronicdatabases,88 lasts for an initial period of at least 15 years. any compiler whomakes a database available to the public, however, may continually renew theright for additional 15year terms with every additional investment in the database.89 this renewal right covers the contents of the entire database, and not justthe new matter (as would occur under the derivative work right of copyright law).the final 1996 directive does not make sui generis protection contingent onthe showing of a creative achievement or of a novel contribution to the prior art,the classical bases for justifying legal derogation from free competition in thepast. rather, it requires the database maker to prove that òthere has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in either the obtaining, verification or presentation of the contentsó or in òany substantial change resultingfrom the accumulation of successive additions, deletions or alterations.ó90 because the directive itself provides no further guidelines for evaluating the requisite level of investment in either case, this threshold will remain uncertain, pending decisions by european courts applying the still to be drafted domestic databaselaws. nevertheless, there are no limits to the number of quantitative or qualitative changes that will thus qualify for such extensions, and any publisher whocontinues to make a substantial investment in updating, improving, or expandingan existing database can look forward to perpetual protection.even though the sui generis right depends on mere investment rather than onsome palpable creative contribution, the scope of protection that the 1996 directive affords investors in noncopyrightable databases now appears roughly equivalent to that which it elsewhere affords fullfledged authors of copyrightable compilations (and greater than that traditionally afforded to authors of literary works;see box 5.4).91 this conclusion follows both from the definitions of the exclubits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150bits of powerbox 5.4the 1996 european directiveõs broad protection for databaseinvestorsthe investorõs scope of protection under the hybrid right to prevent extractionappears paradoxically to exceed even that afforded authors of traditional literaryand artistic works under the classical copyright paradigm of the berne convention1in at least three important respects. first, the basic ideaexpression dichotomyunderlying u.s. copyright law2 (which the agreement on traderelated aspects ofintellectual property rights (trips) applies universally to all copyrightable works,including such borderline works as computer programs and factual compilations3)does not apply to noncopyrightable databases covered by the sui generis regime.for this and other reasons explained below, in the universe of data generators,there is no public domain substratum from which either research workers or second comers are progressively entitled to withdraw previously generated data4 without seeking licenses that may or may not be granted.on the contrary, every independent generation of data, however mundane orcommonplace, will obtain protection if it costs money, and every regeneration orreutilization of the same data in updates, additions, and extensions that cost money will extend that protection without limit as to time.5 as a consequence, thirdparties will rarely be able to avoid the expense of regenerating preexisting datañin the way that they can always use previously generated ideas, however much itcost to develop themñunless the originator of the relevant database has abandoned it, or declined to exercise his or her proprietary rights, much as occurs undertrademark laws.6 to be sure, data providers (including, where feasible, membersof the scientific community) could decide not to exercise proprietary rights in certain databases, for example, those funded by government agencies; but this wouldnot change the legal situation with respect to scientifically important data located inprivately owned databases or in those funded by public agencies, especially foreign agencies, that had opted to commercialize their data.7the absence of any equivalent of the ideaexpression doctrine under the newsui generis regime means that investors, in effect, obtain proprietary rights in data1see, e.g., reichman, òcollapse of the patentcopyright dichotomy,ó note 8 in text, at pp.48586, 49296; see also sam ricketson (1987), the berne convention for the protection ofliterary and artistic works: 18861986, queen mary college, at pp. 23132.2see 17 u.s.c. ¤102(b) (1994); text accompanying note 16 in text.3see trips agreement, note 111 in text, articles 9(2), 10(1); reichman, òknowhow gapin trips,ó note 120 in text, at pp. 77584.4cf. jaszi, note 15 in text, at p. 596; litman, òpublic domain,ó note 9 in text, at p. 967.5see notes 8990 in text.6see lanham trademark act, 15 u.s.c. ¤1052 (1994 ed.). however, there is an infinitearray of trademarks, and the use of marks to distinguish quality producers inherently promotes competition without creating legal barriers to entry. see, e.g., stephen ladas (1975),patents, trademarks, and related rights, harvard university press; william m. landes andrichard a posner (1987), òtrademark law: an economic perspective,ó j. l. econ., 30:265.7executive office of the president, office of management and budget, òimplementing theinformation dissemination provisions of the paperwork reduction act of 1995,ó memorandum by alice m. rivlin, september 22.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights151as such, a type of ownership that the copyright paradigm expressly precludes.the drafters of the sui generis right play this down by insisting that third partiesalways remain free to generate their own databases. but this opportunity existsonly for data that are legally available from public sources and whose cost of independent regeneration is not prohibitively high in relation to the gains expected fromthe exercise, if any. as for proprietary data not legally available for second comersto exploit, there is no opportunity to avoid the originatorõs exclusive rights to prevent extraction or reuse of existing data. in such cases, the investorõs exclusiverights necessarily vest in the data as such.a deeper point is that, regardless of whether it is possible in theory to regenerate the data from publicly available sources, investors in database production canalways deny third parties the right to use preexisting data in valueadded applications,8 even when the third parties are willing to succumb to royaltybearing licenses;9 and there is no escaping such licenses unless the database publisher eitherdeclines to exercise his or her rights, or engages in an abusive exercise of marketpower. in other words, except when the new proprietary rights are abandoned ormisused, the concept of incremental or òcumulative and sequential innovation,ówhich is central to the development of modern technological paradigms,10 hasbeen banished from the universe of database production, despite the economicwaste and inefficiency inherent in such policies.a second, and closely related way in which the database investorõs scope ofprotection under the 1996 european directive exceeds that of authors under theclassical copyright paradigm is to be seen in the treatment of derivative works.under copyright laws, the scope of an authorõs exclusive right to make a derivativework extends only to the original, expressive matter added to the underlying work.it cannot protect either ideas or preexisting expressive matter, including any matterthat has entered the public domain.11 but the 1996 directive recognizes no suchlegal distinctions and, as just explained, it harbors no working conception of apublic domain whatsoever. unless local european courts applying the domesticlaws that implement the directive take pains to limit this omission, the upshot willbe that each new extension of the database makerõs exclusive rights by dint of hisor her òsubstantial investmentó in updates, additions, and revisions12 will, in effect,requalify that investor for protection of the database as a whole, for additional 15year periods, and not just for the revised or added matterñthe òderivative workóñas would occur under the copyright laws. this, in turn, reinforces the monopolistic8see, e.g., samuelson, òmissing foundations,ó note 34 in text.9however, a refusal to license, coupled with a dominant position in the marketplace, couldtrigger an antitrust violation or a related charge of abuse of intellectual property rights. see,e.g., e.c. directive on databases, note 52 in text, article 16(3); hunsuker, note 32.10see, e.g., richard r. nelson and sidney g. winter (1982), an evolutionary theory ofeconomic change, pp. 25562; richard r. nelson (1994), òintellectual property protectionfor cumulative systems technology,ó colum. l. rev., 94: 2674, 1676; see also robert p.merges and richard r. nelson (1990), òon the complex economics of patent scope,ó colum.l. rev., 90:839, 881.11see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤¤101, 102,103, 106, 501 (1994).12see notes 8990 in text.(continues)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152bits of powersive rights set out in the directive itself and from the council of ministersõcloseddoor decision to delete from its 1995 common position the initial draftdirectiveõs compulsory license requirement facing solesource providers.92as defined in article 7(2) of the 1996 directive, the investorõs sui generisextraction right covers even temporary transfers of data to online receivers,much like the authorõs broadened rights to prevent reproduction in copyright lawunder article 5(a).93 the investorõs reutilization right covers online use or transmissions of data, including those in valueadded or derivative formats, much likethe authorõs broadened òcommunicationsó rights under article 5 (b), (d), (e).94 inthis and other respects, including the omission of any requirement for a compulsory license against solesource providers, the drafters of the 1996 directive haveintegrated the sui generis regime into the broader regulatory framework for national and international information infrastructures that the european union andu.s. intellectual property authorities are now jointly promoting.95effects inherent in the originatorõs ability to deny third parties the right to buildincrementally and sequentially upon preexisting scientific and technical knowledge.a third way in which the scope of protection for investors in database production exceeds that afforded authors of copyrightable literary and artistic works results from the much narrower range of public interest exceptions applicable toinvestors.13 in effect, the sole important exception available to all users of noncopyrightable electronic databases under the directive is the right to extract or reutilize òinsubstantial parts of the database.ó14 even this exception applies only toòlawful usersó of the database (i.e., presumably subscribers to an online service orpurchasers of a cdrom), which suggests that in most cases, the exception merely validates acts incidental to obtaining the value for which one has paid. moreover, a lawful user of a noncopyrightable database cannot extract or reuse eveninsubstantial parts of its contents in òrepeated and systematicó ways that òconflictwith a normal exploitation of that database or . . . unreasonably prejudice thelegitimate interests of the maker.ó15 arguably, this could preclude most valueadded uses of an insubstantial part of the database, regardless of the commercial ornoncommercial purpose of the users.13for the general range of publicinterest exceptions under copyright laws, see text accompanying notes 1620 in text.14see e.c. directive on databases, note 52 in text, article 8(1). however, member statesmay allow òextraction for private purposes of the contents of a nonelectronic database.ó id.,article 9(a).15e.c. directive on databases, note 52 in text, article 7(5); see also id., article 8(2) (forbidding any acts by lawful users that òconflict with normal exploitationó or òunreasonably prejudice the legitimate interestsó of its maker).box 5.4continuedbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights153potential effects of an exclusive property rights approachunlike earlier versions, the final 1996 directive does give european unionmember states the option of allowing authorized extraction of a substantial partfrom a noncopyrightable database òfor the purposes of illustration for teaching orscientific research, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified bythe noncommercial purpose to be achieved.ó96 this exception is available only toa òlawful useró and only for the purpose of òextractionó but not for that ofreutilization, and it will exist only in those member states that opt to enact it.97if a member state enacts this provision, the scientific or educational userõsexempted extraction must satisfy both the noncommercial purpose test and thegeneral obligation ònot [to] perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation or[that] unreasonably prejudice [the makerõs] legitimate interests.ó98 because thenormal use of a scientific database in an academic institution typically is to serve asa research and educational tool, this exemption could merely permit illustration ofconclusions reached, but not uses for other scientific or educational purposes, suchas browsing or even extractions from and use of the collected data for the purposeof reaching the conclusions that one may then freely òillustrate.ó99of course, local legislators might manufacture loopholes through which towiden this exception,100 and database publishers might refrain from imposingharsh or oppressive terms and conditions that unduly impinge upon scientific andeducational uses. the fact remains, however, that nothing in the directive asfinally enacted requires such accommodations. its sui generis provisions containno real equivalents of the private use, fair use, and related exceptions that traditional copyright laws afford scientific and educational users of core literary andartistic works. moreover, database publishers who acquired market powerthrough restricted online transmissions reportedly have recently imposed questionable contractual conditions on libraries and academic subscribers.101it follows that under the 1996 directive, the most borderline and, in the sensethat they are basic building blocks of knowledge, questionable of all objects toreceive intellectual property protectionñcompilations of data and facts, scientific or otherwiseñparadoxically obtain the strongest scope of protection available from any intellectual property regime except, perhaps, for the classical patentparadigm itself.102 nor are the breadth of protection and the monopolistic powerit tends to breed likely to be offset by greater competition in the market forelectronic databases, especially now that the 1996 directive as finally adopted nolonger contains the compulsory license requirement that had initially been devised for this purpose.formally, of course, third parties still remain free to compile a databaseexactly like one already in commerce, because independent generation of therelevant data at oneõs own time and expense is always permitted. in practice, thisoption ignores the economic realities of the database industry, in which startupbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154bits of powercosts can be relatively high, the prospects for market sharing have seldom beenrealized, many valuable data sets are unavailable from public sources, and theexistence of one complex database seems empirically to constitute a de factobarrier to entry that is seldom overcome. moreover, as discussed in previouschapters, many databases in the natural sciences contain unique, nonreproducibleobservations that are by definition available only from a sole source. this lack ofeffective competition, with its inherent possibilities for discouraging addon products and for engaging in abuses of market power, was downplayed by the european council of ministers in 1995, even though it had been uppermost in theminds of the european commissionõs own drafters a short while earlier. article16 of the final directive thus merely calls for 3year reviews to determine whetherexisting antitrust laws prove inadequate to deal with the òabuse of a dominantposition or other interference with free competition,ó in which case proposals forònonvoluntary licensingó may once again be considered.103the fear of market failure and of chronic underprotection that initially motivated the quest for a sui generis regime to protect electronic databases has thusgiven way to the creation of òminimonopolies over informationó104 and to anunderlying logic that is inconsistent with the public interest in the full and openflow of scientific data. the original goal of providing some incentives to augment the publishersõ investment in compiling electronic databases has generateda set of norms that could render many scientific and technological undertakingsprohibitively expensive. as explained below, the shortterm social benefits ofthis socalled òextraction rightó may thus conceal the longterm social costs ofdiminished research and development capabilities at scientific and educationalinstitutes, including public and semipublic institutions that are already indirectlysubsidizing private research and development.105overlapping u.s. and european union international modelswhen the european commission began its deliberations concerning database protection, the climate in which intellectual property policy discussions atboth the national and the international level took place differed from that prevailing today. the fate of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations andits intellectual property component, the agreement on traderelated aspects ofintellectual property rights (trips), remained uncertain. the u.s. intellectualproperty authorities had not yet begun to survey the issues posed by widespreadtransmission of digitized information over telecommunications networks. thesupreme court had just denied copyright protection to telephone directories infeist and had recently invalidated state protection of subpatentable industrialdesigns.106 these decisions proclaimed renewed faith in a 19thcentury vision ofthe competitive ethos without recognizing the unresolved problems of gainingreturns from investments in subpatentable information goods under 21stcenturybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights155conditions.107 it also seems noteworthy that a few years earlier, the chairman ofthe house subcommittee on intellectual property had set very high standards thatwould have to be met before congress would consider proposals for additionalforms of sui generis intellectual property protection that deviated from the classical patent and copyright paradigms.108against this background, the european commissionõs early drafts for a directive on databases adopted a defensive posture with respect to foreign publishers,which proposed a strict criterion of material reciprocity. databases made in countries that did not enact sui generis legislation akin to that envisioned by the directive would consequently remain vulnerable to wholesale copying within the european union itself.109 this decision to discriminate against foreign nationalsoperating in nonharmonizing states was modeled on the earlier and equally controversial decision by the united states to impose a material reciprocity clause underthe semiconductor chip protection act of 1984.110 although both decisions restedon dubious legal grounds even before the trips agreement was adopted, and eventhough that agreement rejects this approach, at least in spirit,111 a version of thereciprocity provision nonetheless entered the european commissionõs final directive on the legal protection of databases, as adopted in 1996.112a coordinated highprotectionist strategyby 1995, however, when the european unionõs council of ministers met toadopt its common position on the pending database directive, the climate surrounding worldwide intellectual property policymaking had profoundly changed.universal intellectual property standards embodied in the trips agreement hadbecome enforceable within the framework of the world trade organization,113largely as the result of sustained pressures by a coalition of powerful manufacturing associations in europe, the united states, and japan.114 the success of thisventure presages further alignments of interests by u.s. and european unionofficials with a view to forging a common, strongly protectionist strategy forintellectual goods in the posttrips environment.115included within this strategy was a packet of complementary proposals foramending or expanding the berne convention. known as the òdigital agenda,óthese proposals were considered in a december 1996 diplomatic conferencehosted by wipo.116 some of the proposals, which the european unionõs ownintellectual property authorities placed on the agenda for that conference, wouldhave conformed international copyright law to the regulatory framework for aglobal information infrastructure that the u.s. information infrastructure taskforceõs (iitf) white paper on the national information infrastructure recentlyendorsed.117 the white paper took the view that online providers are, or shouldbe, strictly liable for digital transmissions of copyrighted works, even if thisobliges providers to serve as òcopyright policeó without regard to their ability tobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156bits of powerperform such functions.118 it also proposed a battery of measures that wouldprohibit the decoding of encrypted transmissions (or the tampering with otherelectronic safeguards) as copyright infringement and that would forbid alteringòcopyright management information, including the terms and conditions for access to online transmissions.ó119despite the innocuous appearance of these and related proposals, they arebroadly drafted and may result in indirectly overruling numerous judicial precedents, including some that permit reverseengineering of the noncopyrightablecomponents of computer programs.120 these proposals might also help to immunize copyright owners from claims of misuse for imposing harsh or oppressiveconditions on users in the form of nonnegotiable electronic contracts.121 thesingle most troubling aspect about the white paper (and the legislative proposalsit has spawned) is, as so many qualified observers have concluded, that it favorsòreducing the application and scope of the fair use doctrine in cyberspace.ó122another proposal, the wipo draft database treaty,123 called for worldwideprotection of noncopyrightable databases under sui generis intellectual propertyregimes. a committee of experts prepared the wipo draft database treaty,which draws from both the european unionõs model and from draft u.s. legislation. it was placed on the december 1996 diplomatic conference agenda at thebehest of the u.s. patent and trademark office (pto).124 the diplomatic conference was thus asked to convert the wipo draft database treaty into international law, even though the united states lacked any corresponding domesticregime as of the time of its writing.125 in addition, there has been no empiricaltest of the controversial final 1996 european directive in actual practice,126 andno preliminary reports or studies evaluating even the economic justification forsuch measures have been issued by wipo or by any other reputable internationalinstitution.127 the diplomatic conference postponed action on this proposal andcharged wipo to set a timetable for further deliberations.against this background, the changes to the european commissionõs database directive made in the council of ministersõ common position of 1995, including deletion of the compulsory license provision and other measures thatstrengthened the exclusive rights apparatus,128 reflect the coordinated strategiesthat the european commission and the u.s. intellectual property authorities arenow jointly pursuing. if implemented as proposed, these strategies could graduallyextend international norms concerning the legal protection of databases from theberne convention (or related instruments) to the trips agreement, which empowers the council for trips to òundertake reviews in the light of any relevantnew developments which might warrant modification or amendment of this agreement.ó129 this, in turn, could eventually obviate the longterm effects of thereciprocity clause in the 1996 european directive by replacing it with a set ofharmonized norms binding on all world trade organization member states, likethose already adopted for semiconductor chip designs in articles 3538 of thetrips agreement.130bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights157h.r. 3531ñthe proposed u.s. database investment andintellectual property antipiracy actthe bill proposing a u.s. law to protect noncopyrightable databases, whichwas introduced to the house of representatives at the behest of the pto,131articulated a still more protectionist strategy than that of the european 1996directive. under h.r. 3531, as under the final 1996 directive, a compiler wouldqualify for exclusive rights to prevent extractions and reuses of the whole orsubstantial parts of any database by dint of his or her having made substantialinvestments in the collection, assembly, verification, organization, or presentation of its contents.132 these exclusive rights would attach automatically uponthe expenditure of resources, and if the owner continued to invest in updating orotherwise maintaining the database in question, its 25year initial term of protection could be renewed continually, without limit,133 in all the contents of thatdatabase. this provision thus ignores the constitutional enabling clause, whichrequires intellectual property rights to be limited in time.134furthermore, when one scrutinizes the details of the pending u.s. proposal,one finds that its definition of òdatabaseó is much broader than that of the 1996directive. it contemplates, for example, that noncopyrightable components ofcomputer programs could qualify for protection as databases, and it provides noapparent criterion for excluding even facts or data compiled for scientific andhistorical works.135 moreover, the database makerõs exclusive rights to extract,use, or reuse all or a substantial part of the contents are reinforced by allowingdatabase makers to control any use that òadversely affects the actual or potentialmarket for that databaseó in addition to uses that otherwise òconflict with thedatabase ownerõs normal exploitation.ó136 this specification, which is not foundin the 1996 directive, has the potential for impeding virtually any judgemadeexceptions analogous to òfair useó under copyright laws, because any such exception would almost certainly affect the òpotential marketó for any given database.137 at the same time, the database ownerõs potentially perpetual òderivativeworkó right (flowing from continuing updates), which is subject to no publicdomain exceptions whatsoever, becomes even easier to obtain than under the1996 directive, because the u.s. bill would condition the renewal right merelyupon òany change of commercial significanceó to the database contents and notsolely on additional òsubstantial investments.ó138the pending bill then expands the u.s. database ownerõs scope of protectionwell beyond that of the 1996 directiveõs sui generis regime by introducing anarray of measures that, when read together, could produce formidableanticompetitive effects. for example, the 1996 directiveõs principal concessionto usersñthe exception for extraction of insubstantial parts139ñ is ostensiblybroadened in h.r. 3531 to permit uses or reuses of insubstantial parts,140 but it isthen significantly narrowed in at least two ways. first, there is a new provisionthat not only forbids òrepeated or systematic use or reuse of insubstantial partsóbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158bits of power(like the comparable provision of the european directive),141 but also expresslyforbids extraction or uses even of insubstantial parts òthat cumulatively conflict. . . with . . . normal exploitation . . . or adversely affect . . . the actual or potentialmarket.ó142 this latter clause acquires further strength by means of still otherprovisions that seem to outlaw extraction or reuse of even insubstantial parts of aprotected database in any product or service that directly or indirectly competeswith the database from which it was extracted in any market, however distant.143also forbidden are extraction, use, or reuse of even insubstantial parts òby or formultiple persons within an organization or entity in lieu of . . . authorized additional use or reuse . . . by license, purchase, or otherwise.ó144given such restrictions, one is hardpressed to imagine unauthorized uses ofan insubstantial component that the drafters of the u.s. bill would deem legitimate. to forestall even this remote possibility, the bill allows publishers contractually to override even the formal right of lawful users to extract or use insubstantial parts, in contrast with the express nullification of similar contractualprovisions in the 1996 directive.145 one knowledgeable source reports that someu.s. database publishers, opposed to this constraint in the 1996 directive, expressed an intent to exercise permissible contractual overrides in practice.146 asimilar intention seems manifest in the clause allowing publishers to imposeseparate licenses for networked use of a database within organizations, includingnonprofit academic and scientific institutions, which can be construed as covering the extraction, use, or reuse even of insubstantial parts.147taken together, these and other provisions of the proposed h.r. 3531 reinforce the single most disturbing aspect of the 1996 european directive, namely,that it precludes formation of an evolving public domain from which third partiescan freely draw.148 to this end, the bill expressly confines permissible acts ofòindependent creationó to data or materials not found in a database subject to theproposed sui generis regime.149 this restriction applies regardless of whether theunauthorized extraction or use is made for purposes of noncommercial scientificendeavor or for commercially important valueadded products that build incrementally on existing compilations of data. every unauthorized use or reuse ofexisting data thus potentially violates the database ownerõs unbounded derivativework right. furthermore, the existence of this potential violation is determinedwithout regard to the substantiality of the second comerõs own expenditure ofeffort or resources, to the similarity or differences of the latterõs product orservice, or to the publicgood aspects of the activities undertaken.150the monopoly conferred on database owners under the pending u.s. legislation is then perfected by recognizing no public interest exceptions whatsoever.even the weak exception for extraction (but not reuse) òfor the purposes ofillustration for teaching or scientific researchó that the 1996 directive allowedeuropean union member states to enact151 is omitted from both h.r. 3531 andthe u.s. submission to wipo.152the sole concession to science and education in h.r. 3531 is a provision notbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights159found in the european directive that expressly denies coverage to òa databasemade by a [federal] government entity.ó153 because most databases of primaryimportance to science are funded by federal government agencies, this provisionappears to recognize that such databases merit different treatment from thosenormally covered by the proposed sui generis regime. the message is renderedambiguous, however, because it does not expressly apply to databases funded bygovernment and also because of language in the same provision to the effect thatòany database otherwise subject to this act . . . is not excluded herefrom becauseits contents have been obtained from a governmental entity.ó154 this languageappears to allow private firms that invest in data obtained from federal government sources to qualify for protection. however, it also can be read as implicitlyinviting federal governmental agencies to derogate from the traditional u.s. position, reiterated in a recent office of management and budget (omb) directive,which limits such agencies to the recovery of dissemination costs from commercial applications of governmentfunded data by the private sector.155 if government agencies were to move beyond the costrecovery threshold, the continuedability of scientists to access such data on favorable terms, which current policyseeks to guarantee, would then be called into question.disregarding the status of databases made by governmental entities, h.r.3531 would render virtually any act of òcollecting, assembling, or compiling . . .data . . . from . . . a database subject to this actó a prohibited or infringing act.the perpetrator could never justify such acts as incidental to other acts of independent creation, or as incidental to recognized public interest exceptions, oreven as a legitimate means of building on preexisting data sets.156 nor does h.r.3531 express any concern that application of its exclusive rights might lead toabuse of a dominant position or to other anticompetitive acts that might requireònonvoluntary licensingó at some point in the future.157ancillary provisions of h.r. 3531 also embody some of the current administrationõs most controversial proposals concerning the regulation of national andglobal information infrastructures. for example, one provision, following a proposal from the iitf white paper, would outlaw making or distributing any technical device (or performing any technical service) the primary purpose of whichis to circumvent selfhelp technological security measures that publishers rely onto help protect the contents of their databases.158 another provision, also inspiredby the white paper, would forbid tampering with database management information attached to copies of database contents or otherwise distributing copies in aform that bears false information about ownership or other aspects of managingthe relevant proprietary rights.159selfhelp measures, such as encryption for networked transmissions, oftenserve valid commercial purposes, and they may be indispensable for the protection of privacy.160 however, such measures also may unduly reinforce thepublisherõs power to impose harsh contractual terms in twoparty deals,161 aprospect that h.r. 3531 completely ignores. there are concerns as well thatbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160bits of powerpublishers will use these provisions to fend off legitimate public interest challenges to the scope of protection obtained under the proposed sui generis regime.if, for example, decrypting a coded transmission is necessary to extract part of adatabase for noncommercial scientific purposes, and that act of decryption itselfconstitutes a tort,162 researchers are unlikely to explore the potential availabilityof judgemade public interest exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by thenew regime.163in sum, by providing a longer period of protection, more powerful exclusiverights, no public interest exceptions or privileges, harsh criminal penalties,164 andancillary rules reinforcing selfhelp policing of online transmissions, the proposed u.s. law h.r. 3531 would grant database owners greater monopoly powerthan that emanating from the european unionõs 1996 directive. in so doing, thedrafters of h.r. 3531 take no notice of the important role that affordable, unrestricted flows of data have traditionally played in supporting u.s. research andeducation, or in other sectors vital to economic development. the proposedregime thus risks triggering a chain of unintended consequences that could ultimately compromise both the foundations of basic science and the technologicalsuperiority of the national innovation system.165the rush to legislatein mid1996, the pto (which now speaks for the copyright office in international affairs) presented proposals similar to those set out in the iitf white paperbefore wipo, with a view to amending the berne convention and to adopting newinstruments related thereto at the december 1996 wipo conference.166 however,the diplomatic conference rejected many of these proposals and adopted a moresocially balanced approach to the protection of copyrighted works digitally transmitted over telecommunications networks. whether wipo member statesñincluding the united statesñwill enact this more balanced approach into their domestic laws remains to be seen. in may 1996, the u.s. negotiators at wipo alsopresented the draft of an international treaty to protect noncopyrightable databases,167 and on august 30, 1996, the chairman of the committee of expertspublished a wipo draft database treaty. the conference postponed immediateaction on this treaty, but at a meeting of the wipo governing body in march 1997,a new timetable was established for further work.this unnecessarily fast pace has so far allowed little time for public hearingsor for national science groups and other interested parties to organize, analyze theproposals, and contribute to their shaping.168 if successful, it would convert theiitf white paperõs òreform proposalsó for a sui generis law to protect noncopyrightable compilations of data into international minimum standards of intellectual property protection binding on all signatories to the berne convention.169this òwhiplash effectó would then oblige the united states to implement thesesame standards in its domestic laws, as a matter of international law, even ifbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights161congress had not already adopted similar legislation in the interim.170 the hastewith which both the u.s. and the european union authorities have moved toimplement these measures at the international level171 thus raises still furtherquestions about the extent to which the public interest has been compromised.the case for moving so far and so fast rests largely on the supposed difficulties of enforcing territorially grounded intellectual property rights in cyberspace172and on the fear of òdetaching information from the physical plane, where property law of all sorts has always found definition.ó173 from a legal perspective,these developments raise daunting problems of conflicts of law, a field that hasnever found it easy to accommodate intangible property.174 yet, it will not do toexaggerate these difficulties while ignoring the harmonizing effects of the tripsagreement, which requires all countries that belong to the world trade organization to adopt both the universal minimum standards of the berne convention(whether or not they adhere to that convention) and the additional standardsconcerning computer programs, compilations, and related subject matter set outin the trips agreement itself.175 regardless of whose law applies, in otherwords, digitally transmitted information goods will eventually become subject tothe same international minimum standards of protection in all developed countries and in most developing countries as matters stand.176to be sure, these standards harbor ògray areasó that are open to differentinterpretations, notably with respect to the scope of copyright protection affordedborderline works, such as computer programs and those databases that otherwisemeet the domestic criteria of eligibility.177 but the developed countries have onlyjust begun to grapple with these issues, and there is no basis for an empiricallygrounded consensus even with regard to computer programs or industrial designs,178let alone databases and other electronic information tools. as previously demonstrated, moreover, a solid body of scholarly opinion holds that òa combination oftechnological restrictions (such as encryption), contractual arrangements and criminal sanctions (for unauthorized decryption)ó constitutes overprotection that raises afar greater risk than the risk posed by underprotection.179 taking the iitf whitepaperõs controversial proposals to a premature diplomatic conference without allowing time for adversely affected users, especially the scientific and educationalcommunities, to participate in the discussions thus lacked justification in terms ofsound public policy.charting a wellconsidered course in the new eraputting science into the pictureat the time of this writing, neither the scientific nor the educational community has played any part in the relevant deliberations concerning the legal protection of databases, and they have not been consulted on any official basis. ifmatters proceed without adequate input from researchers and educators, conbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162bits of powergress could enact the proposed sui generis database regime, despite the risk thatòit would allow a limited group of database creators to control the disseminationof informationó and that the òresulting restrictions on the transfer of knowledgewould be detrimental to society, as information lies at the core of social advancement.ó180in most cases the proposed sui generis regime will simply engraft a stronglegal monopoly onto the preexisting natural monopolies that are typical of thedatabase industry. as noted in chapter 4, it is the social costs of these doublebarreled monopolies to the public at large that must actually be taken into account, along with their overall impact on a scientific community whose leadingrole in world technological production is linked in still unexplored ways to thetraditional funding of scientific data by government.clearly, u.s. policy makers should not incur such risks without evaluating inadvance the possible repercussions that sui generis database laws might have onthe nationõs scientific and technological capabilities and future progress, andwithout taking measures to alleviate them before embarking on such an unchartedcourse. by the same token, the scientific community has a vital stake in theformulation of new database laws, in order to ensure that legal incentives tostimulate investment in the production and distribution of data do not end byimpeding the full and open flow of those same data to basic science.the scientific community can ill afford to remain indifferent to these proposals for database protection, if only because its whole modus operandi has beenbased on the principle of full and open exchange of data. this principle isindirectly undermined by the pending proposals concerning legal regulation ofthe national information infrastructure and directly threatened by the drive toinstitute sui generis intellectual property rights in the contents of electronic andother databases. as regards the database laws in particular, the foregoing analysis suggests that science and education have two paramount concerns that need tobe pursued in the course of future legislative deliberations:¥sui generis laws to protect databases should, on the whole, reflect aproper balance between public and private interests, including the public interestin free competition, that is, between public goods and private intellectual property.¥such laws should contain measures specifically designed to preserveand promote the scientific and educational enterprise, including the need tofacilitate and encourage the establishment and maintenance of databases essentialto the work of science.reconciling the needs of science with those of a competitive marketthe advent of new proprietary rights where none previously existed willinfluence the collection and distribution policies of all data providers, includingbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights163governmentfunded providers and other sources that currently follow nonprofitpricing policies. as funding sources shrink and foreign governments operatingunder the european unionõs 1996 directive shift to profitoriented policies, moreand more data of interest to science will be covered by proprietary rights, andfewer data will be made available to science on a costofdissemination basis.the tensions already reflected in the recent omb circular181 will become moregeneralized, even though different disciplines will experience different degreesof hardship.the experience with landsat is indicative of transnational problems likely toarise when states adopting different policies invoke their sovereign rights tobuttress their respective positions. for example, some of the international groundstations that receive landsat data reportedly object to the traditional u.s. policyof making data available at the cost of fulfilling a request. they want to continueto charge whatever the market will bear, and they are pressing the united statesto change its policy and laws. if the costrecovery approach is not extended toground station agreements in other countries, this would leave academics andother nongovernmental users to pay prices that they simply cannot afford.as discussed in chapter 4, the adverse effects of landsat commercializationon the scientific community were easy to document, although the value of lostresearch opportunities remains hard to quantify in terms of objective social costs.in other cases, however, it will prove harder to show the effects on science,especially if a commercialized database has many private downstream users whoare better able to afford the rates, and there is no powerful upstream user communityñakin to the global change research users of landsat datañcapable of voicing its distress in terms that cannot be ignored. in such cases, the high cost of datamay simply inhibit project formulation when there is no realistic possibility offunding that cost. yet, because academic scientists are relatively few in numberand not typically a presence in daytoday decision making at the policy level,their lost research opportunities may simply go unreported and unrecorded.182although such lost research opportunities are difficult to predict or quantifyaccurately, the areas likely to be most adversely affected include dataintensiveresearch in the observational sciences that rely on unique, multiple, or continuously updated data sources.of course, the law of diminishing returns also applies, and commercial providers may find that no one will access their files if they charge too much. before thispoint is reached, however, the more likely resultñas suggested by the landsatexampleñis that the provider may determine that the price/volume point on thedemand curve at which the service is expected to be viable can be afforded by onlya few wellfinanced scientists. this does not provide general access for thoseunable to pay at that level, including both students and scholars with limited grantfunds, not to mention scientists and other potential users in poorer communities.more generally, such an approach ignores the contribution of basic scienceto the ability of u.s. firms to predominate in markets for technology and informabits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164bits of powertion goods. despite a general consensus on the need for sustained levels ofinvestment in research and development, the proposed database laws could changethe status quoñwithout anyoneõs wanting it to happenñby elevating the price ofthe one raw material to which u.s. researchers have always had ready access. ifless available scientific information were to translate to fewer applications ofeconomic importance, the end result would be a loss of u.s. technological competitiveness in an integrated world market.183preserving the publicgood aspects of scienceñwhat is needed?the negative prospects outlined above do not mean that the interests ofresearch and education are best served by the absence of legal protection for thecontents of databases. as chapter 4 suggests, a socially balanced, procompetitivedatabase regime might indirectly help science to contain costs by bringing marketforces to bear on some of the pressure points. it would provide a greater stimulusto thirdparty investors who might compete with solesource data generators ordistributors (when the market segment in question can feasibly support multipleproviders), or who might adapt solesource data sets to applications of particularinterest to science. while this stimulus might not change the overall marketstructure or significantly reduce the formation of natural monopolies, in the shortterm at least it could help to trigger countervailing tendencies and thus lead tolower prices and fewer restrictions on access, particularly if novel, valueaddedproducts become of greater importance to science over time.conversely, if a socially imbalanced, overly protective database law convertsexisting impediments into insuperable legal barriers to entry, the adverse effects onscienceñabsent offsetting legal safeguardsñwould soon make themselves felt(see box 5.5). in this context, the scientific and educational communitiesñlikevalueadding users and second comers in general184ñwould arguably fare bettereither under a simple unfair competition law that prohibits wholesale copying orunder a sui generis regime built on more refined liability principles than under anyregime based on exclusive property rights.a liability model creates no legal barriers to entry in its own right, nor needit significantly strengthen the solesource data providerõs market power. a liability regime also can eliminate the òrefusaltodealó problem, by addressing theserious concerns of those who fear the power of solesource data providers torestrict access to data on a variety of grounds. when an automatic license is builtinto a modern liability regime, it tends inherently to solve the problem of abusewithout recourse to antitrust law. for these reasons, the european commissionõsinitial preference for a liability regime, rather than an exclusive property right,185merits careful consideration by the u.s. scientific community as a possible response to the overall challenge posed by the drive for sui generis database laws.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights165with or without the more procompetitive conceptual framework of a liabilitymodel, a socially balanced database law should preserve and promote the publicgood aspects of science and education. this goal requires careful crafting of itstechnical legal machinery, as well as the inclusion of safeguards that address thespecific needs of the scientific and educational communities.box 5.5possible consequences of an overly protectionistdatabase regimeunder an exclusive property rights model, a database ownerõs absolute monopoly could disincline him or her to allow scientists access to certain files, especially if the owner feared that the uses in question could lead to valueadded products that diminished his or her market power.1 providers and distributors wouldalso be likely to charge higher prices for all uses, to demand payment for certainuses that were previously free, and to resist pressures for price discriminationfavoring scientific users.as matters stand, the electronic publishersõ growing capacity to charge for eachand every use of online data (or at least for every documented access to thedatabase) and to track and monitor every user potentially liable for these chargesmeans that it becomes increasingly capable of serving òas its own collection society, subject to no consent decrees, no membership controls and no external regulation.ó2 in this milieu, even blanket licenses can be set unrealistically high forlargescale nonprofit users, such as libraries, universities, and research institutions, and the net impact of the licensing fees will further depend on other contractual conditions that accompany the licenses. even when a blanket license fee isrelatively low, for example, if the institution is obliged to purchase many licensesfor different researchers or groups of researchers, the total cost may still becomeprohibitive. the existing tendencies of some publishers to approach academicand scientific users one by one and to impose harsh or oppressive terms3 couldonly be strengthened by the enactment of a new and powerful intellectual propertyright covering the contents of electronic databases as such.1here one would expect further tensions stemming from the scientific communityõs ownefforts to internalize electronic publication of research results at the expense of both commercial publishers and professional societies. cf. paul ginsparg, note 35 in text.2reichman, electronic information tools, note 15 in text, at p. 464.3see note 3 in text (ota report); reichman, òelectronic information tools,ó note 15 in text,at p. 464 (noting that licensing agreements òmay consequently require libraries to waiveprivilegesó under new or existing laws, including copyright law, òand to limit usersõ access to[the protected] matter beyond what their own understanding of the . . . [laws] would require.aggressive licensing of electronic information tools could thus distort the public service mission of libraries by making them involuntary collection agents for publishersó). cf. alsoamerican geophysical union v. texaco, inc., 60 f. 3d 913 (2d cir. 1995) (oil companyõsunauthorized copying of articles from its own libraryõs technical journals for archival use by itsown research scientists was not fair use under copyright statute where blanket licensingschemes were available); patterson and lindberg, note 21 in text, at pp. 159, 18190.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166bits of powerensuring legal safeguards for accessexclusive control over data, like exclusive control over ideas, raises seriousconcerns, including first amendment concerns, that are particularly germane toopen scientific inquiry.186 while meeting these concerns does not necessarilyimply that data should become available without charge or proprietary interests,it does mean the following:¥the law itself should define the parameters of an evolving public domainfrom which investigators can freely extract and use data for certain purposes.¥the law must also guarantee scientific and educational users access tothat domain on reasonable terms and conditions.¥the definition of a protectible database should be narrowed so as toexclude ideas and contents of scientific theories.¥database owners should never possess the right to preclude access tootherwise publicly available data when sought for purposes of basic scientificresearch.the terms of access would then depend in part on the size and scope of any freeuse and fair use zones built into a proper sui generis law for the benefit ofscientific and educational users.187publishers are likely to oppose such exceptions because they represent a defacto subsidy to educational and scientific users, which in an online environmentcan no longer be hidden behind the ancillary need to overcome transactioncosts.188 nevertheless, the case for maintaining such exceptions is even strongerwith regard to the contents of databases than to other objects of intellectualproperty protection. as in other cases, publishers require state intervention in themarketplace to enforce the fictitious portable fences on which the protection ofintangible literary productions depends. in this case, however, the objects ofprotectionñdatañare functionally determined elements or particles of knowledge that fall well below the ògrain sizeó threshold of existing intellectual property laws.189 while database publishers need not contribute any intellectualachievement for which a reward is justifiable in terms of social costs, they havenow staked a claim to subject matter that world intellectual property law had leftunprotected as a building block of scientific and technological progress.in seeking an unprecedented level of state intervention, therefore, it seemsonly logical that publishers should exchange a measure of support for the publicgood uses of scientific data for lessened risk aversion and for a measure ofartificial lead time in which to recoup their investments and turn a profit. thislogic is reinforced by the fact that much, if not most, of the data likely to becommercialized under the proposed sui generis regime will, at some stage, havebeen a product of publicgood undertakings funded largely by governments.requiring publishers to further the publicgood aspects of scientific data hardlybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights167seems unreasonable in this context, especially in view of the potential for rentseeking that inheres in a market structure dominated by solesource providers.at the same time, one cannot push the concept of fair use to the point ofrequiring the private sector to make up for diminished government support ofscientific research in general and of the generation of data in particular.policymakers must, indeed, take pains to avoid a worstofbothworlds outcome,in which government support for the production of scientific data declines, whileprivate investment in the generation, distribution, and application of data languishes for lack of adequate incentives. to the extent that private industrydevelops electronic information tools specifically to promote scientific investigation or other educational endeavors, the imposition of a subsidy favoring sciencebecomes harder to justify and even counterproductive, given that scientific andeducational institutions must pay for the many tools they use. this said, datanonetheless constitute a unique kind of tool, and no amount of investment canjustify their greatly diminished availability for scientific inquiry.appropriate fair use provisions should thus be seen as part of a new culturalbargain that responds to serious concerns about the ability of data publishers tocontrol access to scientific data as such. implementing this bargain will requirecareful distinctions between uses that are òfreeó and those that providers mustpermit, but on fair and reasonable terms and conditions.for example, scientists must freely be able to use the data underlying existing scientific theories to verify or challenge those theories and to develop newones. similarly, researchers should have completely free use of their own notesand working files in the conduct of their investigations, regardless of whetherthese files are embodied in electronic or print media. by the same token, ascientist who creates a new database while using another lawfully obtained database covered by a sui generis law, along with other data, should owe nothing butreasonable use or access charges to the proprietary rightholder if he or she did notreproduce a substantial component of the protected data in the new database.indeed, a sui generis law should never prevent anyone, including scientists, fromreproducing or using an insubstantial part of the contents of a protected databasefor virtually any lawful purpose.ascertaining fair uses that database owners must permit the scientific andeducational communities to make on more favorable terms than those applicableto ordinary commercial users constitutes a more delicate task. as discussedthroughout this report, whenever a given database is funded by government, abedrock concept of fair use should require that the scientific and educationalcommunities have access to its contents at no more than the marginal cost ofreproduction and dissemination.190in other words, data generated by public funds should come freighted with abuiltin, costbased discount for scientific research and education as a conditionof further commercialization by others. this principle mainly preserves thestatus quo, at least for u.s. scientists, without shifting the costs of generating andbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168bits of powerdistributing raw or processed scientific data onto private publishers. as long asenlightened government policy continues to favor substantial funding of the datagenerating processes, this principle would promote science by preserving thepublicgood aspects of the data thus collected, without unduly inhibiting privateincentives to invest. by the same token, it would prevent the private sector fromdisplacing (or appropriating) the publicgood aspects of governmentfunded datamerely because sui generis legislation had been enacted to stimulate investmentin distribution or valueadded applications. while such a policy may conflictwith the 1996 european directive, depending on how the european union member states choose to implement the relevant provisions, its adaptation in theunited states could influence other countries, including even some europeanunion member states, which might decide to exercise their implementing optionin precisely this way.191conversely, when the private sector or other nongovernmental entities fundthe generation or distribution of data, a different fair use calculus should comeinto play. here the problem is that the ability of science to pay the going,commercial rates is not commensurate with its resources or with the public interest in a strong, basic scientific establishment. the solution is not to shunt theproblems of science onto publishers, who have their own business risks to manage, but to ensure that publishers charge scientific and educational users fair andreasonable prices that take account of the overriding public interest at stake.achieving this goal, however, is complicated by the difficulties of weaningsolesource providers from the rentseekersõ mentality if market forces themselves do not compel more favorable treatment of scientific and educationalusers. the appropriate response is to incorporate legal standards into the database law that can create sufficient leverage for scientific and educational users toobtain such treatment. the gentlest and least marketdistorting form of leverage,in turn, is the legal uncertainty with which legislatures can endow the relevantfair use provisions. this strategy gives both sides the maximum incentives tonegotiate their own licenses providing for price discrimination, product differentiation,192 and other forms of relief on terms that seek to reconcile the differentinterests at stake.various technical devices, adopted singly or in combination, can be employed to bring about this result. for example, a general clause governing licenses in the database law can expressly provide that all licensing and distribution agreements effected under such a regime must be made òon fair andreasonable terms, with due regard for the needs of the scientific and educationalcommunities, for the public interest in preserving competition, and for the needsof national economic development.ó193 such clauses, which have already beenused in some database transactions,194 would then be construed in the light ofother provisions favoring publishers, so as not unduly to impair the commercialvalue of the database or the ownerõs return on his or her investment.195 thisapproach should at least induce publishers to develop favorable subscription ratesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights169for academic and research institutions rather than insisting on peruse chargesthat may or may not apply in other circumstances.the use of compulsory licensing can also increase the bargaining power ofprivileged users. as previously indicated, a properly crafted liability regimeprotecting investment in databases (which some investigators recommend) coulditself incorporate an automatic license favoring second comers and valueaddingusers, which would kick in after an initial period of guaranteed lead time.196 arefinement of this mechanism could then allow the scientific and educationalcommunities to trigger a special compulsory license for essential needs in theevent that publishers fail to provide reasonable terms and conditions.197 if congress ultimately adopts an exclusive rights regime for database owners, ratherthan an unfair competition model or a more refined liability model, such a regimecould nonetheless include nonvoluntary license provisions to meet the needs ofthese communities. in theory, such a clause permits either side to seek a judicialdecision triggering, or blocking, the compulsory license for privileged uses. inpractice, a builtin duty to negotiate before seeking such a license,198 coupledwith the uncertainty inherent in the applicable legal standards (and the wellknown limits of judicial capability), should almost invariably lead to an accommodation between publishers and the research and educational communities thatwould remove the bone of contention.assessing longterm effectseven if the research and educational communities persuade congress to taketheir needs into account when fashioning a sui generis database law, their attention must remain focused on its operational consequences, assuming that theabovementioned issues have been resolved. the introduction of new legal instruments, and a shift toward the commercialization of data, may profoundlychange current institutions, especially those bearing on the funding of scientificresearch. the effects of these changes certainly will need to be assessed andmonitored over time.where necessary, steps must be taken to ensure that new institutions suitedto the maintenance of scientific progress are set in place before existing institutions are undermined or eliminated. the public funding of basic scientific datacollection and dissemination should remain sufficiently robust to support thelevel of technological applications that has enabled u.s. firms to retain a competitive edge in the global marketplace. in this connection, if conciliatory effortsfail to dissuade foreign government science agencies from overcharging researchers and educators (i.e., charging more than marginal cost) for essential scientificdata, countervailing pricing strategies and other tactics may become unavoidable.in any event, government agencies, the research and education communities, anddatabase makers will have to cooperate at the implementation stage, with a viewbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170bits of powerto reconciling the greater role of the private sector with the publicgood aspectsof national science policy.from a longterm perspective, the research and education communities mustface up to the fact that new technologies for generating, evaluating, and distributingdata will continue to change many institutions on which basic science has traditionally relied. while certain to be disruptive, such changes, suitably guided, couldfoster and enhance vast new opportunities for the sciences, provided that the scientific community moves to meet the challenges in a timely and sustained fashion.for example, new modes of organizing and distributing the funds needed togenerate data may be devised, while the prospects for internalizing transmissionand publication costs through the use of electronic communications networksmerit careful study. to the extent that widespread commercialization or privatization of data does result from the adoption of new intellectual property rightsand other factors, it could stimulate the scientific community to organize its owninstitutions or mechanisms for the management and dissemination of scientificdata, which could operate outside the commercial arena. because the researchand educational communities are both producers and consumers of data, collective action along these lines could make science itself an increasingly importantplayer in the market for databases generally, as well as a stabilizing force indetermining the balance between public and private interests.199 how to organizesuch largescale undertakings will require careful thought and study in order toavoid sacrificing or compromising other goals of scientific endeavor, or undermining traditional norms of science emphasizing objective pursuit of knowledgebased on full and open exchange of data.meanwhile, the adoption of different legal regimes to protect database makers by countries with different agendas and at varying stages of economic development could further complicate the full and open flow of scientific data acrossinternational frontiers. measures to harmonize the domestic databaseprotectionlaws, or at least their effects on the transnational flow of scientific data, willtherefore require intergovernmental study, as will measures and proposals affecting the regulation of national and global information infrastructures. pressures tointegrate these and other international intellectual property standards ever moredeeply into the global trade apparatus will certainly mount as countries move toimplement and expand the trips agreement and related international conventions within the framework of the world trade organization and that of wipo,which continues to administer the paris and berne conventions.the ensuing tensions and conflicts will make it more necessary than ever todevelop a framework treaty to safeguard the full and open exchange of scientificdata in an increasingly commercialized environment. the difficulty of regulatingboth public and private interests within such a treaty should not be underestimated,however, while the developing and leastdeveloped countries are likely to play amore conspicuous role in intellectual property policymaking as time goes on.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights171recommendations regarding legal developmentsaffecting access to datathe new proposals supporting an overly protectionist property rights regimefor the contents of databases and for online transmissions of data and otherscientific information have reached an advanced stage of legislative consideration at both the national and the international levels. the committee believesthat these legislative changes do not reflect adequate consideration of the potential negative impacts on scientific research and education and that they have beenproposed for implementation at an unnecessarily precipitous pace. the committee therefore recommends that the office of science and technology policy,leaders from the science agencies and professional societies, and all those concerned with sustaining the health of the scientific enterprise should immediatelytake the following actions:1.present to all relevant legislative forums the principle of full and openexchange of scientific data resulting from publicly funded research, and clarifythe importance of sustaining such exchange to the nationõs future whenever theseforums consider laws that would apply to exchange of scientific data.2.demand that national and international legislative processes now inprogress slow to a rational pace, and that the deliberations become more public toallow the scientific and educational communities to present their views and concerns to lawmakers.3.advocate the incorporation of equivalents of òfair useó as part of anyregulatory structure applying to databases as such, or to online storage andtransmission of data and other scientific information. as a corollary, ensure thatthe publicgood aspects of scientific data are preserved and promoted in laws andregulations governing intellectual property on the internet and in any futureelectronic networked environments.4.work with congress and the official u.s. representatives to the worldtrade organization and the world intellectual property organization to ensurethat the nationõs interests in maintaining preeminence in science and technologyare not undermined.5.pursue these issues not only within the united states, but also internationally through international scientific organizations and u.s. foreignpolicychannels as they deal with trade and other agreements affecting intellectual property protection.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172bits of powernotes1.for clarification and further documentation of legal issues discussed in this chapter, see thearticle by j.h. reichman and pamela samuelson (1997), òintellectual property rights in data?,óvanderbilt law review, 50(1):51166.2.u.s. constitution, article i, section 8, clause 8.3.see, e.g., office of technology assessment (1986), intellectual property rights in an age ofelectronics and information, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., pp. 5997;anne wells branscomb (1994), who owns information? from privacy to public access,basic books, pp. 18.4.see, e.g., commission of the european communities (1988), ògreen paper on copyright andthe challenge of technologyñcopyright issues requiring immediate action,ó june 7 (hereinafter e.c. green paper); laurence kay (1995), òthe proposed e.u. directive for the legalprotection of databases: a cornerstone of the information society?,ó eur. intell. prop. rev.(hereinafter eipr) 17:583.5.world intellectual property organization (wipo) (1996) òbasic proposal for the substantiveprovisions of the treaty on intellectual property in respect of databases to be considered bythe diplomatic conferenceó (memorandum prepared by the chairman of the committee ofexperts), wipo doc. crnr/dc/6, geneva, august 30 (hereinafter wipo draft databasetreaty).6.both international copyright law under the berne convention and the domestic laws of mostdeveloped countries require that authors of literary works obtain a òmoral rightó to properattribution for their published creations. see, e.g., berne convention, article 6 bis. nevertheless, the u.s. congress has so far declined to implement this obligation except with regard tovisual or graphic artists (see 17 u.s.c. 106a (1994)), which leaves the problem of attributionlargely to the vagaries of state and federal unfair competition law.7.see, e.g., frank gotzen (1987), ògrands orientations du droit dõauteur dans les etats membresde la c.e.e. en mati‘re de banques de donn”es,ó banques de donn”es et droit dõauteur, pp.8598 (irpi ed.); paul edward geller (1991), òcopyright in factual compilations: u.s. supreme court decides feist case,ó int. rev. ind. prop. copyright l. (iic) 22:802; erbert j.dommering (1991), òan introduction to information law: works of fact at the crossroads offreedom and protection,ó protecting works of fact: copyright, freedom of expression, andinformation law, 140 (e.j. dommering and p. bernt hugenholz, eds.). however, the nordiccountries constituted an interesting exception by instituting sui generis laws to protectnoncopyrightable compilations at a relatively early period. see, e.g., gunnar w.g. karnell(1991), òthe nordic catalogue rule,ó protecting works of fact, pp. 6772.8.see, e.g., j.h. reichman (1995), òcharting the collapse of the patentcopyright dichotomy:premises for a restructured international intellectual property system,ó cardozo arts & entertain. l. j., 13:475.9.see, e.g., jessica litman (1990), òthe public domain,ó emory l. j., 39:965, 1015 (ògiving anauthor a copyright in . . . a basic building block of her art . . . risks denying that basic buildingblock to all other authors who come into even fleeting contact with the first authorõs workó).10.see reichman and samuelson, note 1, at pp. 5872, 137 (citing authorities).11.see, e.g., kewanee oil co. v. bicron corp., 416 u.s. 470 (1974); uniform trade secrets act,14 ula ¤1(4) (1985). see generally j.h. reichman (1992), òoverlapping proprietary rightsin universitygenerated research products: the case of computer programs,ó columbiavlaj. law & arts, 17:51, 9398.12.legal liability attached only to third parties who engaged in improper means of reverse engineering, such as bribing employees or resorting to industrial espionage. in such cases, the freeriding offender was required to compensate the innovator only for the lost profits that wouldhave accrued during the hypothetical period that would have been required to reverse engineerthe product in question by honest means.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights17313.see, e.g., paul goldstein (1996), copyright: principles, law and practice, ¤1.2, 2d ed., little,brown; william kingston (1990), innovation, creativity and law, klwer academic publishers, dordrecht, pp. 8385; see also ejan mackaay (1982), economics of information and law,klwernijhdt, pp. 11517 (noting market distortions ensuing from public good problems anduncertainties that would require a higher expected return).14.see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤202 (1994) (distinguishing ownership of copyrightable work from ownership of material support); j.h. reichman (1989), òintellectual property in international trade:opportunities and risks of a gatt connection,ó vand. j. transnatõl l., 22:747, 80006.15.see, e.g., peter a. jaszi (1996), ògoodbye to all thatña reluctant (and perhaps premature)adieu to a constitutionallygrounded discourse of public interest in copyright law,ó vand. j.transnatõl l., 29:595, 599600 (stressing òeconomic and cultural bargain between authors andusers . . . at the heart of u.s. [copyright] law, as reflected in the patent and copyright clause[of the constitution], and a parade of supreme court precedentsó). see also robert a. kreiss(1995), òaccessibility and commercialization in copyright theory,ó ucla l. rev. 43:1, 622;j.h. reichman (1993), òelectronic information toolsñthe outer edge of world intellectualproperty law,ó int. rev. indus. prop. copyright l., 25:446, 461 (stressing that òthese fictitiousportable fences neutralize essential attributes of property that possession would ordinarily conferó).16.see 17 u.s.c. ¤102(a), (b); feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co., 111 s. ct.1282 (1991).17.see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤108 (reproduction by libraries and archives), 109(a) (firstsale doctrine),110(a) (facetoface teaching activities), 110(b) (broadcasts of nondramatic literary or musicalworks for certain educational purposes), 114 (limiting rights and scope of protection in soundrecordings), 115 (compulsory license for musical works recorded on sound recordings), 117(archival uses of computer programs), 118 (exemptions for use by noncommercial broadcasters), 120 (right to photograph architectural works) (1994).18.17 u.s.c. ¤107 (1994).19.see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤107 (1994); campbell v. acuffrose music, inc., 114 s. ct. 1164 (1994);harper & row publishers, inc. v. nation enterprises, 471 u.s. 539 (1985).20.see, e.g., american geophysical union v. texaco, 60 f.3d 913 (2d. cir. 1995); sega enterprises ltd. v. accolade, inc., 977 f. 2d 1510 (9th cir. 1992); pamela samuelson (1993), òfairuse for computer programs and other copyrightable works in digital form: the implicationsof sony, galoob, and sega,ó j. intell. prop. l., 1:49.21.see, e.g., paul goldstein (1994), copyrightõs highwayñfrom guttenberg to the celestialjukebox, pp. 12930 (stating that òthe risk has grown that ôprivateõ copies will displace theretail sales and rentals of the authorized originals from which publishers, record companies,and motion picture producers earn their revenuesó). the extent to which private photocopyingof journals for research purposes without compensation remains a fair use is controversial froma global perspective. see, e.g., william r. cornish (1994), òcopyright in scientific works(scientific communications, computer software, data banks): an introduction,ó europeanresearch structuresñchanges and challenges: the role and function of intellectual property rights, pp. 4750 (maxplanckgesellschaft, ed.) (stressing that academics òwho are alsoauthors, find their interests . . . and . . . judgment . . . pulled in two directions on these issuesóand no settled solution has emerged); jane c. ginsburg (1992), òreproductions of protectedworks for university research or teaching,ó j. copyright socõy 39:181, 18889, 192211(discussing legal license regimes and collection societies). but see l. ray patterson and stanleyw. lindberg (1991), the nature of copyright, pp. 191196 (arguing that private use for nonprofit purposes is always allowed).22.see, e.g., wendy j. gordon (1982), òfair use as market failure: a structural and economicanalysis of the betamax case and its predecessors,ó colum. l. rev., 82:1600. for recenttensions with this theory, compare, e.g., p. goldstein, note 13, ¤10.1 (evaluating public andbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174bits of powerprivate benefits test of fair use in terms of transaction costs) with goldstein, celestial jukebox,note 21, at pp. 22324 (òcelestial jukebox may reduce transaction costsó and òperceived needfor safety valve such as fair use,ó which would lead to a copyright law with òno exemptionsfrom liabilityó). but see goldstein, celestial jukebox at p. 230 (stressing the enduring importance of òexemptions or compulsory licenses for educational and research usesó).23.see, e.g., feist, 111 s. ct. at 1292 (stressing adverse effects on free flow of information byòcreat[ing] monopol[ies] in public domain materialsó); harper & row v. nation enterprises,471 u.s. 539, 555 (1985), stressing first amendment values in free flow of factual information; financial information, inc. v. moodyõs investorõs serv., inc., 808 f. 2d 204, 207 (2d cir.1986), cert. denied, 484 u.s. 820 (1987) (stressing òrisk [of] putting large areas of factualresearch material off limits and threatening the publicõs unrestrained access to informationó).see also philip h. miller (1991), òlife after feist: the first amendment and the copyrightstatus of automated databases,ó fordham l. rev. 60:507; michael j. haungs (1990), òcopyright of factual compilations: public policy and the first amendment,ó colum. j. law &social problems, 23:347, 364; robert c. denicola (1981), òcopyright in collections of facts:a theory for the protection of nonfiction literary works,ó colum. l. rev., 81:516, 525. forthe view that legal protection of facts and data as such is consistent with the first amendmenton certain conditions, such as the availability of noncommercial fair use and compulsory licenses, see, e.g., jane c. ginsburg (1992), òno ôsweatõ? copyright and other protection ofworks of information after feist v. rural telephone,ó colum. l. rev., 92:338, 38487.24.see 17 u.s.c. ¤106(1), (2) (1994); feist publications, inc., v. rural telephone service co.,111 s. ct. 1282, 128991 (1991); key publications, inc. v. chinatown today publishing enterprises, inc., 945 f 2d 509 (1991); kregos v. associated press, 937 f. 2d 700 (2d cir. 1991);victor calli enterprises, inc. v. big red apple, inc., 936 f. 2d 671 (2d cir. 1991); bellsouthadvertising & publishing corp. v. donnelly information publishing, inc., 999 f. 2d 1436 (11thcir., en banc, 1993), cert. denied, 114 s. ct. 943 (1994). if courts strictly apply feist at boththe eligibility and the scope of protection phases, and thus continue to reject stronger protectionbased on òsweatofthebrowó investment theories that some jurisdictions had embraced priorto feist, the effect is to òstrip . . . away or sharply reduce . . . the copyright protection affordeda variety of ôinformation products,õ from directories and mailing lists to computerized databases.ó ginsburg, òinformation after feist,ó note 23, at p. 339.  see also denicola, note 23(advocating compilerõs copyright to overcome lack of incentives); jane c. ginsburg (1990),òcreation and commercial value: copyright protection of works of information,ó colum. l.rev., 90:1865 (advocating copyright protection of lowauthorship factual works, includingdatabases, but proposing compulsory license for derivative users of data. for comparative law,see especially alain strowel (1993), droit dõauteur et copyrightñdivergences etconvergences (bruglaut, brussels) and l.g.d.j. (paris), pp. 2930, 26466, 391474.25.see, e.g., ccc info. servs. inc. v. maclean hunter market reports, inc., 44 f. 3d 61 (2d cir.1994); lipton v. nature co., 71 f 3d 464 (2d cir. 1995); warren publishing, inc. v. microdosdata corp., 52 f. 3d 950 (11th circ. 1995).26.see, e.g., ginsburg, òinformation after feist,ó note 23, at pp. 36773; wendy j. gordon (1992),òon owning information: intellectual property and the restitutionary impulse,ó va. l. rev.,78:149; dennis s. karjala (1994), òmisappropriation as a third intellectual property paradigm,ó colum. l. rev., 94:2594. but see leo j. raskind (1991), òthe misappropriation doctrine as a competitive norm of intellectual property law,ó u. minn. l. rev., 75:875.27.see, e.g., reichman, òcollapse of the patentcopyright dichotomy,ó note 8, at pp. 51217, 513,n. 176; also, quoting j.h. reichman (1994), òlegal hybrids between the patent and copyrightparadigms,ó colum. l. rev., 94:2504, n. 401:factors pulling for over or underprotection already exist on both sides of the classical line ofdemarcation [between the patent and copyright subsystems]. on the copyright side . . . for example, abroad derivative work right sometimes overprotects by favoring overlapping claims to incrementalbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights175innovation while restricting access to ideas, methods and processes by indirect means and for a verylong duration . . . yet, underprotection can result from the inability of copyrightlike models to protectthe internal dynamic features of technological innovation, in which idea and expression merge, andalso from the lack of any exclusive right to control end use . . . similarly, on the industrial propertyside . . ., òoverprotection results from the progressive monopolization of ever smaller aggregates ofinventive activity, which elevate social costs in return for no clearly equilibrated social benefits. yet,the nonobviousness standard [of patent law] and its variants can also induce states of chronicunderprotection by excluding the bulk of the incremental innovations that underlie todayõs most promising technologies.28.see, e.g., debra b. rosler (1995), òthe european unionõs proposed directive for the legalprotection of databases: a new threat to the free flow of information,ó high tech. l. j.,10:105; paul durdik (1994), òancient debate, new technology: the european communitymoves to protect computer databases,ó boston univ. intõl l. j., 12:153, n. 1 (citing e.c.sources showing that u.s. and european producers account, respectively, for about 56 percentand 25 percent of òworld electronic information services output,ó but that the european sharehad been òonly onetenth the size of the u.s. marketó in 1980. for the view that u.s. dominance of the private sector stems from its loose copyright regime, which òmost closely approximates a free market for data compilationsó based on superior product development, see charlesvon simson (1995), òfeist or famine: american database copyright as an economic modelfor the european union,ó brooklyn j. intõl l., 20:729.29.see, e.g., rosler, note 28. for evidence of a similar phenomenon with regard to databases thatserve the legal community, see, e.g., west publishing co. v. mead data central, inc., 799 f. 2d1219 (8th cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 u.s. 1070 (1987); see also l. ray patterson and craigjoyce (1989), òmonopolizing the law: the scope of copyright protection for law reports andstatutory compilations,ó ucla l. rev., 36:719.30.see, e.g., 17 u.s.c. ¤105 (1994) (òcopyright protection under this title is not available for anywork of the united states government.ó a òwork of the united states governmentó is a òworkprepared by an officer or employee of the u.s. government as part of that personõs officialduties.ó 17 u.s.c. ¤101 (1994)).31.nevertheless, some disputes are likely to be adjudicated, owing to the uncertainties that arisefrom the application of overlapping legal regimes to new technologies and to the gaps orambiguities in internal university legislation. see, e.g., rochelle cooper dreyfuss (1987),òthe creative employee and the copyright act of 1976,ó u. chi. l. rev., 54:590, 59798, 64041; reichman, òoverlapping proprietary rights,ó note 11.32.leslie a. kurtz (1996), òcopyright and the national information infrastructure in the unitedstates,ó eipr, 18:120. see also pamela samuelson, òtechnological protection for copyrighted works,ó paper presented to the thrower symposium, emory law school, feb. 22,1996 (stating that, although digital technology òposes a serious challenge for copyright ownersbecause works in digital form are vulnerable to uncontrolled replication and dissemination innetworked environments,ó it is ònot just part of the problem; it may also be part of the solutionó).33.gregory m. hunsuker (1997), òthe european database directive: regional stepping stone toan international model?,ó fordham intell. prop., media & entertain. l., forthcoming.34.hunsuker, note 33. see also pamela samuelson, òmissing foundations of the proposed european database directive,ó paper presented to the specialist meeting on law, informationpolicy, and spatial databases, sponsored by the national center for geographic informationand analysis, arizona state university college of law, oct. 2830, 1994 (stressing importance of addon or valueadded products in the digital environment).35.see, e.g., paul a. david and dominique foray (1995), òaccessing and expanding the scienceand technology knowledge base,ó science, technology, industry rev. 16(3):3859; and paulginsparg (1995), òwinners and losers in the global research village,ó paper presented tounesco conference on electronic publishing, february 1923, 1996, paris; see also, cristianobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176bits of powerantonelli (1992), òthe economic theory of information networks,ó in the economics ofinformation networks (c. antonelli, ed.), elsevier science publishing co.36.see, e.g., david and foray, note 35; see also cristiano antonelli, note 35, at pp. 528.37.see, e.g., hunsuker, note 33, at p. 1 (quoting sources that estimate the value of the globalinformation industry to reach $3 trillion by early in the next century); w. joseph melnick(1994), òa comparative analysis of proposals for the legal protection of computerized databases: nafta vs. the european communities,ó case western reserve j. intõl. l., 26:57, 59,n.14 (quoting sources that estimate e.c. database market at $10.2 billion, which amounted toabout 30 percent of the world market in 1994).38.see, e.g., e.c. green paper, note 4; national information infrastructure task force (1995),report of the working group on intellectual property and the national information infrastructure (sept.) (hereinafter u.s. white paper). in a larger perspective, however, it has beenargued that the legal problems of electronic databases are assimilable to those of industrialdesigns, computer programs, plant varieties, biogenetically engineered products, and numerousother forms of designdependent, subpatentable innovation that fall into a widening penumbrabetween the increasingly obsolete patent and copyright paradigms. see, e.g., reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27 (proposing a third intellectual property paradigm for investors insubpatentable innovation based on liability principles); pamela samuelson, randall davis,mitchell kapor, and j.h. reichman (1994), òa manifesto concerning the legal protection ofcomputer programs,ó colum. l. rev., 94:2308 (proposing such a regime for computer programs).39.see, e.g., ccc intro. servs. inc. v. maclean hunter market reports, inc., 44 f. 3d 61 (2d cir.1994) (ccc took òvirtually the entire compendiumó of macleanõs used car valuations andòeffectively offers to sell its customers macleanõs red book through cccõs databaseó); warren publishing, inc. v. microdos data corp., 52 f 3d 950 (11th cir. 1995) (statistically,microdosõ work contained from 96 to 99 percent of warrenõs data on nationwide cable tvservices).40.see, e.g., office of technology assessment (1992), finding a balance: computer software,intellectual property, and the challenge of technological change, u.s. government printingoffice, washington, d.c., pp. 16679 (deploring contracts in which software licensors obligedlibraries to abrogate òrights described in the copyright law,ó among other practices); otareport, note 3, at p. 163; cornish, note 21, at p. 50 (despite case for a measure of free reprography for purposes of academic research, òacademic institutions are regarded as relatively softtargets by publishing interests [in u.k.], which have looked at them as suitable points forinserting initial wedgesó). see generally reichman, òelectronic information tools,ó note 15,at pp. 46168 (òpublic interest at odds with the twoparty dealó); marshall leaffer (1994),òengineering competitive policy and copyright misuse,ó u. dayton l. rev., 19:1087, 1094.41.see the introductory discussion in chapter 3.42.see, e.g., samuelson et al., òmanifesto,ó note 38; see also joseph straus and rainier moufang(1990), deposit and release of biotechnological material for the purpose of patent procedure,nomos verlags gesellschaft (discussing biotechnical research and development), and dan l.burk (1991), òbiotechnology and patent law: fitting innovation to the procrustean bed,órutgers comp. tech. l. j., 17:1, 3334.43.see, e.g., john browning (1996), òcyber view: playing facts and loose,ó scientific american(june): 3032 (warning about unintended effects of legal restrictions on searching and gathering data).44.charles von simson (1995), òfeist or famine: american database copyright as an economicmodel for the european union,ó brooklyn j. int. l., 20:729, 768.45.if the second comer independently generates its own data, or combines its inputs with the firstcomerõs data to produce valueadding applications, the former contributes knowledge, capital,and skilled efforts to the datagenerating communitiesõ overall endeavor. these second combits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights177ers, who do not merely duplicate or òcloneó the first comerõs product, are hardly free riderseven when they do not contribute directly to the first comerõs production costs under a licensedroyalty transaction. see, e.g., samuelson, òmissing foundations,ó note 34; see generallyreichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp. 252123, 253539.46.see reichman and samuelson, note 1, at pp. 6670, 12430.47.in one recent case, for example, a database maker spent about $10 million to compile some95,000,000 residential and commercial listings from some 3,000 telephone directories. apurchaser who paid $200 for a compact disk electronically extracted and recompiled part of thedata and then made his listings available over the internet. in pro cd inc. v. zeidenberg, 908f. supp. 640 (w.d. wis. 1996), the federal district court rejected the plaintiffõs copyright claimas well as state law claims in contract and unfair competition law (see also hunsuker, note 33,at pp. 1314), but was reversed on appeal, in procd, inc. v. zeidenberg, 86 f. 3d 1447 (7th cir.1996).48.jessica litman (1992), òafter feist,ó u. dayton l. rev., 17:607, 611 (adding that, ò[i]ndeed, alarge number of online database . . . [publishers] availed themselves of those strategies wellbefore the feist decisionó).49.see reichman, òelectronic information tools,ó note 15, at pp. 46167 (òpublic interest atodds with the twoparty dealó); jane c. ginsburg (1993), òcopyright without walls?: speculations on literary property in the library of the future,ó representation, 42 (spring):53, 6063.50.see, e.g., goldstein, celestial jukebox, note 21, at pp. 22324; jessica litman (1994), òtheexclusive right to read,ó cardozo arts & entertain. l. j., 31:29, 32; samuelson, òtechnological protection,ó note 32.51.see note 3 reporting ota concerns in this regard; kurtz, note 32.52.see directive 96/9/e.c. of the european parliament and of the council of march 11, 1996, onthe legal protection of databases, 39 o.j.l.77/20, march 27, 1996 (hereinafter e.c. directiveon databases or final e.c. directive); see also e.c. council of ministers, common positionno. 20/95, adopted 10 july 1995, with a view to adopting directive 95//e.c. of the europeanparliament and of the council . . . on the legal protection of databases, 95/c288/02, o.j.c.288/14 (oct. 10, 1995) (hereinafter e.c. common position).53.see h.r. 3531, u.s. congress, house of representatives, 104th cong., 2d sess., may 23, 1996,database investment and intellectual property antipiracy act of 1996.54.see wipo draft database treaty, note 5, article 5 (i) (proposing a truncated version of theberne conventionõs fair use clauses).55.cf., e.g., kreiss, note 15, at pp. 3334; mark a. lemley (1995); òintellectual property andshrinkwrap licenses,ó so. cal. l. rev., 68:12391294; leaffer, note 40; david a. rice (1992),òpublic goods, private contract and public policy: federal preemption of software licenseprohibitions against reverse engineering,ó u. pitt. l. rev., 53:543. but see 17 u.s.c.¤108(1)(4) (1994) (allowing contractual obligations to override specified library privileges);ginsburg, òspeculations,ó note 49.56.see, e.g., jaszi, note 15, at p. 599 (criticizing replacement of òcultural bargainó theory ofcopyright law with new, tradedriven goal, which seeks to òenhance . . . the wealth and overallfinancial wellbeing of companies which invest in the production of and distribution of copyrighted worksó); see also david nimmer (1995), òthe end of copyright,ó vand. l. rev., 48:1385.57.ginsburg, òspeculations,ó note 49, at p. 60.58.see, e.g., ginsburg, òspeculations,ó note 49, at pp. 6063 (arguing for freedom of publishers tocondition librariesõ access to digitally delivered information on compliance with a variety ofrestrictions, regardless of principles such as fair use, because information providers need notresort to libraries as conduits for digital information in the future except, perhaps, as òfullbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178bits of powerservice helplineó). but see jane c. ginsburg (1994), òsurveying the borders of copyright,ó j.copyright socõy, 41:322: 32526 (arguing for legal restraints on such contractual conditions).59.see, e.g., goldstein, celestial jukebox, note 21, at p. 230 (òexemptions and compulsory licenses for research and educational uses recognize the transcendent claim these uses have on acopyright system whose founding premise is that a culture can be built only if toilers in thevineyard are free to draw on the works of their predecessorsó); marci a. hamilton (1996), òthetrips agreement: imperialistic, outdated and overprotective,ó vand. j. transnatõl l., 27:613,62333 (advocating construction of òfreeuse zone . . . in the online eraó); samuelson, technological protection, note 37. for the view that developing countries should formulate their owndoctrines of misuse to govern information providersõ contracts, see j.h. reichman (1997),òfrom free riders to fair followers: global competition under the trips agreement,ó nyuj. intõl l. pol. (forthcoming).60.see, e.g., hamilton, note 59, at pp. 62829.61.see, e.g., goldstein, celestial jukebox, note 21, at p. 230 (stressing need for exemptions andcompulsory licenses favoring òresearch and educational usesó as transcendent claim rooted incumulative progress of knowledge).62.as mentioned above, the copyright laws of most developed countries exclude functionallydetermined databases and do not protect disparate data even when a given compilation as awhole happens to satisfy the eligibility requirements of those laws. this principle was incorporated into article 10 of the trips agreement of 1994, which requires copyright protectionwhen òthe selection or arrangement of . . . contents constitute intellectual creations,ó but stipulates that such protection òshall not extend to the data or material itself.ó63.see paris convention for the protection of industrial property, march 20, 1883, as last revisedat stockholm, july 14, 1967, 21 u.s.t. 1583, t.i.a.s. no. 6923, 828 u.n.t.s. 305 (hereinafterparis convention); berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works, sept. 9,1886, as last revised at paris, july 24, 1971, s. treaty doc. 9927, 99 cong. 2d sess. (1986),828 u.n.t.s. 221 (hereinafter berne convention). for the official line of demarcation betweenòwritingsó and òproductsó that underlies these conventions, and its gradual disintegration under pressure from a proliferating set of hybrid (i.e., sui generis) regimes that deviate from thepatent and copyright models, see, e.g., reichman, òcollapse of the patentcopyright dichotomy,ó note 8, at pp.  480512; see also reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp. 24482519.64.while the commission claims that a key motive is the need to harmonize european union law,critics debunk this claim because article 10 of the trips agreement partly performed thisfunction, and also because the e.c.õs database regime, as finally adopted, actually discouragesharmonization on the crucial issue of fair use. see, e.g., charles r. mcmanis (1996) òtakingtrips on the information superhighway: international intellectual property protection andemerging computer technology,ó villanova l. rev., pp. 207288. the predominant objective, among those stated, is to increase the share of european database producers (includinggovernments) in the world market. see, e.g., e.c. directive on databases, note 52, recital 11.65.see, e.g., commission of the european communities (1991), 1991 report on the impact program: main events and developments in the electronic information services market, com(93) 156 final; commission of the european communities (1990), working program of thecommission in the field of copyright and neighboring rights, com (90) 584 final; rosler,note 28, at pp. 105, 107, 11013. the impact program specifically addressed the goal ofimproving the position of the european unionõs member countries in the emerging globalmarket for information goods. among the strategies it endorsed were proposals to strengthenintellectual property rights, to protect new technologies, and to stimulate both internationaltrade and european economic development.66.see, e.g., rosler, note 28, at pp. 10910, 13339. the commission stressed the vulnerability ofdatabase publishers to market failure, but devoted little or no published attention to thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights179countervailing risk of technologically induced overprotection. it nonetheless attempted to dealwith this latter problem by means of a compulsory license, but was foiled by the council ofministers at the last moment.67.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, articles 36 (copyright), 711 (sui generis right). forearlier versions, see commission of the european communities (1992), proposal for a councildirective on the legal protection of databases, com (92) 24 finalñsyn 393 (first e.c.directive on databases); commission of the european communities (1993), amended proposal for a council directive on the legal protection of databases, com (93) 464 finalñsyn 393 (amended e.c. directive on databases); council of the european communities,common position, note 52.68.see, e.g., gunnar karnell (1991), òthe nordic catalogue rule,ó protecting works of fact, pp.6772 (e.j. dommering and p.b. hugenholtz, eds.), klwer. laws implementing this regimeòprohibit slavish reproduction, in whole or in part, of ôcatalogues, tables, and similar compilations in which a large number of particulars have been summarizedõ including databases, forten years after first publication . . . [i]ndustrious effort and investment rather than creativity arethe prerequisites.ó reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp. 249293 (quoting karnell andnoting predigital ambiguities of this law).69.reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at p. 2493; see also jean hughes and elizabeth weightman(1992), òe.c. database protection: fine tuning the commissionõs proposal,ó eipr, 14:146,148 (directive goes beyond the nordic rule and protects against reuse of the data compiled).70.see generally common position, note 52 at pp. 1429.71.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52.72.see haungs, note 23; miller, note 23; and rosler, note 28, and accompanying text.  see alsoginsburg, òinformation after feist,ó note 23; litman, òpublic domainó; melville b. nimmerand david nimmer (1996), nimmer on copyright, ¤¤1.10[c][2]. 1.10 [d], matthew bender.73.see first e.c. directive on databases, articles 1(1), 2(5); commission of the european communities (1992), explanatory memorandum to the proposal for a council directive on thelegal protection of databases, com (92) 24 finalñsyn 393, at pp. 2122, 25, 35, 41) (hereinafter first explanatory memorandum); amended e.c. directive on databases, articles 2.2, 6(all stressing the goal of protecting the compilerõs industrious effort and investment againstparasitic appropriation by competitors). a true liability regime does not bestow winnertakeallrewards in exchange for certain technical achievements. rather, a liability regime (such as themodel trade secret law used in the united states) aims primarily to restore and preserve thebases for healthy competition by discouraging certain marketdistorting forms of conduct thatprevent innovators from appropriating the fruits of their investment. as long as innovatorsobtain adequate lead time and second comers contribute directly or indirectly to the innovatorsõcosts of research and development, a liability regime declines to endow these same innovatorswith an absolute right to control the uses of their innovative products or with any legal barriersto entry by others. see, e.g., reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp. 243442, 2496, 25042558.74.see, e.g., samuelson, òmissing foundations,ó note 34; rosler; note 28.75.now preambular recitals 67; first explanatory memorandum, note 73.76.cf. uniform trade secrets act ¤1(4), 14 u.l.a. 438 (1985) (utsa) (adopted by a majority ofstates); restatement (third) of unfair competition law ¤¤3945 (1993); david d. friedman,william landes, and richard posner (1991), òsome economics of trade secret law,ó j. econ.persp. (winter), at 61 et seq.; wendy j. gordon (1992), òon owning information: intellectualproperty and the restitutionary impulse,ó virginia l. rev., 78:149. see also internationalnews service v. associated press, 248 u.s. 215 (1918).77.see first e.c. directive on databases, note 67, articles 1(1), 2(5), 9(3); technically, the rightarises with the creation of the database and lapses 10 (now 15) years from the date it was firstlawfully made available to the public. the provision forbidding unauthorized reuse of thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180bits of powercompilerõs factual contents closed a gap in the nordic catalogue rules, which case law had notyet resolved. see notes 68 and 69 and accompanying text. already at this first draft stage,however, the language chosen to implement the commissionõs òunfair competitionó approachwas contradicted by other language describing the database makerõs òexclusive right to preventunauthorized extraction and reutilizationó of contents. see, e.g., first explanatory memorandum, note 73, at p. 53.78.see first e.c. directive on databases, note 67, articles 8(1), (2); see also amended e.c.directive on databases, note 67, article 11(1), (2). of course, if multiple data providers serviced a given market segment, the draft directiveõs procompetitive thrust was satisfied withoutrecourse to a compulsory license. however, the opportunity to choose among providers seemsto be rare in practice because the bulk of all electronic compilations of data reportedly emanates from solesource providers, and this ònicheó marketing appears characteristic of both theprivate and the public sector. in all such cases, the compulsory license would lie, and originators, including public bodies benefiting from a natural monopoly, would be obliged to grantlicenses for commercial reexploitation of their data on fair and nondiscriminatory terms.79.in this respect, the early draft version seems to have anticipated some of the findings concerning the procompetitive characteristics of liabilitybased intellectual property regimes that legaltheory was investigating at about the same period of time. see, e.g., samuelson et al., òmanifesto,ó note 38, at p. 2308; reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at p. 2432.80.see commission of the european communities, amended proposal for a council directive onthe legal protection of databases, com (93) 464 finalñsyn 393, at p. 4 (1993) (hereinaftersecond explanatory memorandum) (declining to accept e.u. parliamentõs request for specialexemptions in favor of education and research).81.see, e.g., the discussion in chapter 4.82.see amended e.c. directive on databases, note 67; reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, atpp. 249498 (analyzing and criticizing these proposals).83.see e.c. common position, note 52; hunsuker, note 33 (approving this version); von simson,note 44 (criticizing this version); reichman and samuelson, note 1 (criticizing this version).84.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, articles 7(1) (òmember states shall provide for aright for the maker of a database which. . .ó), 16(1) (requiring member states òto comply withthis directive before 1 january 1998ó).85.e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 1(2) (broadly defining a database as òa collectionof independent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodical way andindividually accessible by electronic or other meansó).86.see text accompanying notes 76 and 77.87.e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 7(1).88.see, id., article 1(1) at 24 (òthis directive concerns the legal protection of databases in anyformó). both the first proposed directive, note 67, article 1(1), and the amended e.c. directive on databases of 1993, note 67, article 1(1), covered only electronic databases. the e.c.common position found this distinction unworkable and could not justify differing levels ofprotection on this basis. see, e.g., hunsuker, note 33, at p. 6 n. 14 (citing authorities andadding that òtodayõs high speed scanners and optical character recognition software makeelectronic conversion of nonelectronic databases almost as easy as electronic conversion ofelectronic databasesó).89.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, articles 7(1) (providing initial 15year term from dateof completion), 7(2) (extending protection for an additional 15 years if the database òis madeavailable to the public in whatever manneró before expiration of the initial term), 7(3) (allowing 15year renewals for ò[a]ny substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, tothe contents of a database . . . from the accumulation of successive additions, deletions oralterations, which . . . result in . . . a substantial new investmentó).90.see id., article 7.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights18191.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, articles 3 and 5.92.see e.c. common position, note 52, articles 89, 16(3).93.compare e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 7(2)(a) (defining òextractionó to meanòthe permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of the contents of a database toanother medium by any means or in any formó) with id., article 5(a).94.compare id., articles 7(2)(b) (defining òreutilizationó to mean òany form of making available tothe public all or a substantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, byrenting, by online or other forms of transmissionó) with id., article 5(b), (d), (e). a databaseembodied in a hard copy and sold as such remains subject to the firstsale doctrine even underthe sui generis right, which means that the database maker cannot òcontrol resale of that copy[by the vendee] within the community.ó id., article 7(2) (b). moreover, public lending of sucha copy, say, by a library, òis not an act of extraction or reutilization.ó id., article 2.95.see note 5 and accompanying text (citing 1996 wipo documents favoring an internationaldatabase regime as proposed by the united states and international copyright reforms concerning online transmissions as proposed by the european union).96.e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 9(b).97.see id., articles 9, 9(b).98.see id., articles 8(2), 9(b).99.see, e.g., mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64, at 256 (stating that ò[a]nyother substantial extraction from an electronic database [besides illustration for teaching orscientific research] will be infringing, irrespective of whether the extraction is for a commercialpurpose, such as market research or private investment decisions, or for a wholly noncommercial purpose, such as religious canvassing, political polling, genealogical research, or pursuit ofany . . . hobby or avocationó). mcmanis contrasts this provision unfavorably with òthe exceptions and limitations that safeguard the public interest in copyright law.ó id., at p. 54, n. 204,pp. 5657.100.see, e.g., hunsuker, note 33 (stressing fact that article 9(b) speaks of extraction for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, whereas article 6, concerning copyrightable databases, speaks of òthe sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientific researchó).101.see note 3 (findings of ota report).102.see generally reichman, collapse of the patentcopyright dichotomy, note 8, at pp. 488489(discussing economic implications and contradictions of such paradoxes).103.see e.c. common position, note 52, article 16(3); e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article16(3).104.rosler, note 28, at pp. 138, 140 (stressing tendencies of ò[m]onopolists typically [to] chargelarge premiums for their goodsó).105.see, e.g., rosler, note 28, at pp. 14143; reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp. 249698.106.see feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co., 111 s. ct. 1282 (1991); bonitoboats, inc. v. thunder craft boats, inc., 489 u.s. 141 (1989).107.see, e.g., reichman, òelectronic information tools,ó note 15, at pp. 46667, 47275.108.see robert w. kastenmeier and michael j. remington (1985), òthe semiconductor chipprotection act of 1984: a swamp or firm ground?,ó minn. l. rev., 70:417, 43842 (statingthat proponents of new intellectual property laws have the burden to òshow . . . that a meritorious public purpose is served by . . . proposed congressional action,ó and setting out a fourpronged test of public interest that should be met in each case).109.simon chalton (1994), òthe amended database directive proposal: a commentary and synopsis,ó eipr, 16:94, 99 (stressing that national treatment would apply to copyrightable databases, but not to the extraction right). the reciprocity approach, in a more nuanced form, wasretained in the final directive. see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 11.110.see 17 u.s.c. ¤¤902(a)(1)(a)(c), 913, 914 (1994); jay a. erstling (1989), òthe semiconductor chip protection act and its impact on the international protection of chip designs,ó rutgersbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182bits of powercomputer tech. l. j., 15:303; charles r. mcmanis (1988), òinternational protection for semiconductor chip designs and the standard of judicial review of presidential proclamationsissued pursuant to the semiconductor chip protection act of 1984,ó geo. wash. j. intõl l.econ., 22:331.111.final act embodying the result of the uruguay round of multilateral negotiations, marrakeshagreement establishing the world trade organization, signed at marrakesh, morocco, april 5,1994, annex 1c, agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights (tripsagreement), articles 1(2), (3), 2(1), 3(1), 4, 9(1), 39; mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64, at pp. 25362; paul e. geller (1995), òintellectual property in the global marketplace: impact of trips dispute settlement,ó intõl l., 29:99, 110.112.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 11 and preamble, recital 56.113.see, e.g., j.h. reichman (1995), òuniversal minimum standards of intellectual property protection under the trips component of the wto agreement,ó, intõl l., 29:34751; adrianotten and hannu wager (1996), òcompliance with trips: the emerging world view,ó vand.j. transnatõl l., 29:391.114.see, e.g., intellectual property committee (usa), keidanren (japan), and unice (westerneurope) (1988), basic framework of gatt provisions on intellectual property: statement ofthe views of the european, japanese and united states business communities; see also r.michael gadbaw (1989), òintellectual property and international trade: merger or marriageof convenience?,ó vand. j. transnatõl l., 22:223.115.see, e.g., hanns ullrich (1995), òtrips: adequate protection, inadequate trade, adequatecompetition policy,ó in antitrust: a new international trade remedy?, pacific rim law &policy assoc. at pp. 153, 184207 (john o. haley and hiroshi iyori, eds.); ralph oman (1994),òintellectual property after the uruguay round,ó j. copyright socõy, 42:18 (approving thistrend); see generally reichman, òfrom free riders to fair followers,ó note 59.116.see, e.g., morton david goldberg (1996), òthe digital agenda in the u.s. and wipo,ó paperpresented to the fourth annual conference on international intellectual property law andpolicy, fordham university school of law, april 1112 (hereinafter fourth fordham conference); paul waterschoot (director, dg xv/e, european commission) (1996), òintellectualproperty and the global information infrastructureñthe e.u. perspective,ó paper presentedto the fourth fordham conference; see also shira perlmutter (associate register for policyand international affairs, u.s. copyright office) (1996), òdevelopments in wipo: a statusreport on the new instrument and protocol,ó paper presented to the fourth fordham conference. however, the delegations to the geneva diplomatic conference in december 1996rejected or modified many of these proposals, and a more socially balanced treaty was actuallyadopted. see wipo copyright treaty, wipo doc. no. crnr/dc/89, december 20, 1996,adopted by the geneva diplomatic conference on the same date.117.see committee of experts on a possible protocol to the berne convention, proposals of theeuropean community and its member states, geneva, may 2224, 1996, wipo doc. bcp/ce/vii/1ñinr/ce/vi/1, may 20, 1996; and u.s. white paper, note 38.118.see, e.g., u.s. white paper, note 38, at pp. 11424; p. samuelson, òcopyright grab,ó wired4.01:136, 19091; mcmanis, note 64, at pp. 6870 (criticizing this view).119.see, e.g., u.s. white paper, note 38, at pp. 23034; mcmanis, note 64, at pp. 27179. there arealso privacy reasons behind these measures. cf. branscomb, note 3 (who approves of theencryption and information management proposals).120.see, e.g., reichman and samuelson, note 1; mcmanis, note 64, at p. 73. see also, j.h.reichman (1995), òthe knowhow gap in the trips agreement: why software faredbadly, and what are the solutions,ó hastings commun. ent. l. j. (commun./ent.), 17:763,77984 (citing authorities).121.see, e.g., mcmanis, note 64, at pp. 27476 (stressing proposal to limit removal of electronicòshrinkwrap licensesó as component of u.s. white paperõs overall efforts òto reduce . . .application and scope of fair use doctrineó). for judicial and scholarly opposition to suchbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights183licenses, see note 55; see also charles r. mcmanis (1993), òintellectual property protectionand reverse engineering of computer programs in the united states and european community,ó high tech. l. j., 8:25, 8896 (concluding that contracts, or at least shrinkwrap licenses,that prohibit reverse engineering are preempted by federal intellectual property law); julie e.cohen (1995), òreverse engineering and the rise of electronic vigilantism: intellectual property implications of ôlockoutõ programs,ó so. cal. l. rev., 68:1091. but see raymond t.nimmer (reporter for the drafting committee on uniform commercial code, article 2b (licenses)), u.c.c. revision: information a.s.e. in contracts (april 15, 1996) (arguing thatproposed art. 2b of u.c.c. should make such licenses presumptively valid); procd, inc. v.zeidenberg, 86 f.3d 1447 (7th cir. 1996) (upholding shrinkwrap license concerning electronicdatabase).122.mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64, at p. 67 (citing authorities); hamilton,note 59, at pp. 62829.123.see note 5.124.see committee of experts on a possible protocol to the berne convention, proposal of theunited states of america on sui generis protection of databases, geneva, may 2224, 1996,wipo doc. bcp/ce/vii/2inr/ce/vi/2, may 20, 1996 (hereinafter u.s. proposal on databases); see also mark powell (1996), òthe european unionõs database directive: an international antidote to the sideeffects of feist,ó paper presented to the fourth fordham conference. powell notes that the e.c. directive will be incorporated into the laws of norway,iceland, and liechtenstein under existing trade agreements with the e.u.; that òthe commission will encourage central and eastern european countries to adopt similar legislationó intheir association agreements; that the e.u.turkey customs union decision explicitly obligedturkey to align its legislation on databases with the directive; and that its reciprocity clauseòwill be used by the commission as a bargaining chipó in dealing with third countries.125.powell, id.126.see, e.g., powell, note 124, at pp. 23 (objecting that òit is questionable whether an international instrument should be founded on a legal measure with no proven track record and whichcontains such novel legal concepts . . . especially since . . . [n]either database makers nor userswere satisfied with the compromise reached in the directiveó); see also pamela samuelson(1994), òthe n.i.i. intellectual property report,ó communications of the acm, 37:17. (findingit òpeculiar that the wipo experts should even consider recommending a treaty on databaseprotection when the idea for such a law is so new and untestedó).127.see, e.g., powell, note 124, at p. 16 (stating that the òeconomic case for the creation of a right toprevent extraction and/or reutilization of nonoriginal contents by users has never been satisfactorily explainedó); see also id., at p. 55 (stressing that an òinternational treaty, . . . is trickierto modifyó than domestic models and suggesting that the diplomatic conference should confine itself to a òset of general principlesó for legal protection of databases that would be reviewed within a fixed period of time).128. see, e.g., jens l. gaster (principal administrator, dg xve4, european commission) (1996),òthe new e.u. directive concerning the legal protection of data bases,ó paper presented tothe fourth fordham conference (conceding that òthe sui generis right was considerablystrengthened during the legislative processó and that attacks on the right to extract even insubstantial parts of a protected database were barely repelled).129.trips agreement, note 111, article 71; see also id., articles 6869. while parties to the berneconvention remain free to adopt higher copyright standards among themselves (see berneconvention, note 63, article 20), these arrangements would not become binding on other bernemembers in the absence of a unanimous decision. see id., article 27(3). unless such standardswere incorporated into the trips agreement, parties to a special arrangement under berne (orrelated to berne) would run some risk of having to extend the higher standards to nonsignatorymembers of the wto, under the mostfavorednation clause of the trips agreement. seetrips agreement, note 111, article 4. while applications of article 4 remain inherentlybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184bits of poweruncertain, and this outcome would depend on the interpretation of various provisions in boththe trips agreement and prior international agreements (see notes 63 and 111 and accompanying text), the goal is clearly to develop òa model in the search for a global solution regardingthe protection of databases which is presently discussed at wipo.ó gaster, note 128.130.see trips agreement, note 111, articles 1(3), 2(2), 3(1), 3538; j.h. reichman, òuniversalminimum standards of intellectual property protection under the trips agreement,ó intõl. l.,29: 374375.131.see u.s. congress, house of representatives, h.r. 3531, 104th congress, 2d session, may 23,1996, sec. 1 (shorttitled òdatabase investment and intellectual property antipiracy act of1996ó) (hereinafter h.r. 3531). this bill was introduced by carlos moorhead, chairman of thehouse subcommittee on courts and intellectual property, and referred to the committee on thejudiciary.132.see id., sections 2, 3(a).133.see id., sections 2, 3(a), (b), 6.134.u.s. constitution, article i, section 8, clause 8.135.see, e.g., reichman and samuelson, note 1 at pp. 10209, 13236. because the europeancommunity has codified a doctrine of òthinó copyright protection of computer programs, itexpressly subordinated the protection of databases to that policy (see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 2(a)); in contrast, because the u.s. federal courts have resisted a policy ofòthickó or strong copyright protection for computer programs, there is reason to fear that the suigeneris database law may be used to overturn these precedents.136.h.r. 3531, note 131, section 4(a)(1).137.this provision is thus consonant with several other key provisions that greatly strengthen thescope of protection in general. see infra text accompanying notes 138155.138.see h.r. 3531, note 131, article 6(b); notes 8990 and accompanying text.139.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 8(1) at p. 26. gaster, note 128, at pp. 9, 11(indicating that protection of the right to extractñbut not to reuseñan insubstantial componentwas an integral part of the compromise that led to otherwise strengthened protection).140.see h.r. 3531, note 131, section 4(a)(2).141.id.; e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 7(g).142.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a)(1), (2), 5(a).143.see id., section 4(a)(2), 4(b). this restriction covers markets in which the database owner has ademonstrable interest or expectation in licensing or otherwise reusing the database, as well asmarkets in which customers might reasonably be expected to become customers for the database.144.id., section 4(b) (4).145.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 15 (expressly voiding contractual provisionsto this effect).146.see powell, note 124, at pp. 4043. see also u.s. proposal on databases, note 124, article 7(2)(òno contracting party shall impair the ability to vary by contract the rights and exceptions torights set forth hereinó).147.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a) (2), 4(b) (4).148.see text accompanying notes 9192 and box 5.4; reichman and samuelson, supra note 1, pp.103109.149.see, e.g., h.r. 3531, note 131, section 5(b), which states: ònothing in this act shall in any wayrestrict any person from independently collecting, assembling or compiling works, data ormaterials from sources other than a database subject to this act.ó150.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 4, 5, 6.151.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 9(b); see also id., articles 9(a) (allowingextraction for private purposes from nonelectronic databases), and 9(c) (allowing extractionand reuse for purposes of òpublic security or an administrative or judicial procedureó).bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights185152.see h.r. 3531, note 131, section 5; u.s. proposal on databases, note 124, article 5. the u.s.proposal to wipo appears less watertight, because it does permit contracting parties, òin theirdomestic legislation, [to] provide for exceptions to or limitations on the rights,ó so long as suchexceptions or limitations òdo not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation . . . and donot unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the rightholder.ó id., article 5.3. becausethe u.s. proposal links this exception to the notion of a òsubstantialó taking for purposes ofinfringement and also to the express notion that use of preexisting protected matter is notindependent creation (see id., articles 3.1, 3.2), the drafters clearly aim to forbid any exceptionsthat permit extraction or use of a substantial part of the database for any purpose. at the sametime, the u.s. proposal to wipo is more amenable to local variants that expand upon uses ofinsubstantial components than is h.r. 3531, and to this extent it moves further towards the e.c.directive.153.see h.r. 3531, note 131, section 3(c), which provides: òexcept for a database made by agovernmental entity, any database otherwise subject to this act, is not excluded herefrombecause its contents have been obtained from a governmental entity.ó154.see h.r. 3531, note 131.155.see executive office of the president, office of management and budget, òimplementing theinformation dissemination provisions of the paperwork reduction act of 1995,ó memorandum by alice m. rivlin, september 22, 1995 (cautioning agencies that use the services ofprivate contractors not to impose, or permit the intermediary to impose, restrictions that interfere with the agenciesõ own dissemination responsibilities; and reiterating òthe basic standardthat agencies shall not charge use fees for government information which exceed the cost ofdisseminationó).156.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 4, 5(a)(b); text accompanying notes 140147 (stressing builtin restrictions on claiming use of an insubstantial part in practice).157.cf. e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 16(3) (requiring e.c. commission to report, atthreeyear intervals, concerning these issues and the need to establish ònonvoluntary licensingarrangementsó).158. see, e.g., h.r. 3531, note 131, section 10 (òcircumvention of database protection systemsó);u.s. proposal on databases, note 124, article 8 (prohibition of protectionñdefeating devices).159.see, e.g., h.r. 3531, note 131, section 11 (òintegrity of database management informationó).160.see, e.g., branscomb, note 3, at pp. 17577.161.see text accompanying note 15.162.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 10, 11.163.see further infra text accompanying notes 137138.164.see h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 8, 13.165.see david and foray, note 35.166.see perlmutter, note 116; morton david goldberg (1996), òthe digital agenda in the u.s. andwipo,ó paper presented to the fourth fordham conference.167.see note 124.168.cf., e.g., dirk j.g. visser (1996), òcopyright in cyberspaceñnational dutch report,ó paperpresented to the international association for literary and artistic property (alai) studydays, amsterdam, june 48, at p. 12, quoting the dutch federation of organizations in thelibrary, information and documentation fieldsõ (fobid) recent complaint to the minister ofjustice:to its unpleasant surprise fobid has found that in the [e.c.] green paper [see note 4] little or noattention is paid to the statutory limitations on copyright, such as library privileges and rules on educational, scientific and private use. many existing limitations are technology dependent. it has to beexamined whether and to what extent these limitations should be maintained or adapted in the digitalenvironment.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186bits of powerto this and similar complaints, visserõs report makes the following reply:[m]any limitations are the result of successful òlobbying.ó intermediaries and users applying forspecific limitations must realize that right owners, who will oppose any limitation as a matter ofprinciple, are generally very well represented at the (national and international) legislative level. thus,the extent to which copyright limitations will be preserved or extended in the digital environment willeventually be determined by the ability of intermediaries and users to have their voice heard on thepolitical level.visser, at p. 13 (quoting p.b. hugenholtz and d.j.g. visser (1995), copyright problems ofelectronic document delivery: a comparative analysis, report to the commission of theeuropean communities (dg xiii), brussels/luxembourg, p. 62.) see also robert j. hart,òintellectual property and the global information infrastructureñthe perspective in japan,australia, and canada,ó paper presented to fordhamõs fourth conference (stressing that onlyaustraliaõs proposals concerning regulation of national information infrastructures have so farreflected concerns for òfair useó and related exceptions).169.see berne convention, note 63, article 20 (authorizing member states òto enter into specialagreements among themselves . . . [that] grant to authors more extensive rights than thosegranted by the conventionó).170.the next step would be to use the council for trips and relevant provisions of the tripsagreement as a springboard for binding nonberne countries, and especially developing countries, to the same standards. see, e.g., j.h. reichman (1995), òuniversal minimum standards,ónote 130, at pp. 345, 38385; j.h. reichman, òfrom free riders to fair followers,ó note 59(urging developing countries to resist these pressures).171.see, e.g., e.c. commission, green paper on copyright and related rights in the informationsociety (july 19, 1995); paul waterschoot, òan overview of recent developments in intellectual property in the european union,ó paper presented to fourth fordham conference, note116.172.see, e.g., mcmanis, note 64, at p. 211.173.john perry barlow (1994), òthe economy of ideas: a framework for rethinking patents andcopyrights in the digital age (everything you know about intellectual property is wrong),ówired 2.03, at p. 84 (march).174.see, e.g., paul edward geller (1996), òconflicts of law in cyberspace: rethinking international copyright in a digitally networked world,ó colum.vla j. l., 20:571; i. trotter hardy(1994), òthe proper legal regime for ôcyberspace,õó u. pitt. l. rev., 55:993; jane c. ginsburg(1995) òglobal use/territorial rights: private international law questions of the global information infrastructure,ó j. copyright soc. usa, 42:318.175.see, e.g., reichman, òuniversal minimum standards,ó note 130, at pp. 34751, 36573.176.for the possibility that some developing countries might postpone the obligation to implementthese standards beyond the 11year transitional period specified by the trips agreement, ongrounds of hardship, see reichman, òuniversal minimum standards,ó at p. 353, note 130.177.see, e.g., reichman, òfrom free riders to fair followers,ó note 59 (arguing that if developingcountries interpret ògrey areasó of trips agreement in a procompetitive manner, it couldbenefit consumers, users, and second comers everywhere).178.see, e.g., reichman, òknowhow gap in trips,ó note 120, at pp. 77984 (uncertain scope ofcopyright protection for computer programs); reichman, òlegal hybrids,ó note 27, at pp.245964, 248890 (uncertain status of industrial designs under diverse regimes, including copyright law).179.mcmanis, òemerging computer technology,ó note 64, at p. 284; see also kurtz, note 32, at pp.120, 121, 124 (stressing risk that a chronic state of overprotection could òchoke off opportunities for academic research and educational uses of intellectual propertyó).180.rosler, note 28, at pp. 14142.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights187181.the omb circular supra, note 155, suggests that pressures to privatize the distribution ofgovernmentfunded data had already become a problem before the advent of the proposeddatabase law in the united states.182.see also kurtz, note 32, at p. 121 (stating that overprotective legal monopolies òcan . . . be asstifling to creation as underprotection . . . [and they] can choke off opportunities for academicresearch and educational uses of intellectual propertyó). even though the solesource providermay not wish to price itself out of the market, this will be cold comfort to òthose who cannotafford to pay, and [could thus] lead to a society of information haves and have nots.ó183.see david and foray, note 35.184.see reichman and samuelson, note 1, at pp. 11330, 13763.185.see text accompanying notes 7374.186.see, e.g., ginsburg, òinformation after feist,ó note 23, at pp. 384387.187.the ambivalence of the final e.c. directive in this regard is explained in part by the fact that noserious fairuse provisions had previously been developed in the presence of the compulsorylicense that the council of ministers deleted at the last moment, and in part by the growingdisinclination of both the european unionõs and the united statesõ intellectual property authorities to recognize fair use in the digital environment.188.goldstein, celestial jukebox, note 21, at pp. 22022. gordon, òfair use as market failure,ónote 22.189.samuelson et al., òmanifesto,ó note 38, at pp. 238586 (discussing limits of legal protection forsingle features of computer programs).190.see, e.g., omb circular a130, u.s. government printing office. for the problem of leakageas a limit on price discrimination, see chapter 4.191.see e.c. directive on databases, note 52, article 6(2).192.for example, ònasa and orbital sciences . . . reached an agreement regarding the sea wifsmission for ocean color data,ó a private endeavor òfor which nasa provided upfront moneyfor a data purchase . . . [so that] the companies . . . [could] get financial backing.ó under thisagreement, òthe company had exclusive rights to exploit the data for a number of days, afterwhich the data went to nasa for scientific purposes.ó letter from joanne gabrynowicz, july25, 1996. reportedly, this agreement was possible owing to the perishability of ocean colordata for commercial purposes. however, for some scientific disciplines, which depend on realtime observations, delay as a form of product differentiation is not feasible. this, in turn,suggests the importance of legal measures that permit providers and users to adjust the conceptof fair use (or fair and reasonable terms) to the needs of different categories of users.193.see, e.g., reichman and samuelson, note 1, at pp. 15861. for the general importance of sucha clause in the posttrips environment, especially with regard to transfer of technology agreements, see reichman, òfrom free riders to fair followers,ó note 59.194.for example, licenses òissued pursuant to federal law for private remote sensing systems require that system operators make their commercially obsolete data available to the nationaldata archive on ôreasonable terms and conditions.õ the government does not require that they[be] give[n]. . . the data, nor does it set the criteria by which the decision is made. but if, andwhen, a company decides to purge data, it triggers the requirement, [which] . . . amounts to thegovernment having the right of first refusal.ó letter from joanne gabrynowicz, july 25, 1996.195.see, e.g., e.c. directive on databases, note 52, articles 7(5), 8(2) (forbidding lawful user ofdatabase to perform acts that òconflict with normal exploitationó or that òunreasonably prejudice [the makerõs] legitimate interestsó; see also h.r. 3531, note 131, sections 4(a), (b), 5.196.see reichman and samuelson, note 1, at pp. 14551.197. goldstein, celestial jukebox, quoted note 21; see also ginsburg, òinformation after feist,ó note23, at pp. 38687 (deeming compulsory licenses indispensable under a noncopyright protectionscheme).bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188bits of power198.cf. trips agreement, note 111, article 31(b) (allowing right of states to impose compulsorylicenses on foreign patentees only if, prior to the grant, òthe proposed user has made efforts toobtain authorization from the right holder on reasonable commercial terms and conditionsó).199.see, e.g., hunsuker, note 33.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.trend toward strengthened intellectual property rights1891895appendixesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a191191appendixaabbreviations and acronymsaddsafrican data dissemination serviceadsastrophysics data systemasciiamerican standard code for information interchangeatmasynchronous transfer modeauraassociation of universities for research in astronomyavhrradvanced very high resolution radiometerbasisbattelle automatic search information systemcdccenters for disease control and preventioncdfcollider detector at fermilabcdiaccarbon dioxide information analysis centercdromcompact diskread only memoryceccommission of the european communitiesceoscommittee on earth observation satellitescgiarconsultative group on international agricultural researchciesinconsortium for international earth sciences informationnetworkcindascenter for information and numerical data analysis andsynthesiscobiotechcommittee for biotechnology (icsu)codatacommittee on data for science and technology (icsu)costedcommittee on science and technology in developingcountriesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192bits of powerdisdata indexing system; data and information systemdmcdata management center (iris)dnadeoxyribonucleic aciddocdepartment of commercedoddepartment of defensedoedepartment of energydoidepartment of the interiordvddigital versatile diskendf/bevaluated nuclear data file/bensdfevaluated nuclear structure data fileeosearth observing systemeosatearth observation satellite companyeosdisearth observing system data and information systemepaenvironmental protection agencyerosearth resources observation systemsesaeuropean space agencyfamefatty acid methyl esterfaofood and agriculture organizationfdsnfederation of digital seismic networksfitsflexible image transport systemftpfile transfer protocolgisgeographic information systemgmtgreenwich mean timehdromhigh densityread only memoryhephighenergy physicshippihighperformance parallel interfacehsthubble space telescopehtmlhypertext markup languagehttphypertext transfer protocoliaeainternational atomic energy agencyicsuinternational council of scientific unionsieeeinstitute for electrical and electronics engineersietfinternet engineering task forceifsinternational foundation for scienceigbpinternational geospherebiosphere programmeiitfinformation infrastructure task forceimpactinformation market policy action programipnginternet protocol next generationbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a193iprintellectual property rightirafimage reduction and analysis facilityirexinternational research and exchange boardirisincorporated research institutions for seismologyisdnintegrated services digital networkisointernational organization for standardizationlanlocal area networkmbonemulticast broadcast backbone networkmbpsmegabits per secondmemsmicroelectromechanical systemsmiacmetals information analysis centermssmultispectral scannernasnational academy of sciencesnasanational aeronautics and space administrationncbinational center for biotechnology informationncdcnational climatic data centerngdcnational geophysical data centerngonongovernmental organizationnihnational institutes of healthniinational information infrastructurenistnational institute of standards and technologynlmnational library of medicinenndcnational nuclear data centernoaanational oceanic and atmospheric administrationnodcnational oceanographic data centernrcnational research councilnsfnational science foundationnudatnuclear database (part of ensdf)oasorganization of american statesoecdorganisation for economic cooperation and developmentomboffice of management and budgetotaoffice of technology assessmentpcpersonal computerpdfpostscript data fileposixportable operating system interface for computer environments (an ieee standard)potsòplain oldó telephone serviceptopatent and trademark officebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194bits of powerpttpost, telephone, and telegraph ministryrnaribonucleic acidsgmlstandard generalized markup languagesimbadset of identifications, measurements, and bibliography forastronomical datasmartsystem for the mechanical analysis and retrieval of textsmtpsimple message transfer protocolsnmpsimple network management protocolsotersoils and terrain digital databasespecinfoa database from chemical concepts gmbh containingdigitized nuclear magnetic resonance data and infraredspectra for chemical compoundsstairsstorage and information retrieval systemstecfspace telescope european coordinating facilitystnscience and technology network internationalstscispace telescope science institutetcp/iptransmission control protocol/internet protocoltmthematic mappertripstraderelated aspects of intellectual property rights,agreement ontwasthird world academy of sciencesucuniversity of californiauncedunited nations commission on economic developmentunctadunited nations commission on trade and developmentundpunited nations development programmeunepunited nations environment programmeunescounited nations educational, scientific, and cultural organizationunidounited nations industrial development organizationurluniform resource locatorurnuniform resource nameusaidunited states agency for international developmentusgsunited states geological surveyusnccodataunited states national committee for codatavitavolunteers in technical assistancevhsvideo home systembits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a195wdcworld data centerwhoworld health organizationwipoworld intellectual property organizationwmoworld meteorological organizationwtoworld trade organizationwwwworld wide webbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196bits of power196appendixbglossaryaccess.the process of obtaining data from a storage device or system.analog data.data in the form of continuously variable physical quantities. [c]animation.the use of computer graphics (or sometimes cinematography) tosynthesize drawings or other objects so as to depict motion.archival database.a database containing data values and other informationretained over a period of time and represented as an accurate reflection ofthe contents at a specified time. [c]archive.an organized and managed collection of information (in any form)that is protected to ensure its integrity as an authoritative source for theinformation stored in it.artificial intelligence.the capability of a device to perform functions that arenormally associated with human intelligence, such as reasoning, learning,and selfimprovement. [c]asynchronous transfer mode.the transmission of information in irregularsections, with the time interval of each transmission varying and each section being identified by a start and stop signal. [c]authentication.the process by which a prospective computer userõs identityis verified by a card, token, or biometric device before system access isallowed. [c]note: the sources of the definitions appearing in this glossary are indicated by the symbols inboldface square brackets. these sources are spelled out in detail below. where no source is shown,the definition was crafted explicitly for this glossary by the committee.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b197backbone.(1) a set of nodes and their interconnecting links providing the primary data path across a network . . . . a backbone may be configured as a busor as a ring; (2) in a wide area network, a highspeed link to which nodes ordata switching exchanges are connected. [ibm]bookmark method.refers to a system designed to leave a marker in an application or presentation to which the system will return when the program is nextexecuted.bridge.a functional unit that interconnects two local area networks that use thesame logical link control protocol but may use different access control protocols. [ibm]broadband transmission.in communications, pertaining to transmission facilities whose bandwidth is greater than that available on voice grade circuits andtherefore capable of highspeed data transmission. [l&s]browser.a program used to scan and search electronic files.bulletin board.a set of files, stored on a computer, that may be accessed by anyuser with a terminal and that is controlled by a systems operator, who organizes the files into topical areas. files are uploaded and downloaded by users,and most bulletin boards allow users to exchange electronic mail. computersuppliers often maintain a bulletin board to allow users to have access toinformation system updates and to report on problems encountered. [d]cache.(1) a specialpurpose buffer storage, smaller and faster than main storage, used to hold a copy of instructions and data obtained from main storageand likely to be needed next by the processor; (2) a buffer storage that containsfrequently accessed instructions and data; it is used to reduce access time; (3)an optional part of the directory database in network nodes where frequentlyused directory information may be stored to speed directory searches. [ibm]client/server.a network system designed to share substantial resources thatcannot be provided on every userõs machine. the requesting program (client)sends a request to a program at another site (server) and awaits a response.compilation.(1) with respect to computer programs, the result of the implementation of a compiler program used to make a highlanguage programoperable in a computer; (2) the result of aggregating several documents orfiles. [c]cyberspace.the invisible, intangible world of electronic information and processes stored at multiple interconnected sites, with controlled access and manifold possibilities for interaction.data.scientific or technical measurements, values calculated therefrom, andobservations or facts that can be represented by numbers, tables, graphs,models, text, or symbols and that are used as a basis for reasoning or furthercalculation.[c]bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198bits of powerdata collection.the process of identifying and accumulating data and/or datasets pertaining to a common subject, application, or theme. [c]data exchange.(1) the transfer of data between or among more than one computer program or system; (2) for people or organizations, the sharing of databetween or among people and/or organizations.data integrity.the property/quality of a collection of data being complete, consistent, and accurate. [c]data management/data administration.(1) the function of controlling theacquisition, analysis, storage, retrieval, and distribution of data; (2) in anoperating system, the programs that provide access to data, perform or monitor organization and storage of data, and control input/output devices. [c]data processing.the systematic performance of operations on data, such ashandling, merging, sorting, and computing. [c]data transfer.transmission, copying, or movement of digitized data from oneplace to another, such as from database to database or computer to computer.[c].data validation.a process used to determine whether data are accurate, complete, and/or reasonable. [c]database (also data set).a collection of interrelated data, often with controlledredundancy, organized according to a schema to serve one or more applications. the data are stored so that they can often be used by different programswith little or no restructuring or reorganization of the data. a systematicprotocol is used to add new data or modify and retrieve existing data. [c]database management.the activity associated with organizing, storing, andproviding access to a computerized database. it usually includes responsibility for ensuring the integrity of the database. [c]decnet.a family of software products supporting the general interconnectionof computer systems of digital equipment corporation; also used to refer to anetwork that uses this software.decryption.the process that reverses encryption, turning a file into plain text.derogation.an act partly repealing something, or lessening it in value, force,authority, rank, honor, or the like.desktop publishing.the local production of highquality, cameraready copyby an individual or individuals by means of sophisticated wordprocessing,graphics, and other software packages and laser printers.digital signature.a means by which the recipient of a message can validate thatit came from the person who claims to have sent it. a sender can create asignature for a message and encrypt it with his or her private key. theenciphered signature can be decrypted only by the senderõs correspondingpublic key known to the recipient. a signature encrypted by any other privatekey, corresponding to another individual or source, cannot be decrypted bythe same public key.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b199electronic mail (also email).a method of sending messages from a user on onecomputer to the computer of another user. in its simplest form, electronicmail on a local area network operates by storing all mail messages on files onone machine designated as the post office. mail does not move around; usersaccess the post office when they want to òcollectó their mail and read it. onlarger systems, post offices are interconnected and can exchange mail, so thatusers on different lans can also communicate. [ibm]electronic publishing.(1) submission of text, graphics, and images in electronicform to a publisher who will work directly on these files with various computerassisted techniques to ready the material for publication; (2) submissionof articles, data tables, graphs, etc., to an electronic network where they maybe browsed, annotated, critiqued, or downloaded.encryption.a process that transforms data/information, using a key or keyedprocess, so that only the recipient who has the same key or appropriate keyedprocess can read it. traditional encryption uses secret keys that must beexchanged separately among senders and recipients. the same key used forencryption of a message is used for decryption. see also publickey encryption.eprint archive.a collective file of fulltext electronic journals, available on theinternet, selections from which can be readily downloaded by individual scientists.evaluated data.data that have been subjected to evaluation and can be regardedas scientifically correct within the limits specified.evaluation.the process of establishing the accuracy and integrity of measureddata. evaluation involves examination and appraisal of the data presented,assessment of experimental techniques and associated errors, consistencychecks for allowed values and units, comparison with other experimental ortheoretical values, reanalysis and recalculation of derived quantities as required, selection of best values, and assignment of probable error or reliability. [c]experimental science.one founded on tests, acts, or operations carried out under controlled conditions and intended to discover something unknown or totest a principle or hypothesis.extraction.the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of thecontents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form. [ec]full and open exchange of data.occurs when data and information are madeavailable with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis,for no more than the cost of reproduction and distribution.functional dependence.in databases, an indication of the interrelationships ofattributes in a relation. attribute a of a relation r is functionally dependenton attribute b of relation r if, at every instant of time, each value of b hasno more than one value of a associated with it. [l&s]bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200bits of powergigabyte.109 bytes, or 8  109 bits.home page.a file on the internet that contains information provided by thesponsor of the home page and links to other files (or processes) of the sponsoror to other locations on the internet.hyperlink.the text, number, symbol, or code providing linkage to related itemsin an electronic file or a network of electronic files.hypermedia.a system of presenting information in discrete units, or nodes, thatare connected by links. the information may be presented using a variety ofmedia such as text, graphics, audio, video, animation, image, or executabledocumentation. [ibm]hypertext.text coded with internal crossreferences allowing users to link toother related material posted on the network. [c]image.a visually interpretable representation of objects, text, or graphics asdisplayed, plotted, or printed, that is not semantically coded.information.data that have become meaningful as a result of collection, processing, organization, and interpretation, in light of some hypothesis.informatics (especially in continental europe).the study of the quantitativeaspects of information in any form, including patterns of language use, theproduction, dissemination, and use of recorded information, and the quantitative aspects of science as a discipline or economic activity. [e]interactive information system.in computing, a system allowing continuousdialog or twoway communication between a user and the computer. [l&s]internet.a worldwide network of semiautonomous networks that share a common protocol for internetwork communications and a common form of naming of user and server nodes.intranet.a dedicated computer network (either a localor widearea network)within a corporation or other private institution intended to serve its ownneeds for data exchange, electronic mail, bulletin boards, etc. with reliability,performance, and security beyond that provided by the public internet.òknowbot.óan information robot, a sophisticated browser program for scanning networks of files and employing more elaborate detection schemes thansimple boolean filters.knowledge.an organized body of information that represents a description andunderstanding of concepts, properties, and relationships as viewed by an authoritative community capable of using it.latex, tex.proprietary wordprocessing programs especially designed fortechnical writing.link.a physical or logical connection between two data items or records.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b201list server.a mechanism that provides a flow of òissuedó information to arouting list maintained by the system.megabyte.106 bytes, or 8 106 bits.metadata.data about data; consists of descriptors of data in a database to provide systematic information for users, application programs, and databasemanagement software. metadata may be manipulated and searched and maythemselves be organized in a database. [c]mirror site.a proxy server acting as a cache containing duplicated data from acentral database so as to facilitate more economic and reliable access by localusers.mooreõs law.computer power (speed) will double every 18 months, for aneffective reduction in price by half.multicasting. the transmission of data from one place to many specific ones, asopposed to broadcasting (which transmits everywhere within a range). anexample is the transmission of sound and video over the internet. [d]multimedia.any system that combines computer sound and video; may incorporate an interactive facility.natural sciences.branches of science such as biology, physics, and chemistrythat deal with objectively measurable objects or processes observable in nature, as distinguished from the abstract sciences such as mathematics or philosophy.navigation.following a path within a file or among files to locate desired information.near real time.approximate simultaneity in time; without delay, compression,or expansion in the time variable.neural network.a system of multiple parallel structures, containing a highlyinterconnected set of simple elements, exploiting aspects of their collectivebehavior and operating according to a strict, deterministic set of rules forproceeding from one step to the next.normalize.to reduce data, data structure, or relations among data to a standardform. in the case of numeric data, normalization may involve presenting adata value in terms of its relation to a reference value, e.g., strength at testtemperature as a percent of strength at room temperature.objectoriented database.a database of objects (entities including data, queues,data structures, procedures, modules, etc.) using the principles of objectoriented programming and the concept of inheritance of methods by new classesof objects.observational science.a science founded on observation rather than experimentation.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202bits of poweronline.pertaining to an interactive process by which a user and host computerconverse.overlay.(1) the superposition of two graphical representations for purposes ofcomparison; (2) one of several segments of a computer program that, duringexecution, occupy the same area of main [or virtual] storage, one segment at atime. [c]packet.in data communication, a sequence of binary digits, including data andcontrol signals, that is transmitted and switched as a composite whole. thedata, control signals, and possibly error control information are arranged in aspecific format. [c]parallel communication.a form of communication that simultaneously transmits on multiple communication paths controlled as a unit.portability.capability for transporting of data or programs between computersor computer systems without any required modification thereof. [c]postscript.a proprietary (adobe systems) page definition language used indesktop publishing and capable of handling full text, mathematics, and graphics.primary data see raw dataprivatization.transfer from government management and control to management and control by a private company or other nongovernmental organization.protocol.in a computer system, a formalized set of conventions, including coding, prescribed responses to received signals and/or coded messages, wiringpatterns, etc., necessary to establish and maintain communication betweentwo devices or systems.public good.a product or service typically provided by government that isnondepletable and produces benefits from which others cannot be excludedand which cannot easily be constrained only to those who pay.publickey encryption.a method of encryption/decryption in which the enciphering and deciphering keys are different and not computable from eachother. a person wishing to receive a secret message can publicly distributethe enciphering key, which, when used by the originator of a message, produces an enciphered message that only the secret deciphering key kept by therecipient can decipher. the first and still most widely used publickey algorithm is the rsa algorithm; the public key is derived from the product of twovery large prime numbers, and the strength of protection derives from the sizeof the prime numbers and the resulting computational difficulty in decomposing the product in those primes.raw data.data as originally recorded and that have not been combined, modified, interpreted, or adjusted in any way.real time.in computing, pertaining to operations that are performed in conjuncbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b203tion with some external process or user and that are required to meet the timeconstraints imposed by that process or user, e.g., control of an airplane guidance system or an online information service. [l&s]relational database.a database composed of flat files, each embodying different facets of information about the data, organized by linkages representingone or more relations; the resulting data structure allows the efficient use ofmany types of data during queries and can be manipulated with great flexibility using a formal relational algebra to derive standard (normalized) forms andto establish equivalencies.remote access.capability for communicating with a data processing facilitythrough a data link, usually at a different geographical location.remote sensing. gathering and recording of data through a system of one orseveral sensors capable of obtaining data from afar and transmitting the valuesto a central computer or other display, recording, or storage device.retrieval.the location and transfer of selected data or information from a source(longtime memory or another information system) to local computer memoryfor subsequent processing, display, or downloading to another device.router.a computer that determines the path of network traffic flow. the pathselection is made from several paths based on information obtained fromspecific protocols, algorithms that attempt to identify the shortest or best path,and other criteria such as metrics or protocolspecific destination addresses.[ibm]search engine.a device or program for scanning a file to match data patterns forpurposes of retrieval.secondary user.a user outside the community by or for which the collection ofdata was initiated.serial communication.transmission of a sequence of signals on a single communication path.server.a computer on a network that performs functions (e.g., computation,storage, and retrieval) for other computers, terminals, and peripheral deviceson the network.shareware.software distributed publicly by individuals who have developed auseful program and wish to share it informally (as contrasted to commercialmarketing) with others. [adapted from c]spectral data.data measured for specific wavelengths of radiation related to thephenomenon being observed. the data may be a continuous function ofwavelength value or may indicate only values at discrete wavelengths.sui generis.of its own kind; unique.terabyte.1012 bytes, or 8  1012 bits.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204bits of poweruser friendly.characteristic of a system that inexperienced or untrained usersfeel comfortable working on, and find helpful and not intimidating. generally, use of such a system does not depend heavily on knowing or remembering procedural details; rather, the system provides hints, guidance, andchoices among alternatives at every stage of the interaction.validated data.data values or data sets that have been shown to be generatedaccording to standard test methods and practices or other measures of quality, reliability, and precision. [c]verified data.data that have been shown to be accurately transcribed or transformed from other representations.virtual reality.a computergenerated simulation of reality (or imagined reality) with which users can interact using specialized peripherals such as datagloves and headmounted computer graphic displays. [l&s]workstation.(1) a term traditionally used to describe a highend, highperformance assembly of equipment, including extensive computer graphics capability, as an interactive console for performing a specialized function suchas computeraided design, computer animation, or complex data analysis.typically, the workstation includes enough computing power and data storage capacity to operate freestanding from any other computer, althoughworkstations are often networked to larger systems for data archives, communication with other workstations, etc. as the technology of personalcomputers has improved, they have taken on functions previously handledon workstations. (2) any assembly of computer equipment designed tosupport the full range of work of an individual.world wide web.a tool, based on the hypertext system, for the organizationand representation of online information available over the internet. toaccess the web, a browser such as netscape or mosaic is required. the usermust know the address of the home page of the institution whose information is to be accessed. the www provides the simplest means of navigating the internet, giving access to text, images, sound, and video. [d]sources of definitions[c] j.h. westbrook and w. grattidge, eds. (1991), òa glossary of terms relating to data, datacapture, data manipulation, and databases,ó codata bulletin 23, nos. 1 & 2, 196 pp.[d] t. dodd (1995), computing: the technology of information, oxford university press, 160 pp.[e] g.l. tring, ed. (1994), encyclopedia of applied physics, vch publishers.[ec] directive of the european parliament and of the council of the european union on the legalprotection of databases (1996), 96/9/e.c., march 11.[ibm] g. mcdaniel, ed. (1994), ibm dictionary of computing, mcgrawhill, 758 pp.[l&s] d. longley and m. shain, eds. (1986), dictionary of information technology, 2nd ed., oxford university press, 382 pp.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c205205appendixcexamples of successful international dataexchange activities in the natural sciencesthe following examples of international exchange and management of datain the natural sciences cover a diverse set of activities involving internationalcollaboration in several subdisciplines. all of them meet the minimum criteriafor successful international exchange of scientific data generated from publiclyfunded research.laboratory physical sciences datanuclear structure datathe evaluated nuclear structure data file (ensdf), a mature database thathas existed in electronic form for about 25 years, consists of evaluations of nuclearstructure and decay data. obtained by a variety of experiments and often spanningdecades of measurements, most of the data come from primary sources, such asarticles in refereed journals. the evaluations are carried out by an internationalnetwork of individuals and coordinated by the national nuclear data center(nndc) at brookhaven national laboratory, with the international activities coordinated under the auspices of the international atomic energy agency (iaea). inaddition to the united states, evaluators come from russia, japan, the peopleõsrepublic of china, taiwan, kuwait, the netherlands, france, sweden, canada, andbelgium.the evaluations themselves are reviewed before being disseminated. in thepast the evaluations were submitted via magnetic tape to nndc; more recently,almost all have been submitted via the internet. all foreign evaluators now roubits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206bits of powertinely transmit evaluations electronically and use electronic mail to communicatewith the coordinators.although most of the ensdf file has an 80character column format inheritedfrom ibm cards, a concentrated effort has been made in the past 2 years to transform the file into a more modern, relational database. complete conversion willnot be possible until a commercial database program is available that can meet theneeds of such a large, diverse file, probably after another 2 to 3 years of development. so far, however, the conversion has proceeded smoothly, and it has facilitated the development of software overlay programs that give the user transparentaccess to the data. one subset of ensdf, the nuclear database nudat, is a truerelational database that can be accessed online.traditionally, the evaluations of nuclear structure data were disseminated via amonthly hardcopy journal. now online access, introduced about a decade ago, isavailable by logging into the nndc (guest accounts are available for individualswho want to explore the files) or via the world wide web.1 online access ismenudriven but has limited graphic capabilities. users can generate highqualitypostscript files of tables and level spectra, which can be downloaded to a localmachine. more than 2,000 registered users from 49 countries on six continentscurrently have online access to ensdf.to minimize the problems with intercontinental electronic links, ensdf hasmirror sites in vienna and paris and plans to provide the same at the center inobninsk, russia, when russiaõs internet link is established. these mirror sites aremaintained by the host foreign government, with support from the iaea. whilethe mirror sites have minimized problems with transatlantic electronic links, delays do occur with transpacific links (except those with japan) and links to southamerica. to complement online access, various modes of dissemination are beingused, including cdrom and floppy diskettes. although users in less developedcountries may prefer hard copies, for many the cost of the printed journal is prohibitive. therefore, to maximize international data flow, increased access to the internetis critical.while nuclear scientists are the most common users of ensdf, some of thedata have important applications in other areas of science. for example, radioactive decay data are used in medical physics. to facilitate access by the medicalcommunity, a dynamically generated form of ensdf, called mird, was createdthat can be accessed online. as a portion of the data in the evaluated nuclear datafile/b (endf/b), ensdf data are also used in the design of nuclear reactors anddevices. before the early 1980s the distribution of endf/b was restricted, becausethe information was considered sensitive with respect to national security. thisfile, which is available electronically and on tape, contains results of nuclear reaction model calculations that could be useful to other scientists, for example, stellarastrophysicists seeking to understand nuclear processes in stars.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c207highenergy physics datacollider detector at fermilab collaborationthe collider detector at fermilab (cdf) collaboration presents a unique example of international data exchange and the barriers associated with thetransnational flow of data. the cdf collaboration includes more than 400 scientists from 36 national laboratories and universities in the united states, canada,italy, japan, and taiwan.2 the cdf detector itself cost hundreds of millions ofdollars to construct, and the operating expenses at fermilab are many tens ofmillions of dollars per year. because of the high costs in manpower and operations,the results from this collaboration will not be duplicated.data at cdf are sorted into various data streams based on the physics: electroweak physics, top quark events, b quark events, events that test quantum chromodynamics, exotica, and so on. as of the end of 1995 the grand ensemble of datafrom cdf was about 108 events at 200 kilobytes per event, or 20 terabytes. this isnot an easily manageable data set. the current storage medium is 8mm tape.working data sets are 1/1,000 to 1/100 of the total ensemble. it is estimated that atleast 90 percent of the analysis is done on the fermilab computers with data sets atfermilab. relatively few data are transferred electronically. the aggregate load onthe network into and out of fermilab is only about 4 gigabytes per month. in theevent that data files need to be transferred to another institution, sufficient òbandwidthó is obtained with a briefcase full of 8mm tapes.while the data analysis is done predominantly at fermilab, the various subgroups of the 400member collaboration, which are organized by branch of physicsand technical activities, must meet frequently. in the past, meetings were held in acentral location, such as at fermilab. more recently, videoconferencing has beenused to link institutions in the united states, japan, and italy to facilitate discussionand analysis of the data. however, the expense of videoconferencing done by anintegrated services digital network call across international borders is a major impediment to smaller institutions, particularly universities. videoconferencing doneby internet also creates problems, since the international connections generally donot have high bandwidth. although none of the available technology is very goodat this time, videoconferencing has the potential to be the preferred method of realtime exchange and interpretation of data, so that interactive discussions of theanalysis and interpretation can proceed more efficiently and costeffectively.with 400 individuals in a multiinstitutional, multinational collaboration, thediscussion and dissemination of manuscripts and technical reports could have poseda problem. however, cdf manuscripts and reports are prepared in latex withpostscript output, including encapsulated postscript figures embedded in the file.a cdfnotes database enables note numbers to be assigned and topic/distributioncategories to be selected. there is also a cdfnews procedure for putting thepostscript file and a brief ascii description into a centrally accessible directorybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208bits of powerand sending notification to all collaborating institutions. within minutes of learning about a new posting, scientists can retrieve it and have a hard copy at work orhome at their convenience.electronic preprints of topical information in theoretical highenergyphysicsfor researchers in highenergy particle theoryñincluding phenomenology(theoretical calculations that can be directly related to experiment), more formalquantum field theory and string theory, and lattice and computational approachesñrapid access to information has been a higher priority than the, at times minimal,filtering provided by the conventional refereeing process. consequently, since atleast the early 1970s a hardcopy preprint distribution system has supplanted conventional published journals as conveyers of topical information. with the adventof standardized word processors in the mid 1980s, together with widespread networking connectivity by the late 1980s, researchers regarded electronic transmission of prepublication information as a natural next step. when the òeprint archivesó based at los alamos national laboratory came online in the early 1990s,they were quickly adopted within these communities as the primary mode of communicating topical research information, as well as accessing longerterm archivalmaterial during the periods covered. the eprint archives have essentially supplanted established print journals in these fields.3table c.1 summarizes the distribution statistics for three eprint archives intheoretical highenergy physics (hep) at los alamos. such success has not beenseen for two other experimental physics archives, especially the experimentaltable c.11995 statistics for three eprint archives in theoretical highenergy physicsnumber ofsubscribersretrievalshighlystart(numberssubmissionsperrequestedaarchivedateapproximate)per monthmonth(percent)hepth (abstract theory)8/914,0001961108heplat (computational2/921,00037308approaches)hepph (phenomenology)3/923,000250758note:the numbers are estimates and averages for 1995.athe highly requested articles are those that had more than twice the average number of retrievals.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c209nuclear physics archive (nuclex), and only now is there substantial activity on theelectronic archive in theoretical condensedmatter physics, which is much moreclosely connected to laboratory science than is highenergy theory. the users ofand contributors to the hep eprint archives include about 6,000 highenergy physicists (experimentalists and theorists), most of whom belong to the american physical society.the success of the hep eprint archives in highenergy theory could be due toseveral advantages shared in the subdiscipline:¥a preexisting formal hardcopy preprint distribution system, so thatcreating and using the electronic version did not represent a major change;¥a standardized wordprocessing program (latex or tex), making theelectronic format easily portable;¥a subject esoteric enough that the contributions were of uniformly highquality, making refereeing less crucial to maintaining quality control; and¥a critical mass of participants accustomed to email use.materials science datadata in materials science describe a wide variety of properties (e.g., mechanical, electrical, thermal, and structural) of all types of materials (e.g., metals,insulators, and semiconductors) under many different conditions. the data alsorelate to differences in methods for preparing and refining materials, and, inprocesses such as the doping of semiconductors, to difference in methods forachieving desired levels of controlled impurity. they have little or no timeliness,except insofar as uptodate data may replace older, less confirmed data. hencethe databases have moderate permanence, but grow largely as new materials areadded and conditions and properties are extended.4although most of the collaborations involve the developed countries, international involvement in data activities is increasingly significant. examples inmaterials science include the following:¥structure reports, a printed crystallographic compendium that is editedat a canadian university, published in the netherlands, and has contributors fromall over the world;¥science group thermodata europe, a consortium of eight different laboratories from four european countries that compiles and analyzes thermodynamicdata;¥the alloy phase diagram international commission, whose membersfrom 12 countries collaborate in the compilation and evaluation of phase diagrams of metallic systems;¥the collection of diffusion data from the world literature that are abstracted, recompiled, and published in switzerland and;bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210bits of power¥activities of the codata task group on materials database management, with members from seven countries.5the potential benefits of computer access to technical information are thesame for materials scientists and engineers as for researchers in other fields oftechnology. with reference to alloy design, three additional capabilities are seento be of increasing importance:¥the facilitation of empirical searches for correlations of fundamentalparameters from very large volumes of data through the making of twodimensional and higher crossplots;¥the ability to make and display arbitrary sections of threedimensionalobjects (e.g., crystal structures or ternary phase diagram modes); and¥the ability to simulate crystal structures, atomic arrays, kinetic processes, and so forth, given basic information on dimensions, energetics, andmodeling schema.the most comprehensive system of online databases relevant to materialsresearch is that provided by the science and technology network (stn) international, which is sponsored by the chemical abstracts service and by informationservices in germany and japan. scientists and engineers are able to search approximately 20 databases covering the physical and mechanical properties of thousandsof materials, as well as more than 100 factual and bibliographic databases. although stn international provides the worldõs greatest concentration of data on theproperties of materials, it does not include, for example, data on composites, mostceramics, semiconductors, or elastomers. the software used by stn is particularlyadept at handling numeric data inquiries and is quite sophisticated in readily accommodating range searching, conversion of units, and handling of many datavariables.6 stn international is accessed via commercial online communicationservices. searchers are charged only a modest fee for the time connected, withmost of the charge based on the type and amount of data utilized in terms of thenumber of records involved. however, even a low fee can be prohibitive to ascientist in the developing world.the principal advantages of a system like stn international are (1) the largenumber of databases available on a single system; (2) the ability to use the samesoftware to search each of the databases; (3) the ability to search all of the databasesat the same time or in groups; (4) the sophisticated search software; and (5) theability to access only needed data without having a massive amount of data ononeõs own system.chemical sciences datathe work of chemists depends on many sorts of data, including compendiaof text, patents, numerical tabulations, spectra rendered as analog data, and mobits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c211lecular structures presented both as images and in tables of bond lengths andangles. a typical textual database is the registry of toxic effects of chemicalsubstances.7 another is the bibliographic database of the chemical abstractsservice.8 about 40 percent of the worldõs patents are for chemical substances;this information is included in derwent, the compendium of patents carriedby stn international and other online services.9the numerical databases incorporate thermodynamic and thermophysical data,such as heats of formation and melting points; mechanical properties, such ascompressibility; transport properties, such as heat conductivity and viscosity; andkinetic data, such as rate coefficient and activation energy. some databases, particularly the older ones, such as the beilstein instituteõs compendium of all knownorganic substances and its counterpart for inorganic and organometallic compoundsfrom the gmelin institute, focus on the substances themselves.10 others, such asthe database on atomic energy levels from the national institute of standards andtechnology, catalog generic properties of a limited class of species, in this case allthe atomic species for which data are available. the cambridge structural database, originally created at the university of cambridge and now maintained by thecambridge crystallographic data centre, an independent organization created forthe purpose, is a comprehensive file of evaluated data of crystalline materials andsupporting references of much interest to materials scientists and chemists.11 stillothers, such as detherm from the fachinformationszentrum chemie andspecinfo from chemical concepts gmbh, carry data on specific properties of asmany substances as possibleñthermophysical properties for detherm andnuclear magnetic resonance and infrared spectra for specinfo. one journal, thejournal of physical and chemical reference data, publishes tabulations of evaluated data in conventional periodical form; these data generally reappear in largeelectronic databases.many of the large chemical databases originated in europe, particularly ingermany, where the chemical industry and academic science thrived a century ago.the older databases appeared as bound volumes. then looseleaf forms becamethe mode of presentation. now, most of the databases are available online and incomputerreadable form such as cdrom as well.chemists and materials scientists who use small amounts of data to identifysubstances during a series of experiments need the data quickly, and so they usehandbooks, local reference libraries or, when they can, online material. often theyneed information on the quality of the data, such as the spectral resolution oftabulated infrared absorptions. they also need to be able to search databases forsubstances with related structures or properties. consequently, software tools forlinking data describing related substances are important for the working chemist.the provision of many kinds of data in chemistry, materials science, andcondensedmatter physics involves deriving and providing analytic representationsof physical and chemical properties. this practice is important because scientistsand engineers often need accurate values for properties over a range of conditionsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212bits of powersuch as temperature and pressure. a significant effort in data analysis thus isdirected toward finding underlying relationships on which physically and chemically sound mathematical representations can be constructed. one example is theequation of state, which links equilibrium properties such as density and internalenergy with temperature and pressure.genomic sequence and related datainformation on dna sequences, complete genomes of organisms, and macromolecular gene products is readily available electronically. these data havegiven rise to new concepts in the life sciences and to the development of newresearch fields, as well as to discoveries of commercial consequence such as thedevelopment of novel drugs and vaccines, diagnostic tools in medicine, improvedplant varieties with better growth characteristics and improved food properties,and bacteria needed for environmental remediation. a crucial component of thiscapacity for innovation is largescale international collaboration in generating,assembling, and disseminating the necessary data. the need to collect, analyze,and manage the data is leading to interdisciplinary research involving computerscience and engineering, database design and artificial intelligence, and basicbiological science.exchange of this information is accomplished through a number of databasesat several institutions supported by national governmental research funding agencies, primarily the national center for biotechnology information and the genome database in the united states, the dna database of japan, the europeanmolecular biology organization, and the european bioinformatics institute.12each organization has agreed to collect data deposited by academic, government,or industrial laboratories, put them into a transparent standard format, exchangethem daily in order to maintain a common international database, and make themaccessible (through the world wide web, by email, and so on) for retrieval andanalysis at any time from anywhere in the world. databases of sequencing andprotein structure information are linked through the retrieval system to otherrelated databases (e.g., structural and molecular data, genetic maps, informationon genetic diseases, and life sciences literature), so that a scientist searching for aparticular dna gene sequence can also examine the crystal structure of theprotein in question and perhaps retrieve information about a related disease inhumans as well.the coordination of this database effort, the definition of standards, andplanning for the future are being done by database staff and advisory committees.currently, the international database collection contains about 500 million nucleicacid bases (the individual chemical compounds that link to make up nucleic acid(dna or rna) sequences) from more than 16,000 organisms. data are beinggenerated so rapidly that the database doubles in size every 12 months. thesedata are essential to groundbreaking work in molecular biology and to progressbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c213in the human genome project, which is determining the sequence of the approximately 109 nucleotides (the combining form of the nucleic acid bases) containedin human chromosomes.13 it is expected that by the time this effort is complete inless than 5 years, it will have a great impact on the development of diagnostic andtherapeutic tools for many human diseases that are currently not treatable orwhose symptoms only are amenable to mitigation.currently, there are no intellectual, political, or proprietary barriers limitinginternational access to and use of these data. the barriers are technical andeconomic. the most important technical barrier involves equipment and infrastructure limitations on potential end usersõ capability to access and then makeuse of the wealth of information available. these data and their free availabilityto researchers in the life sciences are contributing to the rapid development ofnew concepts and applications, and there is a great desire and consequent pressure by academic and industrial institutions to keep the data freely accessibleinternationally in the future.hubble space telescope archivethe hubble space telescope (hst) is an example of a science program withsignificant international participation and open access to the data. hst wasdeveloped by nasa with the participation (nominally 15 percent) of the european space agency (esa) under a memorandum of understanding negotiatedbetween nasa and esa. esa also participates in its operation. hst is available for use by the international astronomy community. all science data arearchived, kept proprietary (to the astronomer who proposed the observation) for1 year, and then made available to other astronomers. the archive is accessible tothe public via the internet.14science operations for hst are centered at the space telescope scienceinstitute (stsci) in baltimore, operated by the association of universities forresearch in astronomy (aura), a university consortium, under contract tonasa. aura has international affiliates and incorporates esa representativesin its oversight of the stsci. esa also contributes staff to the stsci; they areintegrated into the total operation. esa astronomers participate in hst committees and advisory structure. in addition, esa operates a small space telescope(hst) european coordinating facility (the stecf) in garching, germany, incollaboration with the european southern observatory.hst observing is open to all astronomers worldwide via a peer reviewsystem. under the memorandum of understanding, astronomers from esa member countries are entitled to 15 percent of the observing time on average. inpractice, they receive at least this amount through the normal peer review system.all hst data are received by the stsci. they undergo routine processingand calibration, and both the calibrated and uncalibrated data and the engineeringand other ancillary data are archived. the primary archive for hst data at thebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214bits of powerstsci contains about 2 terabytes of data and is growing at the rate of a gigabyte perday. a duplicate copy of the science data archive is transferred to the stecf, anda third copy of nonproprietary data is maintained by the canadian astronomy datacenter in victoria, british columbia. each of these data centers also archivesdifferent sets of related data. under nasa policy for hst, nonproprietary data arefreely available, but requests for large amounts of data must be approved by nasaheadquarters and are subject to a negotiated level of cost recovery, typically themarginal cost of reproduction.data analysis software appropriate for hst users was developed and ismaintained by the stsci and is freely distributed to astronomers. it operates in aportable data analysis environment, the image reduction and analysis facility(iraf), developed by the national optical astronomy observatories. althoughother large (and small) data analysis systems exist, iraf has been adopted by anumber of astronomy projects and is used by a large portion of the astronomycommunity both in the united states and in other countries. it incorporates bothgeneral astronomyoriented data analysis tools and specific packages for individual observatories and facilities.geophysical datathe world data centersin the earth sciences, with the impetus of the international geophysical yearin 1957, the world data centers (wdcs) were set up under the aegis of theinternational council of scientific unions (icsu).15 their function was toprovide international access to various types of observational geophysical data.this effort was very successful, and geoscientists since that time have takenadvantage of the wdcs as an effective mechanism for the exchange of data. thewdcs circumvented what otherwise would have been insurmountable politicalbarriers to exchange of scientific data in the era of the cold war and allowedscientists from the east and the west to use data collected by both sides. theprotocol for the wdcs was that any scientist could obtain any of the data residingin the wdcs without government or other restrictions. of course, only subsets ofdata collected in different countries were placed in the wdcs, but substantialamounts were made available. initially, the data were in analog form, but inrecent years data holdings have been archived and disseminated in digital form(e.g., via tapes), and additional wdcs have been established for different typesof geophysical data. increasingly, users can browse the data holdings and receivedata via electronic networks.in the united states, national data centers, such as the national geophysicaldata center operated by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration(noaa), serve a dual role, with a subset of their holdings designated as a wdcand therefore available to any user, domestic or foreign. other examples includebits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c215the u.s. geological surveyõs earth resources observation systems (eros)data center, which houses the newly established wdc for land remote sensing,where a subset of remote sensing data is made available,16 and the department ofenergyõs carbon dioxide information analysis center, which also serves as awdc for trace gases in the atmosphere.17 although the wdcs provide one veryeffective avenue for the transnational flow of geophysical data, many importantobservational data sets are not available through the wdcs and must be obtainedthrough other means, some of which are discussed below.seismic datamany thousands of seismic events occur throughout the world each year,some large and destructive. the detection and location of earthquakes and determination of their magnitudes require a globally distributed network of wellcalibrated, sensitive seismic stations that continuously record ground motions.such a network necessarily involves seismic stations in many countries aroundthe world. data are gathered by a combination of individual institutions anddifferent regional and global networks operated by individual organizations under agreements with countries or institutions where the stations are located. thedetermination of the location, depth, time of occurrence, and magnitude of anearthquake makes use of data from ground motions observed by many stations, atdifferent distances and azimuths from the source. monitoring of global seismicactivity therefore involves the transnational flow of data and information both inreal time and on a recurring basis.global seismic monitoring serves purposes other than earthquake hazardassessment and mitigation, the most important being enforcement of international treaties governing underground nuclear explosions. underground explosions are recorded by the same seismic stations that record earthquakes; likeearthquakes, they can be detected and located. considerable past and currentresearch is devoted to developing reliable methods for distinguishing underground nuclear explosions from natural earthquakes and from mining blasts.under protocols currently being developed among participating countries, allparties are to have equal access to continuous realtime recordings from approximately 50 seismic arrays and from many additional single stations distributedaround the world. each country will then carry out its own assessment of recorded events. the transnational flow of these data in nearreal time will beformalized as part of the comprehensive test ban treaty.in the early part of this century, the international exchange of seismic datawas accomplished by a scientist writing to the seismologist operating each stationof interest and asking to borrow the original (analog) recording of the event beingstudied. when the work was complete, the users returned the original recordingsto the respective station operators. by contrast, a recently implemented dataaccess capability at the incorporated research institutions for seismology (iris)bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216bits of powerdata management center (dmc) allows any scientist (u.s. or international) todownload via the internet the signals recorded at approximately 20 global seismicstations within about 1 hour of an eventõs occurrence (magnitude greater than 5).18similarly convenient internet access to continuous recordings of many other international stations is possible through the dmc, but with a time lag necessitated bynot having realtime or nearrealtime data transmission from some of the availablestations.irisõs dmc has become the international federation of digital seismicnetworksõ archive for continuous digital data. global digital seismic data fromstations distributed around the globe are available through the dmc. users canbrowse electronically to determine what data are available and can place requestsfor data sets they wish to receive; their requests are filled and the data transferredeither electronically via the internet (for modestsize data sets) or via highdensity media such as exabyte cassettes (for large requests). the dmc also servesas a broker for individuals who wish to obtain data from foreign stations that arenot routinely archived at the dmc. this valuable service is accomplished bymeans of data transfer links to data archives in other countries; users wouldotherwise have to access and transfer data from these various sources individually. in this way, the dmc operates as a òvirtualó data center from which the userextracts desired data, some of which do not physically reside at the center.the world weather watchthe world weather watch is the most formally organized international global observation, communication, processing, and archiving system at this time.19this distinction stems from the early recognition that scientific understandingand prediction of the atmosphere, even for only a day or two in advance, requireobservations from very large areas. beginning more than 100 years ago, theobservations were sent by communication systems in nearreal time throughinternationally agreed upon arrangements and procedures. for the last severaldecades, data have been processed and archived on a global basis through asystem of world and regional meteorological centers and world and regional datacenters for meteorology and oceanography. during this period the world weatherwatch has developed many of the characteristics required for an effective systemfor international exchanges of scientific data and therefore can be considered oneof the primary models for other such systems.the development of the world weather watch was accelerated in the 1960sas a result of the potential capability of earthorbiting satellites to obtain atmospheric and oceanographic data on a global basis, and the advent of computerscapable of handling large volumes of diverse data for numerical weather predictions on a global basis. an extensive planning and coordination process was putin place in the world meteorological organization (wmo) to expand the globalobserving component of the world weather watch through polar and geostationbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c217ary satellites and additional in situ observation, to develop an improved telecommunications system capable of exchanging data in real time among all nations,and to establish a system of supporting data centers. three such centers, inwashington, d.c., moscow, and melbourne, were established in the mid1960s,along with regional meteorological centers to serve specific continental and oceanic areas. these world meteorological centers are responsible for the preparation and distribution of an agreed upon set of global products to all nations,through the global telecommunications system of the world weather watch.similarly, the regional meteorological centers prepare products as agreed fortheir specific areas of responsibility. the archival, storage, and retrieval systemsfor retrospective use of the data are maintained by the world data centers, and,by virtue of recent expansion, the regional data centers.wmo does not operate any observing stations, telecommunication systems,or processing centers; through its member nations wmo is responsible only forthe planning and coordination of the world weather watch. this includes developing the scope and extent of the observing networks, the characteristics andstandards of the telecommunication systems, and the products to be prepared atthe centers. the world weather watch, therefore, is built on the national meteorological systems of each member nation. the national meteorological system inthe united states is quite extensive because of the great impact of weather,especially severe storms such as hurricanes, tornadoes, blizzards, and flash floods,on people and industry. services are provided through a publicprivate partnership. the federal government is responsible for public forecasts and forecastsrelated to the safety of life and protection of propertyñsevere weather and floodwarnings for the country and surrounding oceans, and forecasts and advisoriesfor aviation terminals and en route paths. the private sector provides tailoredforecasts for specific clients, and through television, radio stations, and, to anincreasing degree, the internet leads in the dissemination of severe weather andflood warnings to the public.the federal government operates an extensive satellite and groundbasedobserving system, together with meteorological prediction and data centers, toobtain the data and products needed to carry out its responsibility for providingservices. these data and products are made available to the private sector with norestrictions and at low incremental costs. these same data and products are usedin fulfilling the requirements and agreements within the world weather watchand for research internationally and nationally. for example, the data from u.s.geostationary satellites can be received directly by centers in south america; thedata from u.s. polarorbiting meteorological satellites are distributed on theworld weather watch telecommunication system; and the products prepared bythe national meteorological center near washington, d.c., which are designedto meet national requirements, are provided to all countries through the worldweather watch. likewise, the data are available for all research programs,primarily through the noaa national climatic data center and the nationalbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218bits of poweroceanographic data center. other nations have functioned in a similar wayñthe same centers fulfilling both national needs and international commitments.the close interaction between operational meteorological services and research in the atmospheric sciences, nationally and internationally, has provedextremely effective. during the late 1960s and 1970s, an extensive programñthe global atmospheric research programñwas undertaken internationally byicsu and wmo to improve the accuracy and extend the time range of weatherforecasts. a joint mechanism was established within which the icsu scientistsled the planning of major observational field experiments and wmo led theimplementation through national contributions of member nations. the largestand most complex was a global observational experiment during which the worldweather watch global observation system was augmented with additional observations from ships, aircraft, and satellites to provide the most comprehensiveset of global observations ever acquired. again, the world data centers wereresponsible for archiving the data from the experiment for use in the associatedresearch programs. simultaneously during this period, the data from the worldweather watch were being used by the u.s. government and private sector toprovide services. such multipurpose use of meteorological data has historicallybeen very effective and efficient.however, the traditionally unrestricted exchange of data in meteorology hasbeen placed in jeopardy in recent years. pressure on weather services from somegovernments to charge users for services other than public weather forecasts andsevere weather and flood warnings has led to proposals to place restrictions onthe use of data and to charge substantially for realtime data or data sets betweendata centers. the meteorological services in western europe have been the mostaggressive in charging industries and organizations for specialized services andprivate meteorological companies for data. this situation was a major consideration at the meeting of the wmo congress in 1995, which adopted an understanding by members of the wmo that they would endorse the free and unrestricted exchange of data for research and education, and for an agreed set ofdatañsatellite and in situñto be exchanged in real time. however, it included aprovision that an individual country could place restraints on data made availablebeyond the agreed level,20 and this has resulted both in a reduction of data freelyavailable for research as well as in significant adminstrative expenses.notes1.see <http://www.nndc.bnl.gov >.2.see <http://wwwcdf.fnal.gov/> for additional information on the collider detector at fermilab.3.see <http://xxx.lanl.gov/> for the eprint archives.4.summaries of data sources for materials science and engineering (both print and electronic)have been published. see h. wawrousek, j.h. westbrook, and w. grattidge (1989), òdatasources of mechanical and physical properties of engineering materials,ó physik daten, 301,fachinformationszentrum, karlsruhe, germany; j.h. westbrook and w. grattidge, eds. (1988),bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c219òthe codata referral database (crd),ó based on the codata database directories andthe 1988 revision of the unesco òinventory of data referral sources in science and technology,ó available from codata, 51 boul. de montmorency, paris; j.h. westbrook (1986),òmaterials information sources,ó encyclopedia of materials science and engineering, m.b.bever, ed., p. 527, pergamon; f.c. allan and w.r. ferrell (1989), database 12,(3):5058;m.k. booker (1986)òcomputerized materials databases,ó encyclopedia of materials scienceand engineering, pp. 796800, pergamon. the role of the computer in accessing and manipulating materials data for alloy design is discussed by westbrook in j.h. westbrook (1993),òdata compilation, analysis, and access: the role of the computer,ó mrs bull., 18:4449.r.a. matula (1989), òthe importance of numeric databases to materials science,ó j. res.natl. inst. stand. technol., 94:914, emphasizes the importance, in an industrial setting, ofcomputer access to numeric databases in materials science.5.functioning almost entirely without external financial support and on a volunteer basis, thiscodata task group coordinates work in this field, promotes standards, communication, andawareness; assists in education and training; and publishes an international register of materialsdatabase managers.6.see <http://www.cas.org/stn.html>.7.see <http://www.rs.ch/krinfo/products/datastar/sheets/rtec.htm>.8.see <http://www.cas.org> for information about the chemical abstracts service.9.see <http://www.derwent.co.uk>.10.access fees to these are often prohibitive. several respondents to the committeeõs òinquiry tointerested partiesó (see appendix d) noted specifically that they would like access to thebeilstein databases but considered them too costly.11.see the cambridge crystallographic data centre home page at < http://csdvx2.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/ccdchome.html>.12.see the national center for biotechnology information home page at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/>.13.see <http:/www.nghgr.nih.bov/hgp/> for additional information regarding the human genome project.14.see <http://www.stsci.edu/archive.html> for additional information about the hubble spacetelescope archive.15.see <http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/wdcmain.html> for a description of the world data centerssystem.16.see <http://edc.www.cr.usgs.gov> for the eros data center home page.17.see <http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov> for the carbon dioxide information analysis center home page.18.see <http://www.iris.washington.edu/dmc.new.html> for the iris data management centerhome page.19.for additional information on the world weather watch, see the world meteorological organization home page at <http://www.wmo.ch:80/www/www.html>.20.see r.s. greenfield, e.w. friday, and m.c. yerg (1995), òwmo adopts a resolution governing the international exchange of meteorological and related data and products,ó bulletin ofthe american meteorological society, 76(8):14781479.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220bits of power220appendixdinquiry to interested parties on issues in thetransborder flow of scientific datadear colleague:the u.s. national academy of sciences/national research council (nas/nrc) is undertaking a study to review important issues and trends in the international flow of scientific data, particularly along transborder electronic networks.the study will characterize the technical, legal, economic, and policy issues thathave an influence (favorable or negative) on access by the scientific communityto scientific data. the scope of the study includes symbolic and substantivetextual data as well as numerical data; bibliographic data are only included to theextent that they are related to substantive and numerical data. the study willidentify and describe both the positive aspects and the barriers or hindrances thathave impacts on research in the natural sciences (physical, astronomical, biological, and geological) and across those disciplines. these will be illustrated byrepresentative examples. finally, it will identify medium and longterm trendslikely to have significant disciplinespecific and interdisciplinary influence onthe access to and use of scientific data, particularly in electronic forms, and,where appropriate, suggest approaches that could help overcome barriers andhindrances in the international context.the attached òinquiry to interested partiesó is a tool to help us identifysignificant issues and provide important information to us from the viewpoints ofdata users and suppliers regarding transborder dissemination of and access toscientific data in the natural sciences from the legal, policy, economic, and technical perspectives. because of the nature of this inquiry and the means by whichit is being distributed (i.e., not a demographically controlled sample), we do notbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d221intend it to be a survey base for a statistical study. rather, we are interested in facts,interpretations, opinions, and real examples that will help us gain insight into themain issues of the study. we also are seeking illustrative material that we can useto communicate the situation to the scientific and governmental establishments.the goal of our study is to help improve access to scientific data and servicesinternationally. we therefore hope that your interests are common with ours, andthat you will assist us by providing your views on these issues by taking sometime to fill out and return this form. we recognize that not every respondent islikely to be able to comment on every question, and we do not wish to have thespecific questions to be a limit on what you wish to inform us about. therefore,please skip any questions that you do not feel you can address meaningfully, andadd any points that you would like for us to know or consider. feel free to useadditional pages or attach other pertinent information if you have more that youwish to say to us.please send your response and any related documentation by 31 january1996 to:paul f. uhlirdirector, u.s. national committee for codatanational academy of sciences/national research council2101 constitution avenue, n.w.washington, d.c. 20418 u.s.a.telephone: (202) 3343061; fax: (202) 3342154internet: bits@nas.eduwe very much look forward to hearing from you.sincerely,r. stephen berrystudy chairmaninquiry to interested parties on issues in thetransborder flow of scientific dataplease provide the following information:name:address:bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222bits of powertelephone/fax/email (optional):brief description of your data activities and discipline background:are you answering this questionnaire as a scientific data: user ( ), producer ( ),distributor ( ), vendor ( ), system manager ( ), network operator ( ), policymaker( ), or other ? [please check all that apply.]1.barriers to data access. some restrictions on access to scientific datafrequently are considered necessary to protect various interests as well asthe integrity of the data. in your experience, have restrictions on data been aproblem? can you identify any specific impacts or trends? please explain.2.pricing of data. if you use data for scientific research, please tell us:(a)what data sets you have recently used for which you or your institutionpaid nothing, and in what form did you get these data (e.g.,worldwideweb, other online, cdrom, diskette, tape, film, paper,etc.)?(b)what data have you recently used for which you paid any amount(including the cost of reproduction or communication connectivity); inwhat form did you get these data, how were you charged (e.g., flat rate,charge per use, etc.), and how much?(c)what data would you like to use for your research, but consider themtoo expensive/costly? what is the cost of such data and what is theirvalue (apart from cost)?(d)for the data listed under (c) above, what arrangements could helpmake these data available to you? in what form would you like to beable to get these data?bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d223if you supply data for scientific research (and perhaps for other uses), please tell us:(e)are you a profitmaking enterprise; if not, what is the form and intentof your organization?(f)what kind of data do you supply that are used by scientific researchers?(g)besides scientific researchers, what kind of other users of your dataare there, if any?(h)do you provide special pricing for research/academic users? if so,what is your pricing policy?(i)what are the media you use to distribute your data (e.g., paper, film,tapes, diskettes, cdroms, online, etc.)?(j)if you sell or otherwise market your data, what is your perception ofthe price elasticity and demand for the data you distribute? whatchanges would you make to your data products and services if demandwere to increase?bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224bits of power3.protection of intellectual property.(a)what are the principal legal and technical mechanisms actually usedfor protecting unauthorized uses of data in your country/institution/discipline area?(b)can you provide any information about how such legal or technicalmechanisms are implemented or enforced? what are the positive andnegative impacts?4.less developed countries.(a)in your experience, what have been the principal problems associatedwith transferring data into or out of òless developed countries,ó including those nations from the former soviet union?(b)what can be done to help alleviate these problems, especially by theinternational scientific community?5.electronic networks.(a)has the development and growth of the internet and other electronicnetworking services affected the way you access or distribute datainternationally? please give specific examples if you can.(b)how do you think the situation with electronic networks will change inthe next 510 years or so, and what are the likely impacts to youractivities?bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d2256.other technical issues.(a)besides those associated with electronic networks, what are the mostimportant technical benefits or problems you have experienced in either disseminating or accessing data internationally?(b) what changes do you anticipate over the next 510 years, and what arethe likely impacts to your activities?7.scientific data for global problems.(a)in your view, what is the role of international scientific data for addressing global problems, now and in the future? please elaborate.(b)what can be done to enhance the availability or exchange of scientificdata to better address these concerns?8.other issues. do you have any specific concerns or examples of successesthat you believe should be considered in this study? in addition, we wouldwelcome your suggestions for other institutions or individuals to contactwith regard to these questions, as well as any references to key documents.[note: a summary of the most useful responses will be available on the u.s. national committeefor codata web site at: <http://www.nas.edu/cpsma/codata.htm>.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index227227aaccess to scientific data. see internationalaccess to scientific data; data,unrestricted accessadvanced very high resolution radiometer(avhrr), 58, 123africa, 42, 46, 70, 107african data dissemination service (adds),107agencies. see federal government scienceagenciesagreement on trade related aspects ofintellectual property rights (trips),150, 154156, 161, 170, 178, 183184alloy phase diagram internationalcommission, 209american association for the advancement ofscience, 92, 94, 109american astronomical society, 66american geophysical union, 64american institute of physics, 64american meteorological society, 64american society for mechanical engineers, 96animation, 4, 57, 65, 6768, 196anticompetitive exclusive property rights. seeexclusive property rightsantitrust law, 142, 164applied research, 1, 18, 20, 133archives, 5, 5960, 72, 8283, 196. see alsolongterm data sets; retention, longterm; retrospective data setsargentina, 54association for progressive communications,42, 46association of american geographers, 64association of universities for research inastronomy (aura), 117, 213astronomical data center, 66astronomical sciences, 1, 19, 34, 5354, 66astronomical society of the pacific, 66astronomy and astrophysics, 66astrophysical journal, 66astrophysics data system (ads), 66, 71asynchronous transfer mode (atm), 25, 32,35, 196atmospheric sciences, 55, 57, 78, 216218australia, 66australian oceanographic data centre, 118authentication issues, 13, 43automatic license, 164bbalancing divergent interests, 2, 139145, 162,164170indexbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228indexbarriers to access, 3, 4, 8, 76, 89. see alsoeconomic factors and trends;international access to scientific data;legal infrastructurebasic research, 12, 7, 9, 1718, 97, 133, 163164beilstein databases, 61, 211belgium, 205berne convention for the protection of literaryand artistic works, 9, 135, 145, 155,160161, 170, 183òbig science.ó see òmegascienceó programsbilateral agreements, 81biological data, 56, 7274, 84biological sciences, 1, 5, 11, 19, 5657, 73, 8388books. see publishers, commercialbrazil, 54broadband transmission, 28, 30, 197bromley principles, 79, 82brookhaven national laboratory, 63, 205òbrowsing,ó 29, 143, 197ccambridge crystallographic data centre, 211,219canada, 206carbon dioxide information analysis center(cdiac), 71, 105, 215, 219center for information and numerical dataanalysis and synthesis (cindas), 119centers for disease control and prevention(cdc), 120chemical abstracts service, 211, 219chemical sciences, 5051, 210chile, 41china. see peopleõs republic of chinacircular a130, 126, 131, 163, 187climate. see global climate changecodata. see committee on data for scienceand technologycodata commission on standardizedterminology for access to biologicaldata banks, 11, 85, 88, 101codata task group on fundamentalconstants, 88codata task group on outreach, education,and communication, 108cold war, end of, 4, 21, 77, 111, 214collaborative research, 6, 14, 21, 29, 3132, 45,63, 97100, 207208collider detector at fermilab (cdf), 207, 218commercialization of data, 29, 31, 99, 111,168169. see also marketscommercial users, 120, 167commission of the european communities(cec), 8, 145148, 154155, 164committee on data for science andtechnology (codata), viii, 12, 19,85, 88, 219committee on earth observation satellites(ceos), 9495committee on geophysical and environmentaldata, 79committee on science and technology indeveloping countries (costed), 108communications. see also wirelesscommunicationcosts of, 2728, 41, 42, 44twoway, 6, 13compact diskread only memory (cdrom),34, 45, 64, 98, 126, 141competitiveness, 7, 9, 116, 148, 162. see alsoexclusive property rights; unfaircompetition lawscompton gamma ray observatory, 60, 81compulsory license, 147, 159, 169computational materials science, 67computer science research, 13, 43computers, 13, 4042, 44, 102, 110. see alsopersonal computershybrid analog/digital, 26scientific requirements for, 36, 39computing, costs of, 2728conflicts of law. see legislationcongressional budget office, 5861, 104consortium for international earth sciencesinformation network (ciesin), 94, 99,108constants. see fundamental constants; naturalconstantsconstitution. see u.s. constitutionconsultative group on internationalagricultural research (cgiar), 107108contracts, 135harsh terms of, 159copying. see photocopyingcopyright act of 1976, 140, 143144copyright law, 16, 48, 136140, 143144, 156.see also fair use; noncopyrightabledatabases; royaltiesbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index229costs. see computing; data; reproduction anddistributioncouncil of ministers, 148, 152, 154156cyberspace, 9, 143, 145, 161, 197ddata, 46, 2122. see also networksaccessing (see international access toscientific data; full and open exchangeof data)acquiring, 82analog, 196collecting, 2728, 30, 62, 198compatibility of, 5, 8890cost of, 6 (see also data, pricing)declassification of, 7778describing, 36, 38, 4951digitizing, 2, 11, 73, 101, 111distributing, 4, 67, 6264, 114116, 129evaluating, 199exchanging, 21, 83, 198growing volume of, 4, 58historical, 11, 71, 101indexing, 36, 38interfacing, 75managing, 10, 11, 13, 6164, 198modeling, 65, 70nondiscriminatory availability, 79nonproprietary, 79preserving, 57, 6162, 71pricing, 7, 14, 124126primary, 21, 49, 202privatizing, 67, 14, 111, 116, 120124, 202(see also intranets)processing, 50, 198providing (see solesource data providers)purging, 82raw, 202remote access, 203rescuing, 13, 98retaining (see data, storing)retrieval, 83, 206sources of, 11spectral, 203storing, 4, 21, 38, 82, 110transferring, 198transnational exchange of, 19, 21, 83, 97100unique, 163universality of, 48unrestricted access, 83using (see documentation of data sets)validating, 198, 204verifying, 100, 204database industry, 153database publishers. see publishersdatabases, 199. see also genome databases;noncopyrightable databasescommercial value of, 168converting, 89electronic, 8òinsubstantial parts of,ó 152, 157158managing, 198relational, 203vulnerability of, 140142data centers, 5, 21, 60, 83data integrity, 198data management center (dmc), 216decryption, 198. see also encryptiondeoxyribonucleic acid (dna), 48, 56, 73, 212derivative work rights, 139, 151detherm, 211developing countries, 6, 12, 4042, 90100accessing data from, 97100digital versus analog data, 20digital versatile disk (dvd), 34, 45digitizing. see datadirective on the legal protection of databases,european, 9, 142, 148160distributed networks of data centers, 83documentation of data sets, 5, 11, 7677, 106eeapj. see astrophysical journalearth interactions, 64earth observation satellite company(eosat), 121earth observing system (eos), 30, 45, 80earth resources observation systems (eros),57, 58, 62, 106, 118, 215, 219earth sciences, 5, 5456, 69, 75earth system processes, 6, 54, 97earthquakes, 55. see also seismic arrays andstationsecological society of america, 64economic factors and trends, 1, 68, 110131,132133decreasing computing costs, 3, 27restrictions and barriers, 3, 9192education. see science educationelectronic publication, 6465, 142, 165, 199bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230indexelectronic storage media, 4, 21rapid obsolescence of, 36, 38, 72, 74encryption, 43, 156, 159160, 199engineering applications, 51england. see united kingdomenvironmental sciences, 5. see alsoobservational environmental scienceseprint archive, 199, 208209european bioinformatics institute, 212european community, 93, 134, 145148, 154european dictionaire automatique, 33european directive on databases. see directiveon the legal protection of databaseseuropean molecular biology organization, 212european southern observatory, 54european space agency (esa), 54, 118, 213european space information system, 117evaluated nuclear data file/b (endf/b), 119,206evaluated nuclear structure data file(ensdf), 52, 205206exclusive property rights, 136137, 146extraction, 157158unauthorized, 158unfair, 147òextraction right,ó 154social costs, 154, 162ffair use, 89, 12, 1516, 143144, 167168, 171fatty acid methyl ester (fame) system, 120federal government science agencies, 23, 13,20, 44. see also individual agenciesfederation of digital seismographic networks(fdsn), 59, 216feist publications, inc. v. rural telephoneservice co., 8, 16, 139, 154fiberoptic communication, 24, 26fidonet, 42file transfer protocol (ftp), 131first amendment. see u.s. constitutionflexible image transport system (fits), 34food and agricultural organization (fao), 86,93foreign aid, 1213, 44, 92france, 206freedom of scientific inquiry, 2, 17full and open exchange of data, 3, 7, 910, 15,17, 22, 8182, 101, 199fundamental constants, 56fundamental research. see basic researchggemini project, 54genbank, 117genome databases, 56, 117, 212213geographic information system (gis), 7576geological sciences, 1, 19. see also earthsciences; environmental sciences;observational environmental sciencesgeophysical data, 75, 214218global atmospheric research program, 218global atmospheric watch, 69global change research information office,55, 69, 79, 82global climate change, 6, 55global climate observing system, 69, 105global data sharing. see international access toscientific dataglobal observational data sets, 97global ocean observing system, 69, 105global terrestrial observing system, 6970,105government science agencies. see federalgovernment science agenciesgreat britain. see united kingdomògroup of sevenó nations, 10, 101hhigh densityread only memory (hdrom), 45high energy astrophysical observatory 2, 60highenergy physics (hep), 206208highperformance parallel interface (hippi),30historical data. see datahouse. see u.s. house of representativesh.r. 3531. see u.s. database investment andintellectual property antipiracy acthubble space telescope (hst), 4, 60, 110,113, 117, 120, 213214, 219human genome project, 4, 23, 27, 120, 213,219hypertext markup language (html), 3334iicarus, 66iceland, 183image reduction and analysis facility (iraf),214incompatibilities. see standardizationbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index231incorporated research institutions forseismology (iris), 5759, 119, 215216, 219incremental cost pricing, 14, 125126indonesia, 42information infrastructure task force (iitf)white paper, 143, 155156, 159161information market policy action (impact)program, 145information technology, 34, 24, 110trends in, 2446infrared astronomical satellite, 60innovations, 1, 133, 136, 140subpatentable, 137in situ measurements, 75, 97institute of physics (u.k.), 64òinsubstantial parts.ó see databasesintangible property, 161integrated services digital network (isdn)services, 32intellectual property rights (ipr), 5, 810, 48,132188interdisciplinary research, 7476intergovernmental oceanographic commission,70intergovernmental organizations, 63, 93. seealso individual organizationsinternational access to scientific data, 2, 4042,90100developments affecting, 210, 17safeguarding, 710, 166169international atomic energy agency (iaea),52, 205international committee on the taxonomy ofviruses, 85international cooperation, 19, 83international council of scientific unions(icsu), 1013, 44, 55, 88, 99, 101103,108, 214, 219international decade of natural disasterreduction, 75international foundation for science (ifs), 108international geospherebiosphere programme(igbp), 4, 22, 27, 55, 69, 77, 106international organization for standardization(iso), 46international organizations, 6, 12, 93. see alsoindividual organizationsinternational research, 5861international research and exchange board(irex), 94, 109international science foundation, 109international telecommunications union, 13, 44international ultraviolet explorer, 60international union of biological sciences, 85international union of microbiologicalsciences, 88international union of pharmacology, 85internet, 3, 29, 31, 42, 65, 68, 200. see alsoworld wide webcongestion on, 8, 26, 3537, 126128internet engineering task force (ietf), 12,32, 34, 43internet protocol next generation (ipng), 35,45internet ii, 13, 35intranets, 4, 29, 35, 200investment, 9, 154, 168. see also profit; returnon investment; òsubstantial investmentóincentives for, 141italy, 207jjapan, 205journals. see scientific journalskkenya, 42òknowbots,ó 26, 33, 200kuwait, 205llaboratory physical sciences, 5, 5152, 205data compatibility in, 8890data exchanges in, 205212land remote sensing policy act of 1992, 121landsat, 77, 111, 121123, 163language translation, 33large research programs. see òmegascienceóprogramslatex, 65, 88, 200, 207208laws. see legislationlegal infrastructure, 1, 810, 139restrictions and barriers, 3, 9, 136legislation, 132. see also antitrust law;copyright law; trade secret law;trademark laws; unfair competitionlaws; individual lawsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232indexconflicts in, 161pending, 910, 160161, 171legislative process, 8, 15liability principles, 137, 148, 164liability regime, 136libraries, 8, 145licenses, 151, 154. see also automatic license;compulsory licenselicensing fees, 165liechtenstein, 183longterm data sets, 82. see also archives;retention, longterm; retrospective datasetslos alamos national laboratory, 3031, 45, 208mmachine translation, 29manufacturing applications, 18, 51marginal cost pricing, 7, 14, 126market forces, 3, 162164, 168market power, 151, 164abuses of, 154market price system, 113markets, 9, 111114, 139, 140, 162164. seealso competitivenessmaterials sciences, 67, 106107, 211media. see electronic storage media; print mediaòmegascienceó programs, 19, 23, 5861metadata, 106, 201. see also documentationof data setsmetals information analysis center (miac),119meteorology, 79, 216mexico, 76, 98microbiology, 96microelectromechanical systems (mems), 25mission to planet earth (mtpe), 193modeling and simulation in materials scienceand engineering, 67molecular biology, 67, 212monopoliesprofitmaking, 7, 151152, 158, 162public, 116regulated, 124unrestricted, 7mooreõs law, 28, 44, 201multicast broadcast backbone network(mbone), 3132, 45multinational authorship, 21nnational aeronautics and space administration(nasa), 34, 45, 54, 64, 8081, 93, 117,213214data availability policy, 8081national cancer institute, 41national center for atmospheric research, 117national center for biotechnology information(ncbi), 212, 219national climatic data center (ncdc), 72,119, 217national geophysical data center (ngdc), 72,214national human genome research institute, 22national information infrastructure, 193national institute of standards and technology(nist), 89national institutes of health (nih), 41, 117national land remote sensing satellite dataarchive, 62national library of medicine (nlm), 41national nuclear data center (nndc), 52, 6364, 206national oceanic and atmosphericadministration (noaa), 62, 98, 116,119, 121, 214, 217218national oceanographic data center (nodc),98, 217218national optical astronomy observatories, 214national research council (nrc), 20, 38, 4546, 54, 6869, 7475, 103109national science foundation (nsf), 31, 54, 85national security issues, 77national space policy 1996, 62, 79national space sciences data center, 117natural constants, 50natural language processing, 4, 29, 3233natural sciences, 1, 4, 16, 19, 111, 201netherlands, 205networks, 13, 2830, 83. see also fidonet;internet ii; realtimemonitoring and controlling, 4, 29, 3435vulnerability of, 36, 39, 140142ngos. see nongovernmental organizationsniche markets, 139nomenclature, 11, 8388. see also taxonomicdefinitions; terminologynoncopyrightable databases, 146147nongovernmental organizations (ngos), 81,9496. see also individual organizationsbits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index233nonvoluntary licensing. see compulsorylicensenordic catalogue rule, 146, 179norway, 46, 183nuclear database (nudat), 206nuclear information service, 118oobservational environmental sciences, 6983observational sciences, 56, 50, 53, 201observations, simultaneous, 53obsolescence. see electronic storage mediaoceanographic society of america, 64, 216office of management and budget (omb),126, 131, 159office of science and technology policy, 11,15, 90, 102, 171office of technology assessment (ota), 176online transmissions, 156open publication. see publication, openorganisation for economic cooperation anddevelopment (oecd), 10, 20, 27, 101organization of american states (oas), 93,108ppaleoclimatology world data center, 119pan american health organization, 93paris convention for the protection ofindustrial property, 135, 145, 170, 178patent and copyright systems, 8. see alsocopyright law; subpatentableinnovationspatent and trademark office (pto), 156, 160peer review, 11, 101peopleõs republic of china, 7273, 205personal computers (pcs), 35, 110photocopying, 132134, 155physical sciences, 1, 4, 19, 5152òplain oldó telephone service (pots), 32policy. see public policy; science policypopulation issues, 74portable operating system interface forcomputer environments (posix), 33post, telephone, and telegraph ministries(ptts), 40predigital status quo, 135139. see also digitalversus analog dataprice ceiling, 14, 126, 129price differentiation, 67, 124126, 129, 167168price discrimination, 14, 116, 124125, 129price of data. see dataprint media, 140. see also publishers; scientificjournalsprivacy issues, 48, 103private investment, 9incentives for, 141private monopolies, 116, 142private sector, 93, 96, 116, 120privatizing data. see dataprocessing data. see dataproduct differentiation, 14, 116professional societies, 5, 11, 49profit, 132133, 166property rights. see also intangible property;intellectual propertyexclusive (see exclusive property rights)protectionist, 14proprietary period, 11, 79proprietary rights, 48, 151, 162. see also data,nonproprietaryprotectionist strategy, 155156possible consequences of, 165publication, open, 17. see also electronicpublication; professional societies;publishers; scientific journalspublic domain, 8, 166public good, 7, 15, 164170, 202defined, 112113public health and safety, 6, 56public interest, 56, 9, 1718, 161exceptions to, 152, 158public investment, 14, 115, 128129, 133public monopolies, 116public policy, 1, 7, 62, 124. see also sciencepolicydebate over, 22public rights versus private rights, 8, 139145publicly funded research and data, 3, 7, 17,110131, 133publishers, 135, 142, 154, 166, 168commercial, 5, 52, 135database, 139, 166qquality control and assurance, 5, 11, 71, 101bits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234indexrramsey pricing, 124reciprocity clause, 155recommendations, 1015, 22, 4344, 81, 83,100103, 128129, 171regulatory approaches, differing, 145remote sensing, 204reproduction and distribution. see alsophotocopyingcost of, 79, 91research. see applied research; basic research;collaborative research; internationalcooperation; international research;publicly funded research and data;users of research dataretention, longterm, 5. see also archives;longterm data sets; retrospective datasetsretrospective data sets, 78. see also archives;longterm data sets; retention, longtermreturn on investment, 48, 168reverseengineering, 147, 156ribonucleic acid (rna), 73, 212rights. see derivative work rights; intellectualproperty rights; property rights;proprietary rights; public rights versusprivate rightsroyalties, 144russia, 205, 206ssabre foundation, 94, 109satellites, 25, 41, 58, 95, 110science agencies. see federal governmentscience agenciesscience and technology network international(stn), 211science education, 9, 13, 15, 9293science group thermodata europe, 209scientific data. see also dataaccessing (see international access toscientific data)defined, 16rapid growth of, 3, 17, 5758scientific issues, 47109defined, 4749progress in, 3scientific journals, 5, 12, 4849, 52scientific research. see applied research; basicresearch; collaborative research;international research; publicly fundedresearch; users of research datascientific understanding, 82scripps institution of oceanography, 118search capabilities, 89secondary users of data, 106, 203supporting (see documentation of data sets)seismic arrays and stations, 215semiconductor chip protection act of 1984,155shoemakerlevy comet, 36, 54simbad (set of identifications, measurements,and bibliography for astronomical data),71simple message transfer protocol (smtp), 33simple network management protocol(snmp), 3334simulations, 52, 65, 67soil science, 85soil taxonomy system, 86soils and terrain digital database (soter),8587solesource data providers, 147space sciences, 5354, 66, 7172space telescope european coordinatingfacility (stecf), 196, 213214space telescope science institute (stsci),213214specialized agencies of the united nations, 10,13, 44, 101specinfo, 211standard generalized markup language(sgml), 33standardization, 4, 11, 29, 3334storage of data. see datastratospheric ozone depletion, 55subpatentable innovations, 137òsubstantial investment,ó 151, 157sui generis regime, 137, 145147, 149160,162, 164, 166169, 203sweden, 205switzerland, 209tt2. see nuclear information servicetaiwan, 205taxonomic definitions, 11, 84. see alsonomenclature; terminologybits of power: issues in global access to scientific datacopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index235technical factors and trends, 1, 3, 2440advances in, 4, 2526concerns over, 3540telecommunications. see communicationsterminology, 8388tex, 65, 88, 200, 208209textual format, 20, 45thematic mapper (tm), 122123third world academy of sciences (twas),96, 108traderelated aspects of intellectual propertyrights. see agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual propertyrightstrade secret law, 136trademark laws, 150transmission control protocol/internetprotocol (tcp/ip), 33, 42transnational data flow. see data, transnationalexchange oftropical ocean global atmosphere program, 70turkey, 183uunauthorized use, 158unfair competition laws, 139uniform resource locators (urls), 66problems with, 23uniform resource name (urn), 23, 66united kingdom, 54, 66united nations commission on economicdevelopment (unced), 44united nations development programme, 93united nations educational, scientific, andcultural organization (unesco), 86,9293, 108united nations environment programme(unep), 44, 85, 93, 99united nations industrial developmentorganization, 44, 96u.s. agency for international development(usaid), 46, 93, 96, 107u.s. constitution, 8, 172enabling clause, 157first amendment concerns, 139u.s. database investment and intellectualproperty antipiracy act (h.r. 3531),157160, 185u.s. department of agriculture, 93, 107u.s. department of commerce (doc), 119u.s. department of defense (dod), 31u.s. department of energy (doe), 73, 215u.s. department of state, 93u.s. department of the interior (doi), 118u.s. federal government science agencies. seefederal government science agenciesu.s. geological survey (usgs), 5758u.s. government, 93. see also individualgovernment agenciesu.s. house of representatives, 8, 155157u.s. national committee for codata(usnccodata), x, 23u.s. supreme court, 8, 154users of research data, 115116, 125, 163, 169.see also commercial users; secondaryusers of datasize of community, 14, 129vvalueadded products, 7, 133, 140, 152, 164vietnam, 96volunteers in technical assistance (vita), 94wwireless communication, 4, 24, 28, 30world bank, 13, 44, 93world data centers (wdcs), 10, 79, 94, 98,101, 214215, 219world health organization (who), 93world intellectual property organization(wipo), 9, 15, 134, 142143, 146, 155156, 158, 170171, 184world meteorological organization (wmo),55, 70, 93, 116, 216219world trade organization (wto), 15, 155156, 161, 170171world weather watch, 6970, 216218world wide web (www), 26, 30, 42, 65, 68,127, 204, 206xx.400, 33