detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5830modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defense196 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309058421 | doi 10.17226/5830committee on modeling and simulation: opportunities for collaboration betweenthe defense and entertainment research communities, computer science andtelecommunications board, national research councilmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on modeling and simulation:opportunities for collaboration between thedefense and entertainment research communitiescomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1997modeling andsimulationlinking entertainmentanddefensemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the instituteof medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a report review committee consisting of members of the nationalacademy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements ofengineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academiesand the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairman andvicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the defense modeling and simulation officethrough subcontract 4843 from rgb technology inc. any opinions, findings, conclusions,or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.library of congress catalog card number 9768732international standard book number 0309058422additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285washington, dc 20055800/6246242202/3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 1997 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americamodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee on modeling and simulation:opportunities for collaboration between thedefense and entertainment research communitiesmichael zyda, naval postgraduate school, chairdonna cox, university of illinois, urbanachampaignwarren katz, m−k technologiesjoshua larsonmogal, silicon graphics inc.gilman louie, spectrum holobyte inc.paul lypaczewski, alias|wavefrontrandy pausch, carnegie mellon universityalexander singer, independent producer/directorjordan weisman, virtual world entertainment inc.staffjerry r. sheehan, study directorlisa l. shum, project assistantgloria bemah, administrative assistant (through november 1996)modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjeff dozier, university of california at santa barbarasusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjames gray, microsoft corporationbarbara j. grosz, harvard universitypatrick hanrahan, stanford universityjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscodeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtonbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, qualcomm inc.robert l. martin, lucent technologiesdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleycharles l. seitz, myricom inc.donald simborg, knowmed systems inc.leslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjerry r. sheehan, staff officerjulie clyman lee, administrative assistantlisa l. shum, project assistantsynod p. boyd, project assistantmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairpeter m. banks, environmental research institute of michiganlawrence d. brown, university of pennsylvaniaronald g. douglas, texas a&m universityjohn e. estes, university of california at santa barbaral. louis hegedus, elf atochem north america inc.john e. hopcroft, cornell universityrhonda j. hughes, bryn mawr collegeshirley a. jackson, u.s. nuclear regulatory commissionkenneth h. keller, university of minnesotakenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatorymargaret g. kivelson, university of california at los angelesdaniel kleppner, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin companymarsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniathomas a. prince, california institute of technologynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryl.e. scriven, university of minnesotashmuel winograd, ibm t.j. watson research centercharles a. zraket, mitre corporation (retired)norman metzger, executive directormodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe entertainment industry and the u.s. department of defense(dod)ñthough differing widely in their motivations, objectives, and culturesñshare a growing interest in modeling and simulation. in entertainment, modeling and simulation technology is a key component of a$30 billion annual market for video games, locationbased entertainment,theme parks, and films. in defense, modeling and simulation provides acosteffective means of conducting joint training; developing new doctrine, tactics, and operational plans; assessing battlefield conditions; andevaluating new and upgraded systems.recognizing this synergy, dodõs defense modeling and simulationoffice (dmso) asked the national research councilõs computer scienceand telecommunications board to convene a multidisciplinary committee to evaluate the extent to which the entertainment industry and dodmight be able to better leverage each otherõs capabilities in modeling andsimulation technology and to identify potential areas for greater collaboration (see appendix c for committee membersõ biographies). the committee met in june and august 1996 to plan a twoday workshop thatwas held in irvine, california, in october 1996 (see appendixes a and bfor the workshop agenda and list of participants). it met again in november 1996 to discuss the results of the workshop and to plan the structure and format of this summary report.the workshop brought together more than 50 representatives of theentertainment and defense research communities to discuss technicalchallenges facing the two industries, identify obstacles to successful sharmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceing of technology and joint research, and suggest mechanisms for facilitating greater collaboration. participants were drawn from the film, video game, locationbased entertainment, and theme park industries; dod;defense contractors; and universities. they included top executives andgovernment program managers as well as engineers, film directors, researchers from industry and academia, and university faculty. througha series of presentations on electronic storytelling, strategy and war gaming, experiential computing and virtual reality, networked simulation,and lowcost simulation hardware, the committee attempted to encourage dialogue among these diverse stakeholders and stimulate discussionof research areas of interest to both the entertainment and defense industries. because the workshop represented one of the first formal attemptsto bridge the gap between the entertainment and defense communities,the committee also hoped to encourage personal contacts between members of the two communities as a means of facilitating future collaboration. as such, the 1996 workshop should be seen as part of an ongoingprocess that may continue beyond this project and this report.this report represents the committeeõs attempt to capture key themesof the workshop discussions. chapter 1 provides an overview of theapplications of modeling and simulation technology in the entertainmentand defense industries and discusses the historical flows of technologybetween them. it also reviews the potential benefits to collaboration andoutlines the underlying technologies of modeling and simulation inwhich collaboration may be possible. chapter 2 identifies common technical needs of dod and the entertainment industry, identifying and describing areas in which the entertainment and defense communities appear to have similar interests and in which collaboration, at some level,may be possible. chapter 3 describes other issues that must be addressedin order to facilitate collaboration and sharing of research. these includethe needs to develop the necessary human resources, establish mechanisms for information sharing and technology transfer, strengthen theresearch base, and overcome cultural differences between the two communities. as chapter 3 notes, collaboration between the entertainmentand defense research communities will require far more than a list ofcommon research interests. structures must be put in place to facilitatecollaboration and to allow greater sharing of information between thetwo communities; differences in culture and business practices must beovercome, though not necessarily altered. putting these elements in placewill facilitate collaboration over time on an everchanging set of commontechnologies and research areas.this report benefited from the contributions of many people throughout the modeling and simulation community. workshop participants,through their presentations and discussion, provided the committee withmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixmuch of the material used in this report. the committee is especiallygrateful to those participants who submitted position papers outliningthe research challenges in their particular fields of interest. the committee drew from these papers in preparing this report; the papers are reproduced in appendix d. external reviewers of an early draft of this reportalso provided valuable comments.staff members of the u.s. armyõs topographic engineering centerand joint precision strike demonstration provided the committee withan informative demonstration of stateoftheart military systems for battlefield visualization and realtime, manintheloop, networked simulation. david wray, of dmso, provided hours of videotaped visual simulations for the committee to examine and excerpt. several volunteers setup and operated a variety of entertainment and military demonstrationsystems during the 1996 workshop to provide participants with handson experience: charles benton of technology systems inc., michael bilodeau of spectrum holobyte inc., steven carter of thrustmaster inc., leondennis of the armstrong laboratories at wright patterson air force base,brian kalita of bbn corporation, and greg lutz of motorolaõs government electronics division. robin scheer, of spectrum holobyte inc.,worked tirelessly to arrange the entertainment demonstrations and tocontact participants for the strategy and war games session of the workshop. fred zyda orchestrated audiovisual presentations during the workshop, demonstrated video games for participants when called upon, andselected video clips and edited the videotape for the òintroductory commonalitiesó presentation.finally, thanks are due the sponsors of this study. anita jones, asdirector of defense research and engineering, conceived of the projectand ensured its realization. james hollenbach, mark jefferson, and judith dahmann of dmso, with support from terry hines, of the mitrecorporation, provided necessary guidance and support for the projectand facilitated the participation of the defense community in its completion.michael zyda, chaircommittee on modeling and simulation:opportunities for collaboration between themodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xidefense and entertainment research communitiesexecutive summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13defense modeling and simulation, 14modeling and simulation in the entertainment industry, 19connections between defense and entertainment, 23notes, 302 setting a common research agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32technologies for immersive simulated environments, 32experiential computing in dod, 33experiential computing in the entertainment industry, 35research challenges, 35networked simulation, 44applications, 44research challenges, 44standards for interoperability, 52dod efforts in interoperability, 54interoperability in the entertainment industry, 58research areas, 60computergenerated characters, 64computergenerated characters in entertainment, 65dod applications of computergenerated characters, 68common research challenges, 69contentsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentstools for creating simulated environments, 73entertainment applications and interests, 74dod applications and interests, 75research challenges, 76conclusion, 79notes, 793setting the process in motion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84overcoming cultural barriers, 84different business models, 85facilitating coordination and cooperation, 88human resources, 92maintaining the research base, 97concluding remarks, 99notes, 100appendixesaworkshop agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105bworkshop participants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107cbiographical sketches of committee members. . . . 110dposition papers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarymodeling and simulation technology has become increasingly important to both the entertainment industry and the u.s. department ofdefense (dod). in the entertainment industry, such technology lies atthe heart of video games, theme park attractions and entertainment centers, and special effects for film production. for dod, modeling andsimulation technology provides a lowcost means of conducting jointtraining exercises, evaluating new doctrine and tactics, and studying theeffectiveness of new weapons systems. both the entertainment industryand dod are aggressively pursuing development of distributed simulation systems that can support internetbased games and largescale training exercises. these common interests suggest that the entertainmentindustry and dod may be able to more efficiently achieve their individual goals by working together to advance the technology base for modeling and simulation. such cooperation could take many forms, includingcollaborative research and development projects, sharing research results,or coordinating ongoing research programs to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.this report summarizes the results of a workshop, convened by thenational research councilõs computer science and telecommunicationsboard, that brought together members of the entertainment and defenseindustries to discuss research interests in modeling and simulation. theworkshop revealed several areas in which the entertainment industryand dod have common interests (see box es.1). this report examinesthe research challenges in these areas with an eye toward identifyingmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2modeling and simulationbox es.1research areas of interest to the entertainment industryand the defense modeling and simulation communitytechnologies for immersion¥image generationñgraphics computers capable of generating complex visual images.¥trackingñtechnologies for monitoring the head position and orientation of participants in virtual environments.¥perambulationñtechnologies that allow participants to walk throughvirtual environments while experiencing hills, bumps, obstructions, etc.¥virtual presenceñtechnologies for providing a wide range of sensorystimuli: visual, auditory, olfactory, vibrotactile, and electrotactile.networked simulation¥higherbandwidth networksñto allow faster communication ofgreater amounts of information among participants.¥multicast and areaofinterest managersñto facilitate manytomanycommunications while using limited bandwidth.¥latency reductionñtechniques for reducing true or perceived delaysin distributed simulations.standards for interoperability¥virtual reality transfer protocolñto facilitate largescale networkingof distributed virtual environments.¥architectures for interoperabilityñnetwork and software architectures to allow scalability of distributed simulations without degrading performance.¥interoperability standardsñprotocols that allow simulators to worktogether effectively and facilitate the construction of large simulations fromexisting subsystems.computergenerated characters¥adaptabilityñdevelopment of computergenerated characters thatcan modify their behavior automatically over time.¥individual behaviorsñcomputergenerated characters that accurately portray the actions and responses of individual participants in a simulation rather than those of aggregated entities such as tank crews or platoons.¥human representationsñauthentic avatars that look, move, andspeak like humans.continuesmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3areas for possible cooperation. the report does not attempt to provideanswers to existing research questions, nor does it necessarily recommend that cooperative efforts be initiated in the areas discussed. suchdecisions need to be made on a casebycase basis by the individual organizations that might participate.cooperative endeavors between dod and the entertainment industry will face many obstacles. as the workshop revealed, numerous cultural barriers divide the entertainment industry and dod, and few mechanisms exist to facilitate the sharing of information. if such obstacles canbe overcome, these differences could be a source of strength, ensuring acomplementarity of interests, capabilities, and approaches that might benefit both communities. already, the u.s. marine corps is evaluatingcommercial computer games for training purposes, the army is considering use of game machines as personal training units, and members ofthe air national guard are evaluating the use of commercial flight simulator programs to supplement standard training regimens. such initiatives suggest that cooperation is possible but only begin to hint at thekinds of benefits that might be achieved through greater collaboration inresearch, which is the main subject of this report.other tasks will also need to be undertaken jointly in order to ensure¥aggregation/disaggregationñthe capability to aggregate smallerunits into larger ones and to disaggregate them back into smaller oneswithout sacrificing the fidelity of a simulation or frustrating attempts atinteroperability.¥spectator rolesñways of allowing observers to watch a simulation.tools for creating simulated environments¥database generation and manipulationñtools for managing and storing information in large databases, to allow rapid retrieval of information,feature extraction, creation, and simplification.¥compositingñhardware and software packages that allow designersto combine images taken from different sources (whether liveaction footage or threedimensional models) and to facilitate the addition or modification of lighting and environmental effects.¥interactive toolsñhardware and software systems that allow designers to use a variety of input devices (more than mouse and keyboard) toconstruct models and simulations.box es.1continuedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4modeling and simulationthe future strength of both communities. dod and the entertainmentindustry will need to foster the establishment and expansion of education programs to train students in the technical and nontechnical underpinnings of modeling, simulation, and virtual environments. they alsowill need to ensure the viability of the university research base, whichnot only will produce these students but will also generate many of thetechnical advances upon which future entertainment and defense systems will be built.toward a research agendaworkshop discussions revealed several research areas that are of interest to both the entertainment industry and the defense modeling andsimulation community: technologies for immersion, networked simulation, interoperability, computergenerated characters, and hardware andsoftware tools for creating synthetic environments. each of these areasdemonstrates sufficient overlap in interest by dod and the entertainment industry to suggest that common work may be possible, althoughadditional study may be required to fully detail the scale and scope ofsuch work. while both dod and the entertainment industry have similar interests at the research and technology levels, the applications andend products into which research results will be incorporated may differin fundamental ways, reinforcing the notion that the most effective formsof cooperation will derive more from early stages of research than fromsharing products. emphasizing cooperation in research over sharing ofproducts also helps avoid many of the concerns about intellectual property and proprietary interests that could impede collaboration betweenthe entertainment industry and dod.technologies for immersionboth the entertainment industry and dod are interested in developing immersive systems that allow participants (whether game players orsoldiers) to enter and navigate simulated environments. for dod suchsystems can be used to train groups of combatants or, increasingly, individual combatants for particular missions when access to the actual location is either hazardous or just not possible. they can also be used tocreate virtual prototypes of military systems that designers can walkthrough and visualize. for the entertainment industry such systems arethe basis for virtual reality (vr) experiences being incorporated into locationbased entertainment centers, theme parks, and video game centers.immersive technologies are also finding their way into home applications, prompted by the greater availability of threedimensional (3d)modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5graphics on personal computers and reductions in the cost of peripheraldevices, such as joysticks and headmounted displays.immersive environments benefit from a wide range of technologiesthat provide the sensory cues necessary for participants to perceive theirenvironments. the most basic of these are image generators that create3d visual displays of the environment itself. other technologies includelocomotion platforms and unobtrusive bodysuits that allow participantsto walk through virtual environments and track their movements andinteractions. such bodysuits are also used to build keyframes for animated characters in film and video game productions.1 dod is pursuingthese applications as part of its dismounted infantry program, and thedefense modeling and simulation office recently funded relevant workat the u.s. armyõs simulation, training, and instrumentation command.it is also funding work on generating other sensory stimuli in virtualenvironments: auditory, olfactory, and tactile. such work is also thefocus of the commercial vr industry and parts of the entertainment industry.the entertainment industry and dod may also be able to benefitfrom their complementary approaches to selective fidelity. both communities have learned how to boost the fidelity (or accuracy) of some parts ofa simulated environment and limit the fidelity of others while creating anengaging simulation experience. whereas dod has tended to emphasize the fidelity of interactions between objects in a simulated environment (using sciencebased models), the entertainment industry has tended to promote visual fidelity and uses principles of good storytelling tohelp participants suspend their disbelief about the reality of a syntheticexperience (whether a vr attraction or a film). additional work in theseareas, and sharing of approaches, may allow both communities to createmore engaging simulated experiences while minimizing the technical demands placed on the system itself.networked simulationthe entertainment industry and dod face similar challenges in creating networking technologies capable of supporting distributed simulations. dod has already demonstrated the capability to link thousands ofparticipants into a single training exercise and is working on systems thatwould engage tens of thousands of participants. internetbased gamecompanies have recently begun to move fastaction video games onto theinternet and are looking for ways to increase the number of simultaneousplayers from 10 or 20 to hundreds or perhaps thousands. as the numberof participants in internetbased games and the militaryõs joint trainingexercises grows, improvements to simulation networks will be needed tomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6modeling and simulationensure that communications between participants can be transmitted in areliable and timely fashion.several technologies can support such requirements. first, dod andthe entertainment industry can pursue ways of expanding the bandwidthof simulation networks to allow more information to be transmitted morequickly. many of the technologies for doing so will derive from technicaladvances made by the communications and networking industries, onwhich both dod and the entertainment industry rely. other approachesalso are being pursued by dod and the internet community, includingmulticast and softwarebased areaofinterest managers. these techniques can be used to minimize message traffic across the network bydirecting copies of a single message to only those recipients who have aninterest in seeing it. dod and the games industry are also developingways of compensating for the latency of distributed networks throughalgorithms for predicting the future location and state of other objectsand for synchronizing events among different participants.standards for interoperabilityboth dod and the entertainment industry are developing architectures and protocols for linking distributed simulation systems. dod haspromoted the development of standards for distributed interactive simulation (dis) that specify the protocols such systems should follow. it hasalso developed a highlevel architecture for military simulation systemsthat allows different simulator platforms to interoperate and enables reuse of existing simulation programs. commercial industry, in contrast,has developed standards for enabling different types of computer systems to play the same game. rather than adopt a common set of protocols for allowing games to work with one another, game companies haveeach tended to develop their own proprietary protocols that allow copiesof their own games to play against each other but do not allow them towork with another companyõs games. some of these protocols derivefrom dis standards but are modified to boost the performance of a particular game. it is not clear that dod and the entertainment industrywill adopt common standards on a wide scale as long as proprietaryinterests continue to dominate protocol decisions.nevertheless, both dod and the entertainment industry will needto solve common problems in developing their network architecturesand protocols; common research into interoperability standards mightbe beneficial. a careful and considered joint research program isneeded that studies the issues involved in designing a common scalable network software architecture capable of supporting large numbers of players across widearea networks.2 components of this remodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7search effort include webbased interoperability standards thatwould allow the linking of distributed virtual environments, architectures for òplugandplayó interoperability that allow different simulation systems to interoperate, and network software architecturesfor maintaining persistent universesñsimulated worlds that continueto exist and evolve even after an individual participant leaves thesimulation. little fundamental research is being conducted in theseareas by either dod or the entertainment industry; rather, both communities are concentrating on developing networked simulation systems without addressing the basic issues of the network software architecture.computergenerated charactersthe term computergenerated characters refers to the broad range ofentities in a simulated environment (people, tanks, aircraft, etc.) whosebehaviors are controlled wholly or in part by a computer.3 they includethe computerized opponents in computer chess games, digital actors thatappear in films and television, and simulated enemy forces in militarytraining exercises. computergenerated characters are a part of virtuallyevery major dod simulation and all video games in which players compete against the computer instead of, or in addition to, other players.they attempt to reproduce realistic intelligent human behavior that provides participants with a compelling simulated experience.additional research would benefit computergenerated characters inboth entertainment and defense applications. gilman louie, of spectrumholobyte inc., estimates that games companies allocate up to twothirdsof their development efforts to programming autonomous characters thatcannot be reused in other games. dod, while creating more advancedcomputergenerated characters, tends to program behaviors into entities,such as tanks crews, that operate according to strict rules of engagementderived from military doctrine. these entities cannot be easily modifiedor reprogrammed; nor can they accurately portray the behaviors of individual soldiers on a battlefield. both dod and the entertainment industry would like to develop computergenerated characters that have adaptable behaviors and can learn from experience. some research is ongoing,under dod sponsorship, to apply techniques of artificial intelligence andgenetic algorithms to computergenerated characters so that they canachieve these capabilities. other work is needed to develop adequatemodels of individual human behaviors and realistic representations ofhumans in virtual environments. significant work is needed to developthe capability to define computergenerated characters at a high level ofabstraction that will facilitate their reuse.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8modeling and simulationtools for creating simulated environmentsworkshop participants identified lowcost, easytouse hardware andsoftware tools for creating simulated environments as a critical need forentertainment and defense applications of modeling and simulation.4such tools are needed to enable the rapid creation and manipulation oflarge databases of information describing terrain, buildings, 3d objects,and dynamic features of virtual environments, and to facilitate the compositing of such disparate imagery into a unified simulated world. although the entertainment industry purchases a wide variety of graphicshardware and software from established vendors, it spends little on improving these tools and instead concentrates on shortterm solutions todevise advanced special effects. many existing systems are expensiveand difficult to learn. additional research is needed to create more interactive tools that allow designers to develop simulated environments using input devices other than keyboard and mouse. in one system described at the workshop, an immersive vr system was developed toallow filmmakers to manipulate computer imagery in real time. suchtechniques may have broader applicability in entertainment and defense.toward greater cooperationpromoting cooperation between dod and the entertainment industry in modeling and simulation will require both communities to overcome cultural barriers that have, to date, isolated them from one anotherand limited the flows of information between them. differences in business models will need to be overcome if joint research is to be achieved.at the same time, dod and the entertainment industry will need to ensure that they take the necessary actions, both individually and jointly, toensure a continued supply of good people and good ideas for futuremodeling and simulation efforts. educational programs are needed totrain students in the technical and nontechnical skills that are importantto creating effective simulated environments. fundamental research programs are needed to generate ideas and explore new technologies thatare broadly relevant to modeling and simulation. dod and the entertainment industry will need to solicit additional input from the academicresearch community to better understand how to accomplish these tasks.information sharing and technology transferthe workshop conducted as part of this study was unique in that itbrought together two communities that traditionally have shared littleinformation and transferred little technology between them. its successmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9attests to the vision of dod in identifying a potential basis for cooperation and the efforts of the committee to create an atmosphere in whichmutually beneficial exchanges of information could occur. for the mostpart, dod and the entertainment industry are two different cultures,with different languages and separate communities of researchers andmanagers. few opportunities exist for promoting information exchangesbetween the two communities. the ones that do existñmostly government efforts to promote commercialization of technologies developed byfederal laboratoriesñhave been relatively unsuccessful in creating bridges to the entertainment industry.workshop participants suggested that additional mechanisms arenecessary for promoting information exchanges on modeling and simulation technology that would benefit both dod and the entertainmentindustryñeven if they do nothing more than identify research problemsthat have already been solved. these could take the form of formal collaborative arrangements between entertainment companies and dod,efforts by individual firms to supply modeling and simulation technology to both communities, or joint research endeavors mediated by a university research center. experiments are needed to test the viability andeffectiveness of these different arrangements. less formal mechanismsalso could be effective. conferences are the primary mechanism for information exchanges today, but dod and entertainment industry representatives tend to attend separate conferences. some progress could bemade by encouraging crossattendance at major conferences within eachcommunity or by crossfertilizing boards of relevant technical and planning groups and establishing a separate symposium to specifically explore topics of interest to both communities. greater use of the internetand world wide web also might facilitate greater communication.human resourcesat the workshop, representatives of the entertainment industry anddod noted an apparent shortage of talented people with the broad rangeof skills needed to develop models and simulations. both communitiesincreasingly have trouble finding programmers with experience in content development and the technical problems associated with multiplayer/multiprocessor games and simulations. both dod and the entertainment industry are seeking people who are visually literate: people whoare skilled in generating economical, highquality graphics displays andhave a good understanding of human perception so that they can createworlds that have the desired effect on those who experience them.additional efforts will be needed to enhance educational programsfor visual literacy. at present, only a small number of u.s. universitiesmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10modeling and simulationoffer interdisciplinary programs that combine technical and artistic studies. expansion of such programs will require the creation of interdisciplinary degree programs and reward systems that encourage faculty members to pursue such endeavors. the research community will need toarticulate a research agenda that incorporates the perspectives of technical and nontechnical disciplines. workshop participants believed thatdod and the entertainment industry could use existing funding mechanisms as a means for encouraging the creation of such programs withoutincurring additional costs.preserving the research baseensuring an adequate supply of new ideas and technologies for future modeling and simulation efforts requires continued support for relevant fundamental research. university research is especially importantbecause it concentrates more heavily on basic than applied research andhas the added benefit of educating students, who then disseminate newknowledge throughout the research community and industry when theygraduate.workshop participants concurred that over the past 20 years the nature of research funding in such fields as computer graphics and networking has changed. university researchers have less freedom to selectand pursue research areas they deem interesting. in part because ofgrowing demands for accountability, governmentfunded projects are often more resultsoriented than they used to be, and government agenciesare under greater pressure to demand specific project goals and deliverydates for each task. the implication is not only a change in the kind ofresearch many investigators perform, but also a reduction in the quantityof research conducted. most university researchers reported that theynow spend less time on research and more time filling out grant applications and seeking funding. determining the most suitable method forgovernment support of university research is beyond the scope of thisstudy,5 but members of the university research community present at theworkshop expressed considerable concern about the current trend in government funding.to date, industry funding has not compensated for changes in federal research funding. although industry contributions to university research have grown over the past decade, they are still small. moreover,as in many other industries, entertainment companies tend not to conduct longterm basic research, largely because of short planning horizonsand the inability to fully appropriate the results of fundamental research.6entertainment companies tend to obligate most of their research and development expenditures to technical problems related to a particular filmmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11or game release rather than to longerterm issues related to future needs.industrysponsored research is more closely tied to particular productneeds, potentially limiting the scope of inquiry and raising concerns thatvaluable new information will not be widely disseminated.other forms of industry support for university research also appearto be changing. several workshop participants observed that computerfirms do not donate as much equipment to university laboratories as inthe past. university representatives noted that they rely heavily on suchdonations to acquire stateoftheart equipment for research projects andeducation. their inability to attract such donations affects not only thequality of research but also the training of students.recent trends in federal and industry funding for university researchin modeling and simulation mirror those of other scientific and technicalfields. national support for research and development (r&d) is undergoing a period of transformation. interest in reducing the federal budgetdeficit and in realigning defense needs to match the challenges of thepostcold war environment will continue to put pressure on federalfunding for r&d. increased competition seems to be changing the nature and structure of industrial r&d. such issues must be addressed atthe national level to ensure the continued viability of the technology basefor modeling and simulation.notes1.the need for research into lightweight tracking technology is fully described in another national research council report. see virtual reality: scientific and technologicalchallenges, nathaniel i. durlach and anne s. mavor, eds., national academy press, washington, d.c., 1995.2.the term network software architecture encompasses both network architecture andsoftware architecture to indicate that the problems of network bandwidth and limited processor cycles must be solved together to achieve scalability.3.the terms computergenerated forces, autonomous forces, semiautonomous forces, and autonomous agents all refer to computergenerated characters. the first three terms are widelyused throughout the defense community; the term autonomous agents refers to a broaderclass of entities used for seeking relevant information on computer networks as well asgenerating computerized opponents for game players.4.the need for such tools is also described in virtual reality: scientific and technologicalchallenges, note 1 above.5.the national research councilõs computer science and telecommunications boardis conducting two other studies that may more fully investigate this topic. the first willlook retrospectively at the role of government, industry, and universities in key innovationsin information technology. the second will look prospectively at institutional arrangements for ensuring the continued leadership of the u.s. information technology industry.6.the difficulty of appropriating profits from investments in basic research has been alongstanding issue in economics and management. for greater discussion of this topic, seeteece, david j., 1988, òprofiting from technological innovation: implications for integramodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12modeling and simulationtion, collaboration, licensing, and public policy,ó in readings in the management of innovation, michael l. tushman and william l. moore, eds., ballinger publishing company, cambridge, mass., pp. 621647; and levin, richard et al., 1987, òappropriating the returns fromindustrial research and development,ó brookings papers on economic activity, no. 3, pp.783831.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.131introductionfrom threedimensional (3d) graphics on home video games to thespecial effects and animation sequences created for feature films, it isapparent that the entertainment industry has emerged as an innovativesource of modeling and simulation technology.1 the u.s. department ofdefense (dod) has an even longer history of investing in modeling andsimulation to support objectives such as training and analysis programsand has supported the development of many of the fundamental computer graphics and networking technologies that underlie both militaryand entertainment applications of modeling and simulation. though thetwo communities differ widely in their structures, incentives, and motivations, opportunities may exist for the entertainment industry and thedefense modeling and simulation community to work together to advance the state of the art in modeling and simulation technology. bysharing research results, coordinating research agendas, and working collaboratively when necessary, the entertainment industry and dod maybe able to more efficiently and effectively build a technology base formodeling and simulation that will improve the nationõs security and economic performance.2this report explores the potential for greater cooperation betweenthe entertainment industry and dod in modeling and simulation. itdraws heavily on a workshop convened by the computer science andtelecommunications board of the national research council in october1996 that brought together representatives of the entertainment industryand the defense modeling and simulation community to discuss issues ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14modeling and simulationmutual interest and identify areas for cooperation. the report summarizes major uses of modeling and simulation technology in both defenseand entertainment applications, outlines research areas in which the entertainment and defense modeling and simulation communities share acommon interest, and identifies other issues that must be addressed tofacilitate cooperation and ensure the viability of the technology base formodeling and simulation. it does not explicitly consider the degree towhich dod can adopt commercial offtheshelf technologies for its ownpurposes; rather, it examines opportunities for conducting research thatcould benefit both military and entertainment applications.as the report demonstrates, the potential exists for greater cooperation between the entertainment industry and dod, but collaboration maynot be easy to achieve. the entertainment industry and dod have vastlydifferent cultures that reflect different business models, capabilities, andobjectives. it is unlikely that the cultures will converge, and bridgingthem may be difficult. nevertheless, these differences can be a source ofstrength. dodõs research efforts and those of the entertainment industryare in many ways complementary rather than contradictory. whereasdodõs research and development efforts are well funded (by industrystandards), meticulously planned, and forward looking, the entertainment industryõs efforts are diverse, fast paced, and market oriented. ifcultural barriers can be overcome, the resulting cooperation could enablethe two communities to leverage each otherõs strengths to develop astronger technology base that will allow both to more easily achieve theirindividual objectives for modeling and simulation.defense modeling and simulationdod uses modeling and simulation for a variety of purposes, suchas to train individual soldiers, conduct joint training operations, developdoctrine and tactics, formulate operational plans, assess warfighting situations, evaluate new or upgraded systems, and analyze alternative forcestructures (see box 1.1). the technology also supports the requirementsof other critical defense needs such as command, control, and communications; computing and software; electronics; manpower, personnel, andtraining; and manufacturing technology. as a result of this breadth, defense models and simulations range in size and scope from componentsof large weapons systems through systemlevel and engagementlevelsimulations, to simulations of missions and battles, and theaterlevel campaigns. dodõs defense modeling and simulation office (dmso) coordinates military modeling and simulation programs on an interservice level and has played a key role in developing a standard architecture formilitary simulations. each of the military services also has a designatedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction15box 1.1defense applications of modeling and simulationdodõs efforts in modeling and simulation generally support three majorfunctions: training, analysis, and acquisition. the vision for each of theseareas is outlined below.¥training. warriors of every rank will use modeling and simulation tochallenge their skills at the tactical, operational, or strategic level throughthe use of realistic synthetic environments for a full range of missions, including peace keeping and the provision of humanitarian aide. huge exercises, combining forces from all services in carefully planned combinedoperations, will engage warriors in realistic training without risking injury,environmental damage, or costly equipment damage. simulation will enable leaders to train at scales not possible in any arena short of fullscalecombat operations, using weapons that would be unsafe on conventionallive ranges. simulation will also be used to evaluate the readiness of armedforces. the active duty and reserve components of all forces will be able tooperate together in synthetic environments without costly and timeconsuming travel to live training grounds.¥analysis. modeling and simulation will provide dod with a powerful set of tools to systematically analyze alternative force structures. analysts and planners will design virtual joint forces, fight an imaginary foe,reconfigure the mix of forces, and fight battles numerous times in order tolearn how best to shape future task forces. not only will simulation shapefuture force structure, it will be used to evaluate and optimize the course ofaction in response to events that occur worldwide. modeling and simulation representations will enable planners to design the most effective logistics pipelines to supply the warriors of the future, whether they are facingconventional combat missions or operations other than war.¥acquisition. operating in the same virtual environments, virtual prototypes will enable acquisition executives to determine the right mix ofsystem capability and affordability prior to entering production. fightingsynthetic battles repeatedly while inserting new systems or different components will help determine the right investment and modernization strategy for future armed forces. models and simulations will reduce the time,resources, and risks of the acquisition process and will increase the qualityof the systems produced. in addition, modeling and simulation will allowtesters to create realistic test and evaluation procedures without the expense and danger of live exercises. òdry runsó of live operational tests willminimize the risks to people, machines, and testing ranges. modeling andsimulation will enhance information sharing among designers, manufacturers, logisticians, testers, and end users, shortening the system developmentcycle and improving the integrated product team development process.source: defense modeling and simulation office, position paper prepared for this project; see appendix d.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16modeling and simulationoffice to serve as its single point of contact on all modeling and simulation matters.3dodõs interest in modeling and simulation is growing. the 1997defense technology area plan identifies modeling and simulation as oneof five key areas of information technology critical to u.s. defense needsand projects growth in funding for enabling technologies from $169 million in 1998 to $280 million in 2003.4 most of these initiatives will beorchestrated by the dmso, the defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa), the defense special weapons agency, and the u.s.army. several other projects are under way by the army, navy, airforce, and marines to individually and jointly develop simulation systems. overall acquisition of training systems by military departmentsexceeds $1.5 billion per year, including both trainers for specific systems(such as the b2 bomber) and simulators for the integrated performanceof a variety of weapons systems. development of individual simulationsystems can easily cost between $100 million and $1 billion (see table1.1).5dodõs growing interest in modeling and simulation derives fromseveral factors. changes in the geopolitical environment are requiringthe military to plan for actions not only in traditional regions of conflict,such as the former soviet union and the middle east, but elsewhere inthe world as well. thus, dod needs to be able to rapidly model variedlocations and scenarios to assist in training troops. in addition, dod isbeing asked to conduct a broader range of missions (such as drug interdiction and peacekeeping), to defend against new types of threats, and tocoordinate joint operations that cross service and national boundaries.each of these missions requires the development of new doctrine andtactics as well as training. at the same time, advances in informationtechnology have lowered the cost of computerbased models and simulations, making modeling and simulation a costeffective alternative to livetraining. simulated training exercises do not require the space or transportation needed for a live training exercise, nor do they have the environmental impact of live training exercises.6 already, dodõs modelingand simulation activities, such as simnet, have helped the services getaway from major field exercises that required the agency to move largenumbers of people around. in the future, dod hopes to use modelingand simulation to provide readily available, operationally valid environments for use by all dod components. it would like users to have dailyaccess to warfighting scenarios from their offices, in the same places thatthey normally work.dod has developed a modeling and simulation master plan as afirst step in directing, organizing, and concentrating its modeling andsimulation activities. it is intended to be dynamic and flexible, evolvingmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction17table 1.1large dod development programs in modeling andsimulationproject nameclose combattactical trainerbattle forcetactical trainingwarfighterõssimulation 2000joint tacticalcombat trainingsystemsynthetic theaterof war (stow)advancedconcepttechnologydemonstrationjoint simulationsystem (core)distributedinteractivesimulationtotaldescriptionnetworked simulation system for training armymechanized infantry and armor units. it is composed ofvarious simulators that replicate combat vehicles, tacticalvehicles, and weapons systems interacting in real timewith each other and semiautonomous opposing forces.tactical training system for maintaining and assessingfleet combat proficiency in all warfare areas, includingjoint operations. it will train at both the singleplatformand battle group levels.nextgeneration battle simulation for training armycommanders and battle staffs at the battalion throughtheater levels. it has a computerassisted exercise systemthat links virtual, live, and constructed environments.joint effort by the navy and air force to create a virtualsimulation at the battle group level in which combatparticipants will interact with live and simulated targetsthat are detected and displayed by platform sensors.stow is a program to construct synthetic environmentsfor numerous defense functions. its primary objective isto integrate virtual simulation (troops in simulatorsfighting on a synthetic battlefield), constructive simulation(war games), and live maneuvers to provide a trainingenvironment for various levels of exercise. thedemonstration program will construct a prototype systemto allow the u.s. atlantic command to quickly create,execute, and assess realistic joint training exercises.a set of common core representations to allow simulationof actions and interactions of platforms, weapons, sensors,units, command, control, communications, computers, andintelligence systems, etc., within a designated area ofoperations, as influenced by environment, systemcapability, and human and organizational behavior.a virtual environment within which humans may interactthrough simulation at multiple sites that are networkedusing compliant architecture, modeling, protocols,standards, and databases.estimatedprogram cost($ millions)$ 846165172270442154500$2,549source: u.s. department of defense, office of the inspector general. 1997. requirements planning fordevelopment, test, evaluation, and impact on readiness of training simulators and devices, a draft proposedaudit report, project no. 5ab0070.00, january 10, appendix d.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18modeling and simulationas the technology matures and consensus develops on policy and programmatic issues.the first objective of the master plan is establishment of a commontechnical framework to facilitate interoperability among simulations andthe reuse of simulation components. the key to this effort is the development of a standard architecture for defense simulations, the highlevelarchitecture, with which all defense models and simulations must comply. this architecture was designed to allow dod to meet its vision ofconstructing a rapidly configured mix of computer simulations, actualwarfighting systems, and weapons systems simulators geographicallydistributed and networked, involving tens of thousands of entities to support training, analysis, and acquisition. such simulations would be usedboth to train individuals to perform particular tasks, to interpret data,and to make decisions, and to help groups of individuals (tank crews,fighter squadrons) work together as a team.the second objective of the master plan is to provide timely andauthoritative representation of systems (aircraft, ground vehicles, ships,communications systems, etc.), the natural environment (air, space, land,sea, weather, and battle effects), and individual human behaviors.efforts are under way to create databases that would allow justintime generation of integrated and consistent environmental data to support realistic mission rehearsals anywhere in the world, including locations that are difficult to access or that are operationally dangerous. thiswork is attempting to develop the capability to generateñwith minimaleditingñsynthetic representations of geographic surfaces that incorporate relevant surface features (trees, rocks, etc.) and to create modelbasedsoftware tools for feature extraction. achieving these goals will ensure,for example, that weather fronts that bring rain or snow to an area willaffect the transit rate of vehicles and troops and that wind patterns willmove trees, create waves, and alter dispersal patterns of smoke and dust.these effects will not only help increase the realism of dod simulations(and, hence, more realistic training and analysis) but will also allow simulation of different seasonal conditions.other objectives include the establishment of a robust infrastructureto meet the needs of simulation developers and end users. the infrastructure will include resource repositoriesñvirtual librariesñand a helpdesk for users. the goal is to provide common services and tools tosimulation developers to further reduce the cost and time required tobuild highfidelity representations of realworld systems and processes.such tools will enable the construction of realistic simulations that interact with actual warfighting systems to allow combatants to rehearse missions and train as they will fight. it could also facilitate development ofvirtual prototypes that could be evaluated and perfected with the help ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19real war fighters before physical realizations are ever constructed. suchvirtual prototypes could have applications outside defense, such as incity planning, architecture, and design (see discussion of database generation and manipulation in the òtools for creating simulated environmentsó section of chapter 2).the final objective of the plan is to share the benefits of modeling andsimulation. dod must educate potential users about the benefits of modeling and simulation. to that end, an extensive study is under way toquantify objective data on the costeffectiveness and efficiency of modeling and simulation in training, analysis, and acquisition applicationsthroughout dod. extensive anecdotal data exist, but no concerted efforthas been made to demonstrate the return on investment.modeling and simulation inthe entertainment industrythe entertainment industry consists of a varied mix of companiesengaged in a broad range of activities, including film, television, radio,recorded music, publishing, performing arts, home entertainment, andvideo. companies in these industries are using digital electronic technology for many applications: (1) to deliver existing products, such as videogames and video on demand, and potentially to distribute products toaudiences that are not reached today; (2) to create electronic games andother forms of digitized material (such as films that have been convertedinto electronic games); (3) for direct response sales (i.e., home shopping);(4) for new entertainment products that are still in the process of beinginvented (such as musical books or interactive stories); (5) for locationbased entertainment, such as hightech theme parks based on visual simulation and other offshoots of the aerospace and electronics industries;and (6) for new methods that enhance the quality or lower the costs ofproducing products (e.g., computer animation systems or virtual realitysystems for set design and lighting).7of these industries, filmmaking, television, video games (includingboth computer games that run on standard personal computers and console games such as nintendo, sega, and sony systems), and locationbased entertainment centers have been most active in adopting modelingand simulation technology. for the most part, these sectors have operated independently of one another, though some blurring of the boundaries is occurring as film studios attempt to develop games based on theirmovies. other linkages also exist. filmmakers and television producers,for instance, often share techniques, technologies, actors, and even content. companies that produce games are working hand in hand withnetwork service companies to provide networked video games.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20modeling and simulationthese companies play an important role in the u.s. economy. sales ofvideo games and consoles, such as the sony playstation, nintendo 64, andsega saturn, were expected to surpass $4.3 billion in 1996.8 game boxesthemselves accounted for nearly $3.6 billion.9 such devices are attractive tomany game players because they sell for roughly $200 compared with $2,000for a typical personal computer (pc). nintendo expected to sell out itsproduction of 1 million ultra 64 machines in 1996, and sega sales also wereexpected to reach nearly 1 million. game boxes themselves do not usuallygenerate significant profits, but they pave the way for sales of game cartridges. sales of game software for personal computers are also rising andwere expected to grow 20 percent in 1996 to $1.2 billion. part of the increaseis the rise in online game sites. though internetbased games were expected to generate only $90 million in 1996, they are projected to generate $1.6billion by 2000.10 the film industry generated another $22 billion in revenues. box office receipts totaled almost $6 billion in 1996,11 with video taperentals at $16 billion.12 these figures do not include revenues from merchandise related to films, such as toys, games, and clothing. such revenuesoften exceed box office receipts.in some areas, modeling and simulation technology has already enabled firms to regain their competitiveness internationally. as ed catmullof pixar animation studios noted at the workshop, technology saved theanimation industry. most u.s. animation went overseas in the 1980s asstudios looked for ways to cut labor costs. the advent of electronic animation technologies (such as those that made the computeranimated film toystory possible), however, has allowed u.s. firms to win back animation;foreign competition is seen as less of a threat to the u.s. industry. in fact,u.s. firms are now raiding other countries for talent.technology will continue to transform the entertainment industry inmyriad ways, many of which will be unpredictable over the long term.nevertheless, certain trends are already apparent. video games are moving onto the internet, creating a new way to play games and drivingchanges in the games themselves (see box 1.2 and choudhury et al.,199713). a handful of companies are putting the infrastructure in placefor game companies like id software, spectrum holobyte, acclaim, andothers to move their games out of their constricted singleplayer modeinto a worldwide, networked, realtime, multiplayer domain. the totalentertainment network (ten), for example, allows subscribers to playonline versions of duke nukem 3d, quake, command and conquer, warcraft, and deadlock. more games are added regularly. in its first threemonths ten garnered more than 14,000 subscribers who pay $14.95 amonth to access its internetbased games. mpath interactive, anotherentrant into the online games industry, offers an online version of quakeand recently agreed with hasbro interactive to put versions of classicmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21box 1.2nextgeneration video gamesthe intent of online gaming is to create massively networked games inwhich hundreds, if not thousands, of players can play on the same virtualworld simultaneously. gilman louie of spectrum holobyte inc. predictsthat the next generation of computer games will be designed around a blockof server code that will enable offtheshelf products to be played either insingleplayer or multiplayer mode. in multiplayer mode the player willenter a persistent universe that will run 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.players will be able to join a game whenever they want and in whateverrole they want (tank commander, fighter pilot, etc.). they will be immersedin an environment of teammates and adversaries controlled by other players and by the computer, with the distinctions between the two becomingincreasingly hard to detect. when players enter the game, they will replaceunits being controlled by the computer.behind the scenes, louie says, will be a campaign engine that will moveall of the computergenerated forces, monitor other playersõ moves, andserve up new tasks for the players. most video games currently use a progression of linearly scripted missions to advance a player through the game.each mission contains predetermined outcomes and paths. players conduct each mission over and over again until they successfully graduate tothe next level of play. the campaign engine allows a different structure, inwhich story lines and missions are dynamic and outcomes are not predetermined. each play of the game influences the next. if a player is first assigned a mission to destroy a bridge but fails, the next mission may be toprovide support to friendly tanks that are being engaged by an enemy thatjust crossed the bridge. the campaign engine will aggregate and disaggregate units as players encounter them (e.g., converting an icon for a tank unitinto four separate tanks and vice versa). disaggregated units will be controlled by the computer until the player leaves the area and they are reaggregated.game servers will also support multiple dissimilar products, like different aircraft types and groundbased vehicles, that users will buy at retail.users will be able to download upgrades to their vehicles, such as newavionics, weapons systems, and better automated individuals or units. every month new scenarios will be generated to enhance game play. thesescenarios could include new terrain or specially scripted missions. thesystem will be designed so that the visual display system of the games willbe totally independent from the server, so that upgrades to the visual systems will be tied to each individual simulator rather than being an inherentpart of the networked architecture. the network will be totally object oriented to facilitate seamless upgrades and enhancements.source: gilman louie, chairman, spectrum holobyte inc., alameda, calif.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22modeling and simulationparker brothers board games, such as monopoly, scrabble, and risk, online. mpath offers subscribers who have multimedia pcs the ability totalk to other players during games. players speak into microphones attached to their pcs, and the mpath software digitizes their voices andtransmits them over the internet to other players. players without microphones can communicate by typing messages.a growing number of companies are entering the market for locationbased entertainment, using virtual reality (vr) technologies as thecenterpiece of their centers. locationbased centers generally provide aspecific entertainment attraction, often accompanied by a cafe, bar, orrestaurant. a recent compilation listed 153 vr entertainment centersworldwide, ranging from restaurants or cafes with one or two vr unitsto larger facilities and theme parks with up to 40.14 in some of thesecenters, participants don a headmounted display and enter a 3d worldthrough which they navigate with a joystick or ski down a simulatedmountain. in others, groups of players sit in podlike facsimiles of military aircraft and fly through a simulated landscape, engaging enemy targets and communicating with a control tower. further advances in technology combined with reductions in price could enable simple vrtechnologies to enter homes. already, companies such as thrustmasterinc. are marketing mockups of aircraft cockpits for home use in conjunction with flight simulator games designed for pcs.industry analysts, such as john latta of 4th wave inc., see cdroms,òinternetworking,ó and interactive television as the primary means ofdelivering entertainment in the 1990s, although motionbased simulators, vr experiences, and largeformat films also will contend. with theexpansion of infrastructure and content, home entertainment is becoming more popular; spending for inhome entertainment far exceeds thatfor outofhome entertainment. the emerging market for 3d pc applications may reinforce this trend.as the price of 3d image generators continues to decline and performance improves, 3d graphics will become a key feature of home pcs.latta predicts that by the end of 1998, most new pcs will include 3dgraphics accelerators. some 30 to 40 companies are designing or producing 3d video chips for pcs. the market for 3d accelerators is predictedto grow from 5,200 chips in 1994 to 36 million in 1999. applications willrange from home video and pc games to 3d tools, such as animation andmodeling software, vr, multimedia 3d, and interactive television. venture capitalists have already pumped $200 million into 3d startup firms,and over 25 companies have invested at least $1 million apiece in multiplayer games, but the market must still be created, and developers havelittle control over development of the infrastructure.15film companies, too, are pursuing innovations in information techmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23nology. disneyõs animated feature films have been all digital for severalyears now and, as demonstrated by toy story (produced in associationwith pixar animation studios), are achieving realistic 3d images. agrowing number of nonanimated films, such as terminator 2: judgmentday, jurassic park, and casper, incorporate digital effects and characters.companies such as boss film studios, digital domain, and industriallight and magic continue to improve the realism of these effects and aredeveloping ways to digitize real actors for use in stunts and other specialeffects.16 in addition, virtually every major hollywood studio has established a subsidiary to create interactive products, typically computer adventure games based on movies. record companies, too, seeing the music production innovations being led by specialized multimediacompanies, are exploring interactive media. the new academy of interactive arts and sciences was established to confer awards in the field; thehouston international film festival has established new prizes for interactive multimedia products; and the american film instituteõs computerbased graphics, editing, and multimedia classes are overflowing.17connections between defense and entertainmentthe idea of linking research efforts in dod and the entertainmentindustry is not as far fetched as it might first appear. connections between the two communities stretch back over the decades and have takenmany forms, from sharing products, to sharing technologies, to sharingpeople.18 the entertainment industry now rests on a technological foundation laid by large amounts of governmentfunded research and infrastructure, including advanced computing systems, computer graphics,and the internet. in the area of computer graphics, for example, earlydod funding resulted in development of the geometry engine, about1979 (see box 1.3). this technology has since been incorporated into anumber of game devices, such as the new nintendo 64 machine. similarly, early advances in networking in the late 1950s and 1960s laid thegroundwork for the arpanet, which grew into todayõs internet andhas become the foundation of todayõs growing networked games industry. as these examples demonstrate, 20 years or more often pass beforedodsponsored research generates new technology that is incorporatedinto a new product.19technology has also flowed back to dod. the agency has benefitedfrom the entertainment industryõs constant attempts to lower the price/performance ratios for image generation, networking technologies, andcontent development tools, to name a few areas. it has also benefitedfrom new ideas pioneered by the entertainment industry. the first aircraft simulator created by edwin linkñwhich became the basis for themodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24modeling and simulationbox 1.3defense funding and the roots of computer graphicsdefense funding, channeled primarily through the defense advancedresearch projects agency (darpa) and the office of naval research(onr), played a key role in creating computer graphics technologies thatnow lie at the heart of many entertainment and business applications. programs sponsored by darpa and the national science foundation supported research activities at the university of utah, north carolina state university, ohio state university, california institute of technology, andcornell university. in the early 1970s, researchers at the university of utahdeveloped techniques for creating threedimensional (3d) images that weremore realistic than wire frame images drawn with lines. work by g.s.watkins and others resulted in a faster way of determining which parts ofobjects were hidden and drawing only those visible from the viewerõs vantage point. work by henri gouraud, buituong phong, and others resultedin techniques for smoothly shading curved surfaces. additional work at thenew york institute of technology created the basis for software used torender graphics images. industry still uses the basic algorithms developedat the university of utah for simple light calculations, in both software andcommodity graphics hardware. more sophisticated rendering packages thatexploit algorithms developed at universities are used in the film and animation industries, as well as in flight simulators and computeraided design.these include the renderman system used by pixar animation studios forsuch animated films as toy story.militaryõs flight simulator programñwas originally sold to amusementparks as an entertainment device (see position paper by jacquelyn fordmorie in appendix d). game machines are now being considered formilitary training.20 discussed below are several projects currently underway or under consideration to modify commercial hardware and software for military training applications:¥peter bonanni, of the virginia air national guard, for example,has been working with spectrum holobyte inc. to modify the falcon 4.0flight simulator game for military training. budgetary pressures andworldwide deployments have caused some segments of the armed forcesto face true training shortfalls for the first time in decades. u.s. air forceactive duty and reserve squadrons, for example, have experienced a reduction in training sorties of up to 25 percent as a direct result of deployments in support of contingency operations over iraq and bosnia (seeposition paper by peter bonanni in appendix d). since conducting realistic training is impossible on most of these missions, simulators providemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction25the only realistic training alternative. unfortunately, most of the simulators in use today are very expensive, are limited to singlecrew training,and are not deployable. as a result, pilots have few opportunities fortraining while on deployment, and proficiency declines as the deployment wears on. the problem also is occurring in other military servicesas the trend to use u.s. forces in peacekeeping roles accelerates. lowcost commercial simulators may be a nearterm solution to this militarytraining problem. though lacking the fidelity to allow fighter pilots topractice certain skills, such as properly timing the release of a weapon toensure the greatest probability of intercept, lowcost simulators may allow pilots to maintain familiarity with the layout of cockpit and throttlecontrols and to òkeep their heads in the game.ó according to peter bonanni, games such as falcon 4.0 realistically mimic the look and feel ofreal military aircraft and allow users to play against computergeneratedforces or, in a networked fashion, against other pilots, which facilitatesteam training opportunities.the first implementations of virtual reality in 1968 also derived fromgovernment funding from onr, the air force, and the central intelligenceagency, with contributions from bell labs. with such support, ivan sutherland, then at harvard university, developed the headmounted display aswell as stereo and seethrough displays, head tracking, and a handheld 3dcursor. such devices are now used in video games and in rapid prototypingsystems for design, architecture, and scientific visualization.the hardware used in computer graphics also traces its roots to federalfunding. while a graduate student at utah, jim clark and his adviser, ivansutherland, pursued research in 3d graphics hardware with governmentfunding. after joining the faculty at stanford university, clark receivedsupport from darpaõs very large scale integrated circuit program for thegeometry engine project, which developed techniques for producing custom integrated circuits for costeffective highperformance graphics systems. the resulting technology formed the basis of silicon graphics inc.,which has become a leading supplier of graphics computers to the defenseand entertainment industries.source: computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil. 1995. evolving the highperformance computing and communicationsinitiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure, national academypress, washington, d.c., pp. 2021; mccracken, edward r. 1997. òcomputergraphics: ideas and people from americaõs universities fuel a multibilliondollarindustry,ó in computing research: a national investment for leadership in the21st century. computing research associates, washington, d.c., pp. 1115.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26modeling and simulation¥the u.s. marine corps has initiated a program to evaluate commercial war games software for use in training. the marine corps seessuch games as a lowcost way of engaging soldiers in daily decisionmaking exercises to help improve their tactical decisionmaking capabilities. the corpsõ combat and development command in quantico, virginia, evaluated close to 30 games in 1995 for their potential teachingvalue, examining their cost as well as technical issues such as memoryand processor requirements, data accuracy, and ease of use; multiplayercapabilities, level of game play (strategic, operational, or tactical); relevance to the marine corps task map; and compatibility with marinecorps doctrine and tactics. in future tests an education specialist willevaluate the educational merits of each game and determine whether itproduces negative training. the evaluations to date have found thatwhile no war game was capable of producing a òrobust simulated combat environment,ó several offered potential for training: harpoon2, tigerson the prowl, operation crusader, patriot, and doom.21 the computerwar game assessment group recommended the use of these games,and the marine corps commandant has authorized commanders topermit these games to be loaded onto government computers and toallow marines to play them during duty hours.22 the marine corpshas already begun using doom for training fourperson fire teams.users play in a networked environment that allows them to cooperate, listen, and make decisions quickly.23 the game has been modified from its original version to include fighting holes, bunkers, tactical wire, òthe fog of war,ó and friendly fire, as well as marine corpsweapons, such as the m16(a1) rifle, m249 squad automatic weapon,and m67 fragmentation grenades. such activities are not viewed asa replacement for field training but are used in the hope of makingfield training more efficient.¥the army battle command battle laboratory is discussing thepossibility of adapting the nintendo 64 game machine as a lowcost individual training device. the system, which would be developed by silicon graphics inc. and paradigm simulation inc., would represent an alternative to pcs and cdroms. initial analyses indicate that thenintendo 64 is less expensive than alternative trainers and offers moreinteractivity and visual realism. unit commanders would be able to purchase them in larger quantities than other systems, allowing more soldiers access.24¥the marine corps has awarded a contract to m−k technologies todesign a video game that can be used for military training as well ashome entertainment. the company will use the same game engine inboth the military and civilian versions. the military version will addmore accurate details about tactics and weapons, while the civilian gamemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction27will be less demanding. both versions will allow multiple players tocompete against each other over a localarea network or the internet.25additional opportunities may exist for dod and the entertainmentindustry to share the data and resources used to create simulations. forexample, dod has created a simulation of one of the major tank battlesof the persian gulf war, 73 easting. part of the effort in creating thesimulation was collecting geographic data and information regarding theposition of military units and terrain features. there are enough similardata readily available to produce comparable studies of austerlitz, waterloo, gettysburg, antietam, and other battles. available in formats thatpermit the viewer to traverse these battlefields in time as well as space,these databases could become staples of history courses, officer trainingprograms, and the countless clubs and societies that cherish military history or stage reenactments. by allowing participants to alter the courseof the battles, such simulations could be even more attractive to dodand the public at large.to date, the flows of technology between the defense and entertainment industries have been largely uncoordinated. many derive fromlarge investments the government made in fundamental research andinfrastructure for its own purposes but that then became the foundationson which entrepreneurs have created whole new industries. the question that must now be asked is whether there is a way to take advantageof future overlap in interest in a more proactive way to encourage thetypes of interplay that have occurred in the past.military and entertainment simulations have markedly different objectives. in entertainment the driving factor is excitement and fun. usersmust want to spend their money to use it again and again (either at homeor at an entertainment center) and hopefully are willing to tell othersabout it. unrealistically dangerous situations, exaggerated hazardousenvironments, and multiple lives and heroics are acceptable, even desirable, to increase excitement. defense simulations, on the other hand,overwhelmingly stress realistic environments and engagement situations.the interactions are serious in nature, can crucially depend on terrainfeatures or other environmental phenomena, and generally rely on theuserõs ability to coordinate actions with other players.nevertheless, many of the future challenges that face the movie industry, games industry, and dod are similar. a striking example of this ismultiplayer simulations using realtime 3d graphics. the dod is interested in this capability for largescale training exercises; the games industry isinterested in networked games that would allow hundreds or thousands ofplayers to participate. the underlying technologies to support these objectives address similar requirements: networking, lowcost graphics hardware, human modeling, and computergenerated characters. given futuremodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28modeling and simulationtrends in defense modeling and simulation and in the entertainment industry, such overlap is likely to occur more frequently in the future.these similarities suggest that potential exists for dod and the entertainment industry to leverage each otherõs modeling and simulationefforts, provided they understanding the fundamental differences andobjectives. simulation, vr, video games, and film share the commonobjective of creating a believable artificial world for participants. in thiscontext, believability is less a factor of specific content of the environment than of the perception that a world exists into which participantscan port themselves and undertake some actions. in film this process isvicarious; in simulation, vr, and gaming it tends to be active, even allowing participants to choose the form for porting themselves into theenvironment, whether as occupants of a vehicle moving through the environment, as a separate controllable entity, or as a fully immersed human. their representation can assume whatever form is appropriate forthe environment.designing and building such worlds require a common set of enabling technologies, regardless of the application (defense or entertainment) to which the worlds will be put. because they are fundamental tovirtually all simulations, these technologies may represent areas in whichdod and the entertainment industry could collaborate on research andearly stages of development:¥tools for fabricating synthetic environments. computerbased toolsare needed to efficiently create 3d virtual worlds that can be sensed inmultiple ways (visual, auditory, tactile, motion, infrared, radar, etc.). costrises as the size space, resolution, detail, and dynamic features (objectsthat can interact with participants, like doors that can open or buildingsthat can be razed) of the simulated environment increase. tools for efficiently constructing large complex environments are generally lacking;existing toolsets are quirky and primitive, require substantial training tomaster, and often prohibit the environment architect from including allof the attributes desired.¥interfaces. interfaces provide the portal through which participantsinteract with a system. they include displays, entry devices such askeyboards or touchsensitive screens, vr systems, and a host of otherinput/output devices that link the participant to the simulator. the increase in the richness of the participantõs ability to interact with the synthetic environment and other people and agents similarly ported there isespecially important as largescale simulations are constructed.¥networking technologies. networking technologies enable largenumbers of participants to join in a simulation regardless of their physical locations. the network must be able to accommodate the volume ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction29messages between and among participants in a timely fashion with aminimum amount of delay or latency. these factors are influenced byboth the architecture of the network and the protocols for transmittinginformation. protocols are needed to minimize message traffic across thenetwork, and service providers need to figure out how they can provideguaranteed levels of service that distinguish between timecritical interactions and lowerpriority messages that are less sensitive to time delays.¥computergenerated forces and autonomous agents. computergenerated forces and autonomous agents control the actions of elements notdirectly under the control of a human participant in a simulation. theycan be adversaries (as in a computer chess game) or companions (controlling a wingman in a flight simulator) and can represent individualplayers or aggregated forces (such as an enemy infantry division). computergenerated forces are critical in any simulation intended to be usedby an individual participant or in large networked simulations in whichit may not always be possible to ensure enough players to control all thenecessary entities.26 such forces typically strive to display behaviors characteristic of intelligent human participants.both dod and the entertainment industry could benefit from greatercollaboration in the above technical areas. the primary benefit of suchcollaboration would be the development of a technology base that couldsupport modeling and simulation efforts in either defense or entertainment, eliminating redundancies and sharing technical advances. collaboration could improve the competitive advantage of entertainment companies and the ability of dod to meet its national security objectivesmore efficiently than if the two communities continued to operate independently. as ed catmull, of pixar animation studios, and eric haseltine, of walt disney imagineering, noted, funding from defense agenciessuch as darpa had a significant effect on the development of fundamental technologies critical to defense and entertainment; moreover, ithelped develop the human resources required to research, develop, andadvance those technologies. more formal collaboration may give dodand the entertainment industry more opportunities to gain greater leverage from each otherõs research investments to further their own objectives. such collaboration will become especially important given continued constraints on defense research and development (r&d) spending.between 1987 and 1996, real dod expenditures for r&d declined 27percent, though the largest cuts were allocated to the development portion of the budget; expenditures on basic and applied research remainedalmost level. given current attempts to balance the federal budget andrealign federal expenditures on defense r&d to reflect a new set of namodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30modeling and simulationtional priorities, it is unlikely that defense r&d budgets will rise significantly in the near future.achieving these benefits will require efforts in two areas. first, dodand the entertainment industry must identify research areas in which theyhave a common interest. this is something of an exercise in which the twocommunities plot their research agendas, identify areas of commonality,and determine ways in which the capabilities of each community can bestbe leveraged to move the field forward. second, they must find ways tofacilitate collaboration between the two research communities. differencesin culture and business practices must be overcome, and mechanisms mustbe put in place to facilitate information sharing and, perhaps, collaborativeresearch projects. unless these types of obstacles are overcome, even thebest intentions will not produce fruitful results.notes1.dod defines a model as a physical, mathematical, or otherwise logical representationof a system, entity, phenomenon, or process. it defines simulation as a method for implementing a model over time. see u.s. department of defense. 1994. òdod modeling andsimulation (m&s) management,ó directive number 5000.59, january 4.2.other communities, such as manufacturing, medicine, and education, also mightbenefit from greater collaboration with the defense and entertainment industries in advancing modeling and simulation technology. this report addresses the possibility of greatercooperation between the entertainment industry and the defense modeling and simulationcommunity only.3.u.s. department of defense, directive 5000.59, note 1 above.4.u.s. department of defense, office of the director of defense research and engineering. 1997. defense technology area plan. dod, washington, d.c., may.5.u.s. department of defense, office of the inspector general. 1997. òrequirementsplanning for development, test, evaluation, and impact on readiness of training simulators and devices,ó a draft proposed audit report. project no. 5ab0070.00, dod, january10.6.concerns over the environmental impact of the annual return of forces to germany(reforger) exercise is one of the considerations that has led to a greater reliance onsimulation for that program.7.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 30.8.miao, walter, access media international, as cited in eng, paul m. 1996. òi canõtwait to go online and blow something up,ó business week, december 23, pp. 7071.9.npd group, port washington, n.y., as cited in business week, note 8 above.10.jupiter communications, as cited in business week, note 8 above.11.motion picture association of america. 1996. u.s. economic review. motion pictureassociation of america, washington, d.c.; available online at http://www.mpaa.org/htm#hlk388150685.12.video software dealers association. 1996. vsda white paperña special report onthe home video industry. vsda, encino, calif.; available online at http://206.71.226.123/whitepaper/whitpapr.htm.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction3113.choudhury, seema, et al. 1997. entertainment & technology strategies. forresterresearch, cambridge, mass., april 1.14.atlantis cyberspace, vr entertainment centers, downloaded february 17, 1996, fromwww.vratlantis.com/lbeguide/lbelist2.html.15.latta, john. 1996. dod & entertainment: where is the social experience? 4th waveinc., alexandria, va.16.parisi, paula. 1995. òthe new hollywood: silicon stars,ó wired, december, p. 142.17.computer science and telecommunications board, keeping the u.s. computer andcommunications industry competitive, p. 31, note 7 above.18.the two communities also have common physical space. not only are southerncalifornia and central florida focal points for both dod and entertainment industry efforts in modeling and simulation, but the walt disney company also announced in august1996 that one of its divisions would take occupancy of a 200,000squarefoot facility formerly occupied by the skunk works division of lockheed martin corp., a highsecurity division that designed and engineered some of the nationõs most guarded defense projects,including the u2 spy plane. see newman, morris. 1996. òa unit of disney finds an idealspace among the remnants of the militaryindustrial complex,ó new york times, august28, p. d17.19.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.evolving the high performance computing and communications infrastructure to support thenationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.20.geddes, john, silicon valley science and technology office, u.s. army researchlaboratory, personal communication, november 20, 1996.21.marine corps modeling and simulation management office, òcomputer based wargames catalog,ó available online at http://138.156.4.23/catalog.22.marine corps modeling and simulation management office, òcomputer based wargames catalog,ó p. 3, note 21 above.23.sikorovsky, elizabeth. 1996. òtraining spells doom for marines,ó federal computerweek, july 15; available online at http://www.fcw.com/pubs/fcw/0715/guide.htm. seealso ackerman, robert. 1996. òcommercial war game sets spell doom for adversaries,ósignal, july; available online at http://www.us.net/signal/archive/july96/commercialjuly.html.24.geddes, john, silicon valley science and technology office, u.s. army researchlaboratory, personal communication, november 20, 1996.25.bray, hiawatha. 1997. òbattle for military video game niche on,ó boston globe,april 16, p. 1.26.dodõs experimentation with distributed interactive simulations during the late 1980sresulted in constant pressure to increase the number of participants in simulated exercises.because there were not enough simulators or participants to populate a typical battlefieldscenario (nor did the technical capability exist to efficiently network together large numbersof participants), dod began to rely on the use of computergenerated forces.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.322setting a common research agendathe entertainment industry and the u.s. department of defense(dod) are both interested in a number of research areas relevant to modeling and simulation technology. technologies such as those for immersive simulated environments, networked simulation, standards for interoperability, computergenerated characters, and tools for creatingsimulated environments are used in both entertainment and defense applications. each of these areas presents a number of research challengesthat members of the entertainment and defense research communitieswill need to address over the next several years. some of these areas maybe amenable to collaborative or complementary efforts.this chapter discusses some of the broad technical areas that the defense and entertainment research communities might begin to exploremore fully to improve the scientific and technological base for modelingand simulation. its purpose is not to provide answers to the researchquestions posed in these areas but to help elucidate the types of problemsthe entertainment industry and dod will address in the coming years.technologies for immersivesimulated environments1immersive simulated environments are central to the goals and needsof both the dod and the entertainment industry. such environments usea variety of virtual reality (vr) technologies to enable users to directlyinteract with modeling and simulation systems in an experiential fashmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda33ion, sensing a range of visual, auditory, and tactile cues and manipulating objects directly with their hands or voice. such experiential computing systems are best described as a process of using a computer or interacting with a network of computers through a user interface that isexperiential rather than cognitive. if a user has to think about the userinterface, it is already in the way. traditional military training systemsare experiential computing systems applied to a training problem.vr technologies can allow people to directly perform tasks and experiments much as they would in the real world. as jack thorpe of saicpointed out at the workshop, people often learn more by doing and understand more by experiencing than by simple nonparticipatory viewingor hearing information. this is why vr is so appealing to user interfaceresearchers: it provides experience without forcing users to travelthrough time or space, face physical risks, or violate the laws of physicsor rules of engagement. unfortunately, creating effective experienceswith virtual environments is difficult and often expensive. it requiresadvanced image generators and displays, trackers, input devices, andsoftware.experiential computing in dodthe most prominent use of experiential computing technology indod is in the area of personnel training systems for aircraft and groundvehicles. dod also has a series of initiatives under way to develop advanced training systems for dismounted infantry that rely on experiential computing. such programs are gaining increased attention in dodand will become a primary driver behind the militaryõs efforts to developand deploy technologies for immersion in synthetic environments. theyare being undertaken in coordination with attempts to develop computing, communications, and sensor systems to provide individual soldierswith relevant intelligence information.2 experiential computing, as applied to flight and tank simulation, is a mature science at dod. there area number of organizations that have extensive historical reference information they can draw on in specifying the requirements for new immersive training systems. these organizations include the u.s. armyõs simulation, training, and instrumentation command (stricom) and thenaval air warfare centerõs training systems division. experiential computing is something that has been essential to military training organizations for decades.for traditional training and mission rehearsal functions, the currentneed is to reduce the cost of immersive systems. existing mission rehearsal systems based on image generators like the evans and sutherland esig4000 serve the armyõs special operations forces well, allowmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34modeling and simulationing them to fly at low altitudes above highresolution geospecific terrainfor hundreds of miles and enabling them to identify specific landmarksalong their planned flight path to guide them on their actual mission.unfortunately, these domeoriented trainers used to cost upward of $30million, making it impractical to either procure many simulators or totrain many pilots. cost reductions would allow more widespread deployment of such systems.experiential computing technologies are being used by the u.s. navyin both training and enhanced visualization. for battleships an advancedbattle damage reporting system allows a seaman in the battle bridge tonavigate a threedimensional (3d) model of his ship to identify wheredamage has occurred and both where the best escape routes would be fortrapped seamen and which routes the rescue and repair crews shouldtake. in another navy application developed at the naval commandcontrol and ocean surveillance centerõs (nccoscõs) research, development, test, and evaluation division (which is referred to as nrad),submarines are fitted with an immersive system that generates a view ofthe outside world for the commander when they are submerged. sincesubmarine crews cannot normally look outside the boat except when it ison the surface, a virtual window outside provides not only a view of theseafloor (created through the use of digital bathymetric data) but of thetactical environment as well, with other ships, submarines, sonobuoys,and sea life represented clearly and spatially for the commander to gain abetter understanding of the tactical and navigational situation.in the nonimmersive domain, experiential computing technology isbeing leveraged by both the naval research lab (nrl) and the armyresearch lab (arl) in the form of a stereoscopic tablebased display.this display is known at nrl as the responsive workbench and at arlas the virtual sandtable. the responsive workbench was invented in1992 at the german national computer science and mathematics institute outside bonn. nrl duplicated the bench and started exploring howit could be used in a variety of applications. the concept of the workbench is simple. the bench itself is a table 6 feet long, 4 feet wide, andstanding 4 feet off the floor. the tabletop is translucent, and a mirror sitsunderneath at a 45 degree angle. a projector behind the table shines onthe mirror and up onto the table surface from below, creating a stereoscopic image on the tabletop. users wear stereoscopic glasses and a headtracker. as they move their heads, the image changes to reflect thatmotion and objects appear to be sitting, like a physical model, on thetable.an army application of this technology is a recreation of the traditional sand table in which forces are laid out and move around to planstrategies and tactics or to review a training exercise. coryphaeus softmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda35ware of los gatos, california, is commercializing a similar product, theadvanced tactical visualization system, which operates with the commercial version of the responsive workbench, the immersive workbenchby fakespace inc. since commanders are used to working with scalemodels of battlefields and maps, they can easily accommodate this typeof display.experiential computing in the entertainment industrythe problem with creating effective experiential computing systemsis that they demand realtime graphics. in the entertainment industry,return on investment must be considered. the high cost of immersivetechnologies has slowed their expansion into entertainment settings.nevertheless, an increasing number of locationbased entertainment attractions and home systems are emerging. the majority of the systems inoperation fall into one of three categories: (1) arcade systems, (2) locationbased entertainment centers, and (3) vr attractions at theme parks.locationbased entertainment centers and arcades boast both standalonesystems that allow participants to drive down a race course, ski down amountain, or play virtual golf. others have networked together flightsimulators that allow players to interactively fly through a virtual environment and engage targets (including each other). disney has developed a vr attraction based on its film aladdin, and universal studios hasdeveloped a ride based on back to the future.now that the costs of realtime graphics systems are dropping, it islikely that the list of vr experiences for entertainment will expand andthat home applications will become more prevalent. threedimensionalgraphics are becoming more widely available on home computers, andthe number and variety of peripheral devices, such as throttlelike joysticks and mockups of fighter cockpits, are expanding. continued reductions in cost coupled with increases in capability will likely stimulatefurther expansion of the home market.research challengesseveral areas of experiential computing would benefit from additional research. much of this work would be applicable to both defenseand entertainment applications of experiential computing technology.technologies for image generation, tracking, perambulation, and virtualpresence are of interest to both communities, but research priorities tendto be very different. as an example, the factors guiding development ofthe microprocessors that form the heart of the new nintendo 64 gamemachine are very different from those that dod would have set were itmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36modeling and simulationspecifying a deployable, lowcost, realtime simulation and training device. for example, the nintendo system was designed for operation inconjunction with a television and uses an interlaced scanning techniqueand lowresolution graphics. most training systems would require higher resolution to enable participants to identify more easily specific features of the environment and to avoid eye strain during periods of extended use and would likely use a progressive scan system similar tomost computer monitors. thus, for military purposes it might be possible to leverage a variant of the nintendo 64 processor, but the actualprocessor would probably not do the job.image generationvisual simulations in defense and entertainment applications share acommon need for image generators with a range of capabilities and costs.on the entertainment side, lowcost platforms such as personal computers (pcs) and game boxes, such as those manufactured by sega or nintendo, underlie the video games industry. pcs also serve as the primarypoint of entry to the internet and therefore are critical to companies providing online entertainment, whether through socalled chat rooms ormultiplayer games. larger locationbased entertainment centers, such asthe flight simulator centers operated by virtual world entertainment andthe magic edge, also are interested in moving away from workstationbased simulators to pcbased simulators as a means of reducing operating costs.image generation has long benefited from close linkages between thecommercial and defense industries. from its early roots at evans andsutherland (e&s) and ge aerospace, the image generator industry responded largely to defense needs because volumes were low and priceshigh, typically in the millions of dollars. the high cost limited the use ofsuch simulators outside dod. nevertheless, the e&s ct5 (circa 1983)and the ge compuscene 4 computer image generators were benchmarksby which all interactive computer graphics systems were measured foryears.at about the same time, interactive 3d graphics began to migrateinto commercial applications. stanford university professor james clarkand seven of his graduate students founded silicon graphics inc. to bringrealtime graphics to a broad range of applications. other companiessoon followed, creating the nowpervasive commercial market for realtime 3d graphics. as a result, image generation capabilities that costover $1 million in 1990 are now available on the desktop for oneonethousandth (1/1,000) that priceña drop of over three orders of magnitude in less than a decade. this improvement in price/performance ramodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda37tios results from both technological advances and a related growth indemand for 3d graphics. by driving up production volumes, increaseddemand has lowered costs significantly, and the entrance of new competitors into the market has accelerated the pace of innovation and resultedin further declines in cost. as realtime 3d becomes a commodity, thetrue cost of image generation is switching to softwareñthe time and resources required to model virtual worlds.as commercial systems become more capable, more opportunitieswill exist for dod and the entertainment industry to work together onimage generation capabilities, coupling fidelity with the lower costs thatstem from producing larger volumes. a number of existing and emerging technologies could potentially be used for dod training applications.lowcost 3d image generators exist that can support robust dynamic 3denvironments. these range from game machines such as nintendo 64 tolowcost graphics boards for pcs manufactured by companies such as3dfx and lockheed martin.improvements in lowcost image generators depend on advances insix underlying technologies: processors, 3d graphics boards, communications bandwidth, storage, operating systems, and graphics software.the commercial computer industry will play the leading role in bringingsuch technologies to the market but will continue to draw from a largernational technology base created by both public and private research programs. advances in highend dod systems may be able to create capabilities that can be used in less expensive systems. processing powercontinues to increase with each new generation of microprocessors. current microprocessors operate at speeds of 200 megahertz or more, andmany include multiprocessor logic that can allow several (typically fourto eight) processors to work together on a common problem. in the areaof 3d graphics boards, some 30 to 40 companies currently offer boardsfor pcs. as a result, david clark of intel corporation predicts that theperformance of graphics chips (the number of polygons generated persecond) may double in performance every nine monthsñtwice as fast asprocessors are improving. inexpensive chips will soon be able to generate upward of 50 million pixels per second with textures. new communications architectures for pc graphics, such as intelõs accelerated graphics port architecture, will enable over 500 megabytes per second ofsustained bandwidth, enabling designers to rapidly transfer texture mapsfrom main memory, thus keeping the cost of 3d graphics low. because ofsuch advances, producers of pc hardware and software see 3d graphicsas a growing application area and are moving quickly to commercialize3d graphics technology. both windows nt and unix operating systems support pcbased graphics, and a number of software vendors areporting their applications from the workstation to the pc environment.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38modeling and simulationmultigen inc. has announced that it is making products available forwindows nt systems; gemini corporation has ported the gemini visualization system. microsoft corporationõs purchase of softimage, manufacturer of highend graphics creation software used by both dod andthe entertainment industry, promises to accelerate the graphics capabilities of pcs.trackingone of the areas that has seen insufficient innovation in the pastdecade, position and orientation tracking, continues to hamper advanceddevelopment in experiential computing. todayõs tracking systems include optical, magnetic, and acoustic systems. the most popular trackersare ac or dc magnetic systems from, respectively, polhemus corporation and ascension technologies. these systems have fairly high latency, marginal accuracy, moderate noise levels, and limited range. newuntethered tracking systems from ascension help with the intrusive nature of being wired up but still require the user to wear a large magnet.tracking remains a barrier to freeroaming experiences in virtual environments. to meet the goals of the u.s. armyõs stricom for trainingdismounted infantry, long tracker range, resistance to environmental effects from light and sound, and minimal intrusion are key to assuringthat the tracking does not get in the way of effective training (see positionpaper by traci jones in appendix d). similar requirements were expressed at the workshop by scott watson of walt disney imagineering.magnetic tracking is currently used for detecting head position and orientation in disneyõs aladdin experience and other attractions, despite thefact that the latency of such systems is roughly 100 millisecondsñlongenough to contribute to symptoms of simulator sickness.3as the performance of graphics engines rendering virtual environments increases, the proportional effect of tracker lag is increased. someopticalbased trackers are currently yielding good results but have someproblems with excessive weight and directional and environmental sensitivity. experiments with novel tracking technologies based on tiny lasers are showing promise, but much more work needs to be done beforeuntethered longrange trackers with six degrees of freedom are broadlyavailable in the commercial domain.while untethering the tracker is a current nextstep goal, the idealtracker would not only be untethered but also unobtrusive. any devicethat must be worn or held is intrusive, as it intrudes on the personalspace of the individual. all current tracking systems suffer from thisproblem except for some limitedfunctionality video tracking systems.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda39video recognition systems are typical examples of unobtrusive trackers,allowing users to be tracked without requiring them to wear anything(except for the university of north carolina video tracker, which actually had users wear cameras!). while this is an ideal, it is difficult to effectively implement and thus has seen only limited application. some examples include myron kruegerõs videoplace and vincent john vincentõsmandala system.perambulationimproved technologies are also necessary for supporting perambulation in virtual environments. the u.s. armyõs stricom has funded thedevelopment of an omnidirectional treadmill to explore issues associated with implementing perambulation in virtual environments, a topicthat is applicable to entertainment applications of vr as well. allowingparticipants in a virtual environment to wander around, explore, andbecome part of a story would greatly enhance the entertainment value ofthe attraction. it would also enable residents of a particular neighborhood to wander around synthetic recreations of their neighborhoods tosee how a proposed development nearby would affect their area, from anatural perspective and with a natural user interface. research is neededto improve current designs and to create perambulatory interfaces thatallow users to fully explore a virtual environment with floors of differenttextures, lumps, hills, obstructions, and other elements that cannot easilybe simulated using a treadmill.technologies for virtual presence4virtual presence is the subjective sense of being physically present inone environment when actually present in another environment.5 researchers in vr have hypothesized the importance of inducing a feelingof presence in individuals experiencing virtual environments if they areto perform their intended tasks effectively. creating this sense of presence is not well understood at this time, but among its potential benefitsmay be (1) providing the specific cues required for task performance, (2)motivating participants to perform to the best of their abilities, and (3)providing an overall experience similar enough to the real world that itelicits the conditioned or desired response while in the real world. several technologies may contribute to virtual presence.¥visual stimulus. this is the primary means to foster presence inmost of todayõs simulators. however, because of insufficient consideration of the impact of granularity, texture, and style in graphicsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40modeling and simulationrendering, the inherent capability of the available hardware is notutilized to the greatest effect. one potential area of collaborationcould be to investigate the concepts of visual stimulus requirementsand the various design approaches to improve graphicsrenderingdevices to satisfy these requirements.¥hearing and 3d sound. dod has initiated numerous efforts to improve the production of 3d sound techniques, but it has not yet beeneffectively used in military simulations. providing more realistic soundin a synthetic environment can improve the fidelity of the sensory cuesperceived by participants in a simulation and help them forget they arein a virtual simulated environment.¥olfactory stimulus. smell can contribute to task performance incertain situations and can contribute to a full sense of presence in a synthetic environment. there are certain distinctive smells that serve as cuesfor task initiation. a smoldering electrical fire can be used to triggercertain concerns by individuals participating in a training simulator. inaddition, smells such as that of hydraulic fluid can enhance a syntheticenvironment to the extent that it creates a sense of danger.¥vibrotactile and electrotactile displays. another sense that can beinvolved to create an enhanced synthetic environment is touch and feel.current simulator design has concentrated on moving the entire trainingplatform while often ignoring the importance of surface temperature andvibration in creating a realistic environment.¥coherent stimuli. one area that has not received much research isthe required coherent application of the abovelisted stimulations to create an enhanced synthetic environment. although each stimulation maybe valid in isolation, the real challenge is the correct level and intensity ofcombined stimulations.electronic storytellingpart of making a simulated experience engaging and realistic hasnothing to do with the fidelity of the simulation or the technological featsinvolved in producing highresolution graphics and sciencebased modeling of objects and their interactions. these qualities are certainly important, but they must be accompanied by skilled storytelling techniquesthat help participants in a virtual environment sense that they are in areal environment and behave accordingly. òthe problem we are tryingto solve here is not exactly a problem of simulation,ó stated danny hillisat the workshop. òit is a problem of stimulation.ó the problem is to usethe simulation experience to help participants learn to make the rightdecisions and take the right actions.the entertainment industry has considerable experience in creatingmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda41simulated experiencesñsuch as films and gamesñthat engage participants and enable them to suspend their disbelief about the reality of thescenario. these techniques involve methods of storytelling, of developing an engaging story and using technical and nontechnical mechanismsto enforce the emotional aspects. as danny hillis observed:if you want to make somebody frightened, it is not sufficient to showthem a frightening picture. you have to spend a lot of time setting themup with the right music, with cues, with camera angles, things like that,so that you are emotionally preparing them, cueing them, getting themready to be frightened so that when you put that frightening picture up,they are startled.understanding such techniques will become increasingly important inapplications of modeling and simulation in both dod and the entertainment industry. alex seiden of industrial light and magic observed atthe workshop that òany art, particularly film, succeeds when the audience forgets itself and is transported into another world.ó the technology used to create the simulation (such as special effects for films) mustserve the story and be driven by it.dod recognizes the importance of storytelling in its largescale simulations. judith dahmann of dmso noted that dod prepares participants for simulations by laying out the scenario in terms of the startingconditions: who is the enemy? what is the situation? what resourcesare available? however, dod may be able to learn additional lessonsfrom the entertainment industry regarding the types of sensory cues thatcan help engender the desired emotional response.selective fidelityone of the primary issues that must be considered in both entertainment and defense applications of modeling and simulation technology isachieving the desired level of fidelity. how closely must simulators mimic the behavior of real systems in order to make them useful trainingdevices? designing systems that provide high levels of fidelity can beprohibitively costly, and, as discussed above, the additional levels of fidelity may not greatly improve the simulated experience. as a result,simulation designers often employ a technique called selective fidelity inwhich they concentrate resources on improving the fidelity of those partsof a simulation that will have the greatest effect on a participantõs experience and accept lower levels of fidelity in other parts of the simulation.developers of dodõs simulator networking (simnet) system, a distributed system for realtime simulation of battle engagements and wargames, recognized that they could not fool trainees into actually believmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42modeling and simulationing they were in tanks in battle and put their resources where theythought they would do the most good.6 they adopted an approach ofselective fidelity in which only the details that proved to be important inshaping behavior would be replicated. success was measured as thedegree to which traineesõ behavior resembled that of actual tank crews.as a result, the inside of the simnet simulator has only a minimal number of dials and gauges; emphasis was placed on providing sound andthe lowfrequency rumble of the tank, delivered directly to the driverõsseat to create the sense of driving over uneven terrain. though usersinitially reported dismay at the apparent lack of fidelity, they acceptedthe simulator and found it highly realistic after interacting with it.7the entertainment industry has considerable experience in developing systems that use selective fidelity to create believable experiencesthat minimize costs. game developers constantly strive to produce realistic games at prices appropriate for the consumer market. they do so byconcentrating resources on those parts of their games most important tothe simulation. after realizing that game players spent little time lookingat the controls in a flight simulator, for example, spectrum holobyteshifted resources to improving the fidelity of the view out the window.8experiments have shown that even in higherfidelity systems the experience can be improved by telling a preimmersion background story andby giving participants concrete goals to perform in virtual environments.9selective fidelity is important in both defense and entertainment simulations, though it can be applied somewhat differently in each domainto reflect the importance given to different elements of the simulation.for dod, selective fidelity is typically used to ensure realistic interactions between and performance of simulated entities, sometimes at theexpense of visual fidelity. hence a dod simulation might have a radarsystem with performance that degrades in clouds and rain or an antitankround that inflicts damage consistent with the kind of armor on the target, but it might use relatively primitive images of tanks and airplanes ifthey are not central to the simulation. the entertainment industry tendsto place greater emphasis on visual realism, attempting to make simulated objects look real, while relaxing the fidelity of motions and interactions. an entertainment simulation is more likely to use tanks that lookreal, but that do not behave exactly like real tanks: their motion may notslow when they travel through mud, or their armor may not be thinner incertain places than in others.such differences limit the ability of defense and entertainment systems to be used in both communities. for example, while many modernvideo games create seemingly realistic simulations, they do not necessarily model the real world accurately enough to meet defense requirements.granted, there is a genre of video games that strive to be as realistic asmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda43possible. games like back to baghdad and ef2000 are popular in largepart because they strive for high degrees of accuracy. in addition, because of the long lifetimes of some trainers at dod, several modern video games far exceed the accuracy of some older operational simulators.but game designers must often break with reality in order to meet budgetary and technological constraints. as scott randolph of spectrumholobyte noted at the workshop,there is always the tendency to do things like take an [infrared] sensorthat is good for 10 miles and works best at night. but because you donõtwant to keep track of [the] time of day, you make it so it always worksthe same. it canõt really see through a cloud or dust, but since therearenõt very many clouds in the game and you donõt want to keep trackof dust, you very quickly end up with a sensor model that doesnõt model the real sensor.while the software in these applications may have the technical underpinnings to produce training devices, their primary goal is entertainment,not accuracy. given the verification, validation, and accreditation requirements that must be met for dod training applications and the profit expectations of the entertainment industry, it appears unlikely that acommon software application could be written to meet the needs of bothcommunities. this observation does not suggest that dod and the entertainment industry cannot develop a common architecture or framework(such as network protocols and database formats) for simulation thatboth communities could use, as is described in the òstandards for interoperabilityó section of this chapter.dod and the entertainment industry may be able to benefit fromtheir complementary approaches to selective fidelity. the entertainmentindustry, with support from other industries, will continue to pursuetechniques for enhancing visual fidelity. much of the basic research tosupport such efforts is being conducted in universities. the nationalscience foundation, for example, is funding a science and technologycenter for computer graphics and scientific visualization that includesparticipants from the computer graphics programs at brown university,the california institute of technology, cornell university, the universityof north carolina at chapel hill, and the university of utah. the centerhas a longterm research mission (11 years) to help improve the scientificbases for the next generation of computer graphics environments (bothhardware and software). its research focuses on modeling, rendering,interaction, and performance. in contrast, dod may have a greater incentive to explore ways of incorporating scientific and engineering principles into its simulations to enable entities to behave and interact morerealistically. once developed, techniques for fidelity may be able to bemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44modeling and simulationshared between the two communities. one committee member statedthat many game developers visit his lab seeking physicsbased modelsfor vehicles in a simulated environment.networked simulationapplicationsnetworked simulation, which allows multiple participants connected to a common network (whether a localarea network or the internet)to interact simultaneously with one another, is becoming increasinglyimportant to both dod and the entertainment industry. both share acommon need for adequate network infrastructure to support growingnumbers of participants. dodõs goal is to develop a networked trainingenvironment in which military operations can be rehearsed with largenumbers of participants while avoiding expenditures on fuel, machines,and travel. participants can range into the thousands or tens of thousands and include soldiers at workstations with weaponssystemspecificinterfaces, soldiers at keyboards, or computergenerated forces that mimic human interaction. such largescale networked simulations are carefully planned and set up, just like actual military maneuvers with realequipment; they are coordinated with radios and include the full rangeof participants needed to support military operations.for the games industry the goal of networked games is to provide ashared compelling entertainment experience for participants. players insuch networked systems are most often at the consoles of home computers or at locationbased entertainment centers and are connected via localarea networks or the internet. internetbased games are an area ofstrong growth. currently, internet gaming supports multiplayer versions of existing computer games that have been modified to allow òinternetworking.ó most use proprietary protocols to exchange informationand can support interoperability among players using the same game.though they are still at a simple stage, connecting only tens of players,such games are moving toward largerscale connectivity. if the numberof participants in networked games grows as large as dod simulations(the targeted size of military simulations has increased by nearly twoorders of magnitude over the past decade), new architectures may berequired to keep the games from running so slowly that delays (or latency) become perceptible to players.research challengesboth dod and the entertainment industry anticipate large growth inthe number of participants who engage simultaneously in networkedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda45simulations. dod has already demonstrated systems linking thousandsof players and would like to link hundreds of thousands. most networked games currently allow 8 to 32 players, but as the offerings expand, games could see hundreds or even thousands of networked participants.10 such increases in scale pose a number of challenges that willneed to be resolved. more participants implies an increase in the sizeand complexity of virtual worlds. such requirements, combined with theincreased amount of information that must be exchanged among participants, place additional demands on available bandwidth. greater network traffic implies greater delays in delivering messages along the network unless improved means can be found of designing the network ordistributing processing.overcoming bandwidth limitationsthe growth in the number of participants in networked simulationsand the desire to share greater amounts of information place increasingdemands on bandwidth and computational power of simulation andgame systems. attempts to overcome bandwidth limitations have tended to concentrate on one of two areas: (1) increasing the bandwidthavailable for networked simulations and (2) minimizing the demand forbandwidth made by networked simulations. workshop participantsagreed that there would be some value in bringing these two communities together to exchange implementation ideas and techniques.expanding available bandwidth. to overcome bandwidth limitations, boththe defense modeling and simulation community and providers of internetbased games have attempted to develop or acquire greater bandwidthfor their systems. dod has constructed its own network, the defensesimulation internet (dsi), to allow simulation systems at distant sites toengage each other. the system in effect provides dod users with adedicated widearea network that is logically separated from the internetand keeps dod messages free from other traffic on the internet. localarea networks tied to dsi are connected via a t1 line, which allows highspeed transfers of data. as such, dsi makes each participating site into abig localarea network.networked game companies have also attempted to separate theirmessage traffic from that of the internet to improve reliability and expand available bandwidth. such companies have typically negotiatedwith internet service providers to pay for premium service with certainguarantees of available bandwidth in order to reduce network latency.continued improvements in the bandwidth available for networkedsimulation will continue to derive from advances outside the defense modeling and simulation community or the entertainment industry. telemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46modeling and simulationcommunications companies and internet service providers continue toupgrade the capacity of their networks and network connections to provide higherspeed access and greater bandwidth. dod will continue toexpand the capacity of its networks for command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (c4i) and the defense simulation internet. to the extent that dodõs c4i community becomes more closelylinked with the commercial communications industry, some of the existing constraints on bandwidth may be relaxed.11reducing bandwidth requirements. other attempts at overcoming bandwidth limitations have focused on using existing bandwidth more efficiently and reducing the amount of bandwidth demanded by networkedsimulations. networked game companies, cognizant that most playersaccess the internet via 14.4 or 28.8kilobitspersecond modem connections, are striving to customize their network data to reduce data transmission requirements while maintaining the entertainment value of theirapplications. military simulation designers have paid relatively little attention to determining which data transmissions can be dispensed withwhile retaining acceptable reality at the application level. the militarycould leverage game developersõ expertise in determining what data reduction might be achievable through techniques developed by the entertainment industry. dod and the entertainment industry could also become more involved in work that is under way internationally in thecomputer and consumer electronics industries to develop image compression technologies and standards. to date, neither dod nor the entertainment community has been heavily involved in mpeg4.dod and the internet community have pursued another possible solution to the bandwidth problem: multicast routing systems that incorporatesoftwarebased areaofinterest managers (aoims) to direct packets of information across a network to particular groups of listeners.12 such systems allow any member of a group to transmit messages (containing text,voice, video, and imagery) to all other members of the group via a singletransmission.13 this approach prevents the sender from having to transmitindividual copies of the message to all intended recipients, freeing resources for other purposes. machines that are not part of the group ignore thepacket at the network interface, eliminating any need for the central processing unit to read the packet. proposed partitioning schemes are basedon spatial (geographic groupings based on locality), temporal (e.g., realtime versus nonrealtime), and functional (e.g., voice communications, aircraft) characteristics. aoims distribute partitioning algorithms among hostsrather than rely on a central aoim server. used in conjunction with multicast routing, they can help minimize the amount of bandwidth needed tosupport networked simulations.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda47work on multicast routing and aoims has been ongoing for severalyears. the naval postgraduate school has incorporated multicast into itsnpsnet for experiments across the internet. dmso has also invested inthe development of aoim filters as part of its highlevel architecture(hla), and the hlaõs runtime infrastructure (rti) will soon support acomprehensive aoim capability.14 the internet engineering task force(ietf) has also initiated an effort to implement multicast mechanisms tosupport distributed simulation. its large scale multicast applicationsworking group has developed documentation to describe how ietf multicast protocols, conference management protocols, transport protocols,and multicast routing protocols can support largescale distributed simulations, such as dod simulations containing 10,000 simultaneous groupsand upward of 100,000 virtual entities.15nevertheless, additional research is needed to expand the capabilities of aoims beyond those of simple filters and to make them generalizable across problem domains. the ietf, for example, has identified seven areas in which existing internet protocols are insufficient to supportlargescale distributed simulation networks (see table 2.1). among theseis the need to develop multicast protocols that can provide the quality ofservice needed for distributed simulation: different types of messagesmust be transmitted with different degrees of reliability and latency. inaddition, research is needed to (1) help define a network software architecture that properly uses aoims; (2) determine how best to programaoims and how to generalize the concept of aoims so that as applications change new aoims can be downloaded to match the application;and (3) implement and test aoims on a widearea network basis.network latency16latency is a major barrier to fastaction internet games and to largescale simulations generally. to make participants feel as though the system is responding in real time, designers of fastaction games typicallytry to keep the delay time between the moment players instruct theirsimulators to take certain actions (e.g., fire a gun, change direction) andthe time the system generates the appropriate response to 33 milliseconds or less. maintaining such latencies across large distributed networks, such as the internet, is difficult. electrical and optical signalstransmitted across such networks can experience several types of delays.the fundamental limitation is the speed of light: signals cannot travelroundtrip in fiber optic cable between new york and san francisco, forexample, in less than about 54 milliseconds. but signals encounter additional delays as they travel through large networks: modems must format messages for transmission over the network; routers must determinemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48modeling and simulationtable 2.1additional capabilities identified by the internetengineering task force that are needed to support multicast indistributed interactive simulationssource: pullen, j.m., m. myjak, and c. bouwens. 1997. òlimitations of internet protocolsuite for distributed simulation in the large multicast environment,ó a draft report of theinternet engineering task force dated march 24; available online at ftp.ietf.org/internetdrafts/draftietflsmalimitations01.txt.descriptionthe capability to reserve a specified amount of networkbandwidth for a given simulation to help ensure thatcertain messages can be transmitted with higher levelsof service. the proposed resource reservation protocolis one candidate for this need.routing protocol that determines the paths of packetsthrough the network based on the relative congestion ofdifferent pathways and the qualityofservice demandsof different message types.multicast capabilities need to be extended to differenttypes of widearea networks, such as those that useasynchronous transfer mode communications.a set of transmission protocols that can provide therange of qualityofservice and latency requirements ofdistributed interactive simulations, such as besteffortmulticast of most data, reliable multicast of criticalreference data, and lowlatency reliable unicast of dataamong arbitrary members of a multicast group.a protocol for managing network resources, such as thesimple network management protocol used on theinternet.procedures and protocols that facilitate coordinatedstarting, stopping, and pausing of large distributedexercises.mechanisms to ensure the integrity, authenticity, andconfidentiality of communications across the network.needresource reservation inproduction systemsresourcesensitivemulticast routingmulticast capabilities thattake advantage of allmulticastcapable datalink protocolshybrid transmissionprotocolsnetwork management fordistributed systemssession protocols to start,pause, and stopdistributed simulationsintegrated securityarchitecturemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda49how to send the messages through the network. queuing delays that aredue to congestion on large networks and packet losses (which requiremessages to be resent) can add significantly to the latency of distributednetworks, especially public networks like the internet that handle largevolumes of traffic.as a result, even premium services over the internet cannot generally meet the latency requirements for fastaction simulations conductedacross a widely distributed network. according to will harvey of sandcastle inc., network latency for roundtrip coasttocoast transmissionsacross the internet will not drop below 100 to 130 milliseconds by theyear 2000 (figure 2.1).17 fastaction simulations do not operate realistically with such latencies. participants trying to dodge bullets may become frustrated because the response time is too slow for them to dodge,or they may feel cheated because the program displays their charactersuch that it appears they have dodged it when they have not.latencies are highly dependent on the architecture of distributed networks. in a lockstep architecture (figure 2.2) each individual machinecontrols all objects locally and broadcasts changes to the other machinesvia a central server. if a player pushes a button to make his or her character jump, for example, the playerõs own machine will update the positionof the character and send a message to the server indicating that the jumpbutton was pressed. the server will broadcast a message to other playersõ machines that the first player pressed the jump button, and thoseplayerõs machines will update the first playerõs position accordingly. thesimulation advances one cycle when each machine has received a complete set of user input from all participating machines. since advancing acycle requires complete exchange of user input, the responsiveness of thesystem is limited by the latency of the slowest communication link and iscontingent on the reliability of all nodes.figure 2.1 estimated latency for roundtrip coasttocoast internet transmissions. source: position paper prepared for this project by will harvey; seeappendix d.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50modeling and simulationfigure 2.2 alternative architectures for distributed simulations. note: inthese pictures the large circle is a server or multicast router in a building. thesmall circles are machines in peopleõs homes. x, y, and z represent objects controlled by users from their own homes. proxies not shown in these figures display the objects on every machine. the x, y, and z letters represent the point ofcontrol of each object. source: position paper prepared for this project by willharvey; see appendix d.in a client/server architecture each machine independently sends itsuser input or action request to a central server, which then relays theinformation to each playerõs client machine. for example, if a playerpushes the jump button, the client machine will send a message to theserver indicating that the button has been pushed. the server will thenupdate the position of the playerõs icon and send the updated position toall client machines participating in the game. controlling an object froma client machine still entails a roundtrip delay (from client to server andback), but the responsiveness of any individual client machine is not affected by the communication speedñor reliability problemsñof the other machines.in a fully distributed architecture, machines control objects locallyand broadcast the results of actions to other machines, which receive theinformation with some time delay. if a player presses the jump button,his or her machine will update the position of his or her character andsend the updated information, via the central server, to each of the otherplayers engaged in the game. each machine has immediate responsiveness controlling its own objects but must synchronize interactions between its own objects and other objects controlled by remote machines.in the lockstep and client/server architectures, responsiveness is limited by the roundtrip communication latency to the server. in the distributed architecture, responsiveness is not limited by latencies because objects are controlled locally and the playersõ own objects respond tocommands with little delay; however, this architecture creates problemsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda51of synchronization. playersõ own objects are displayed in near real time,but other playersõ objects are displayed with a delay equal to the latencyof the system. while such synchronization problems are not of concern ifinteractions between objects are minimal, they can create problems withshared objects.attempts to resolve latency and synchronization problems can takeseveral approaches. the first is to improve the speed of the underlyingnetwork. work is under way to develop and deploy a new algorithm forqueue management called random early detection that will help minimize queuing delays across the internet and other networks.18 otherresearch is investigating ways to speed the delivery of timesensitivepackets across the internet by establishing different levels of service quality.19 for a price premium, users will be able to designate that theirpackets need to be delivered with minimal delay. similar performance isavailable today through the use of dedicated networks that some internetgaming companies and the dod have built to support distributed simulations. such networks avoid delays caused by congestion in public networks. nevertheless, all such efforts in this area cannot reduce latenciesbelow those imposed by the speed of light itself.other attempts at improving responsiveness recognize the latencies inherent in distributed systems and attempt to compensate forthem by predicting the future location of objects, a technique calleddead reckoning. this technique accommodates the delay with whichinformation is received from other participants by predicting theiractions using information such as position, velocity, and accelerationand by bringing all objects displayed on each simulator into the sametime frame. such techniques are effective only insofar as the motionsor actions of objects are predictable and continuous; they cannot yetanticipate future changes in the course of objects (although futureresearch may allow the development of more sophisticated algorithms that can anticipate deviations from continuous motions, perhaps by incorporating information about terrain features or past flighttrajectories). participants in simulated tank engagements have foundways to outsmart such deadreckoning techniques: before passing infront of an enemy tank, they will accelerate quickly and then stopabruptly so that the enemy tank will incorrectly predict and displaytheir position.alternatively, some researchers are developing techniques for synchronizing events across distributed simulations.20 such approaches assume that information from remote simulators will always be receivedwith a time delay and that many actions cannot be predicted accurately.thus, they show objects from remote machines with an inherent timedelay. if users have no interactions with remote objects, the time delaymodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52modeling and simulationdoes not interfere with the simulation and the system need not compensate for the time differential. but if objects from local and remote machines do interact, synchronization technologies compensate for the timedifference. these technologies give users the impression that the network has zero latency, or immediate responsiveness, but they do so bysacrificing some degree of fidelity. for example, a 100meter car racemay actually be a 90meter race with 10 meters of compensation interjected at the appropriate places to synchronize the outcome; similarly, a ballthrown from one player to another may travel faster when moving awayfrom than toward the local player (box 2.1). while having demonstratedsome efficacy in game applications, additional analysis will be needed todetermine the suitability of such techniques for defense simulations thatrequire high levels of fidelity.standards for interoperabilitya related area of interest to dod and the internet games communityis standards for interoperability. interoperability is the ability of varioussimulation systems to work with each other in a meaningful and coherent fashion.21 it is often defined as a matter of degree: a simulation isconsidered compliant if it can send and receive messages to and fromother simulators in accordance with an agreedupon specification. twoor more simulators are considered compatible if they are compliant andtheir models and data transmissions support the realization of a commonoperational environment. they are interoperable if their performance characteristics support the fidelity required for the exercise and allow a faircontest between participants in which differences between individualsimulators are overwhelmed by user actions. for example, a flight simulator with no damage assessment capability would not be interoperablewith other simulators having this capabilityñeven if they can communicate data effectivelyñbecause it could not detect that it had been hit byan enemy missile and destroyed.achieving interoperability between simulation systems requires (1) acommon network software architecture with standard protocols that govern the exchange of information about the state of each of the participants in the simulation; (2) a common underlying architecture for maintaining information about the state of the environment related to aparticular simulator; and (3) a common representation of the virtual environment.22 as the size and scale of defense simulations grow, participants will need a consistent view of the battlefield so that they can agreeon the location of objects there and on the timing of events. given thatdifferent players will have different ways of gathering information (e.g.,radars and other sensors as well as information relayed from commandmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda53and communications centers), they do not need to have the same information, but the simulation itself should not alter the information they receive. meeting these requirements allows tank simulators, for example,to be designed and interconnected so that their operators can share information and train jointly in a common virtual battlefield.related to this capability is composability, the ability to build simulations using components designed for other simulations. composabilityis a significant concern for dod, which cannot construct a single intebox 2.1an example of event synchronizationconsider a football game played by multiple players in a distributednetwork. it is important that the football be controlled locally on themachine of the player currently holding the ball so that latencies areminimized; otherwise, the ball will not move at the same time as theplayerõs hand, and a lag may be apparent. if the football is passed toanother player, it must then be controlled by the other playerõs machine, but passing the football is complicated by the fact that the positions of the players on the two computers may not be synchronizedbecause of latencies in the network.the solution to this problem rests on two observations. first, bymigrating the football from one machine to another, the latency problem can be corrected. second, two players do not need to see exactlythe same thing on their two screens, as long as they agree on the outcome and no one feels cheated. so if one player throws another afootball, the football can travel slightly slower from the first to the second player on one screen than on the other, giving control of the football a chance to migrate from one computer to the other midwaythrough the path. neither player can tell the difference.to demonstrate the viability of this approach, sandcastle inc. developedan experimental internet ping pong game in which two players hit a ballback and forth to each other, controlling individual paddles. each playersees his or her own paddle in real time and the opponentõs paddle withsome time delay. each player sees the ball travel away from his or herpaddle at a slower speed than the ball travels toward his or her paddle, sothat at the point at which the ball reaches the opponentõs paddle, the playersees the ball and the opponentõs paddle at a point in the past equal to thelatency of the system. in experiments, participants could not detect a delayin the system, even with network latencies of twothirds of a second (670milliseconds).source: will harvey, sandcastle inc.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54modeling and simulationgrated simulation that serves all possible purposes and would like tominimize the development costs of new simulations. using composablesimulations, for example, a simulation designed to train aircrews andground forces in conducting close air support operations could be builtusing simulated aircraft and simulated soldiers that were designed forother simulations. ensuring this type of interoperability requires a common architecture for the design of simulations and a common understanding of the types of tasks conducted by the individual simulatorsand those conducted by the integrating system. while most existing simulations were designed for a particular purpose and may not be able tobe combined into larger simulations, future systems may be able to bedesigned in ways that will allow greater interoperability and composability.dod efforts in interoperabilityover the past several years dod has attempted to develop standardsto promote interoperability among its simulation systems. such effortshave needed to accommodate the heterogeneity and scale of entities modeled in the virtual battlefieldñcombat aircraft, tanks, and ships, and refueling vehiclesñand support the full generality of participant interactions. to this end the defense simulation community developedstandards, such as distributed interactive simulation (dis) standards,that aim primarily at achieving òplugandplayó interoperability amongsimulators developed by independent manufacturers.dis is a group of standards developed by members of the defense modeling and simulation community (both industry and university researchers)to facilitate distributed interactive simulations. they can be used for hostingpeertopeer multiuser simulations in which objects (typically vehicles)move independently, shoot weapons at each other, and perform standardlogistics operations such as resupply and refueling. the dis protocols include a variety of industry and military standards for computer equipmentand software, as well as the transmission control protocol/internet protocol (tcp/ip) networking protocols used over the internet. specific protocols have had to be devised to define the communications architecture fordistributed simulations as well as the format and content of informationexchanges, the types of information relevant to entities (such as tanks, aircraft, and command posts) and the types of interactions possible betweenthem, simulation management, performance measures, radio communications, emissions, field instrumentation, security, database formats, fidelity,exercise control, and feedback.23 dis has a welldeveloped simulation management subprotocol for setting up and controlling individual players in anexercise. consequently, dis can achieve certain levels of data interchangemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda55for oneonone and unitlevel interactions but cannot support aggregationand disaggregation of units.the dis standard is derived from protocols developed for dodõssimulation network (simnet) system, adopting its general principles,terminology, and protocol data unit (pdu) formats for transmitting information between simulators.24 the initial set of protocols (dis 1.0) wasaccepted by the standards board of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee) in 1993 and is now codified under ieee standard 12781993. these protocols were subsequently recognized by theamerican national standards institute.in addition, dod has been pursuing development of the highlevelarchitecture (hla) to facilitate both interoperability and composability.hla is a software architecture that defines the division of labor betweensimulators and a layer of support software, called the runtime infrastructure (rti), that facilitates interoperability. it consists of specifications, interfaces, and standards for a broad range of simulations, from combat simulations to engineering analyses. groups of people wanting to establishinteroperability among their simulators via the rti do so by creating afederation. federation members make their own decisions about the types ofentities that will be included in simulations and the types of informationthey will exchange. individual simulators post statechange information tothe rti and receive statechange information from other simulators via therti. the rti makes sure all parties to a federation receive statechangedata and ensures that the federationõs data are time synchronized and routed efficiently to the other simulations in the federation.development of the hla is being managed by the architecture management group, which is chaired by dmso and has representatives fromall military services and dod agencies developing advanced modelingand simulation systems. members represent a wide range of militaryapplications, from training and military operations to analysis, test andevaluation, and engineeringlevel models for system acquisition and production. development of the hla was initiated in 1994, when darpaawarded three contracts for the definition of a highlevel architecture foradvanced distributed simulations. contractors analyzed the needs ofprototype federations in four areas: (1) platform simulators (such as anm1 tank simulator and close combat tactical trainer; (2) joint training(simulationlike war games that occur in accelerated time); (3) analyticalsimulations of systems to support joint theaterlevel warfighting andsupport activities; and (4) engineering federations to design, test, andevaluate new military systems. the final briefings from these contractorteams were received in january 1995, and a core team of individualssynthesized the inputs, with additional insight from other ongoing dodmodeling and simulation programs to arrive at the initial definition ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56modeling and simulationthe hla.25 testing of prototype federations was completed in july 1996to determine if the rti was broadly enough defined to be useful across awide range of federations. test results informed development of thehla baseline definition, which was completed in august 1996 and approved by the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology as the standard technical architecture for all dod simulations in september 1996. all simulations developed after october 1, 1999, mustcomply with hla; no existing simulations that are not compliant withhla may be used after october 1, 2001, unless they are converted to thestandard.26box 2.2the processes used to create standardsthe development of a standard for distributing 3d computer graphicsand simulations over the internet has taken the quick path from idea toreality. in 1994 mark pesce, tony parisi, and gavin bell combined theirefforts to start the vrml effort. their intention was to create a standard thatwould enable artists and designers to deliver a new kind of content to thebrowsable internet.in mid1995 vrml version 1.0 emerged as the first attempt at this standard. after an open internet vote, vrml 1.0 was to be based on silicongraphics inc.õs (sgi) popular open inventor technology. vrml was widely evaluated as unique and progressive but still not useable. at this point,broad industry support for vrml was coalescing in an effort to kickstart anew industry. complementary efforts were also under way to deliver bothaudio and video over the internet. the general feeling was that soon thebroad acceptance of distributed multimedia on the internet was a real possibility and that vrml would emerge as the 3d standard.after completion of the vrml 1.0 standard, the vrml architecturegroup (vag) was established at the association for computing machineryõs special interest group on computer graphics (siggraph) annualconference in 1995. it consisted of eight internet and 3d simulation experts. in early 1996 vag issued a request for proposals on the secondround of vrml development. the call was answered by six industry leaders. the selection of the vrml 2.0 standard was made via open voting andoccurred in a short time frame of about two weeks. sgi emerged as thewinner with its òmoving worldsó proposal. by this time over 100 companies had publicly endorsed vrml, and many of them were working oncore technologies, browsers, authoring tools, and content. at siggraphõ96, vag issued the final vrml 2.0 specification and made a number ofother significant announcements.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda57to help maintain vrml as a standard, vag made several concretemoves. first, it started the process of creating the vrml consortium, a notforprofit organization devoted to vrml standard development, conformance, and education. second, vag announced that the international organization for standardization would adopt vrml and the consensusbasedstandardization process as its starting place for an international 3d metafile format.like vrml, dis standards were generated in an open process via thebiannual workshop on standards for the interoperability of distributed simulations. though the first version of dis derived largely from standardsdeveloped by bbn corporation for the simnet program, participation in arevision of the standards was greatly expanded. the first workshop washeld in orlando, florida, in september 1989 and defined the shape of thedis standards as they progressed from protocols for dodõs simulationnetworking (simnet) program to the version 2.1.4 standards that exist today. attendance at the workshop grew from 150 people in 1989 to morethan 1,500 in september 1996.in contrast, the hla design and prototype implementations were developed by a small group of dod officials and contractors in a more closedfashion that did not solicit input from the modeling and simulation community at largeñdespite an interest in promulgating the standard broadly.doing so speeded development of the standard, but significant concernswere expressed that requirements of the broader community were being leftout in the rush to completion. few members of the communications architecture group of the dis workshop participated in hlaõs development, nordid representatives from industries outside defense.sources: position paper prepared for this project by brian blau; see appendix d. also, lantham, roy. 1996. òdis workshop in transition to . . .what?ó, real time graphics 5(4):45.dod hopes that the hla will be adopted outside the defense modeling and simulation community. to facilitate this process, rti softwarewill be made freely available as a starter kit.27 the software will be in thepublic domain; initial release will be for sun workstations, with laterreleases for silicon graphics, hewlettpackard, and the windows ntplatforms. adoption of hla beyond dod is questionable, however;members of the entertainment industry noted at the workshop that hlaõsdevelopment took place largely without their inputñor that of other nondefense communities. as a result, many representatives of the gamescommunity believe that hla will not meet their needs; at the workshopmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58modeling and simulationmany indicated that they were not even aware that the standard wasbeing developed.28 further, the process used to develop hla may haveoffended those who were not involved in the development process.29hla was not developed in as open a manner as dis standards and standards for the internet community, such as the virtual reality modelinglanguage (vrml) (box 2.2).interoperability in the entertainment industrythe entertainment industry, to date, has expressed different interestsregarding interoperability standards. while dod has a strong interest inensuring that various simulation systems can work together, the enterbox 2.3virtual reality modeling languagevrml is an evolving standard used to extend the world wide web tothree dimensions. it is a widely accepted commercial standard, one thatpeople heavily involved with the internet are seriously thinking about andadopting for their software development. the current version, vrml 2.0, isbased on an extended subset of the silicon graphics inc.õs (sgi) openinventor scene description language. it has both a static component and aninteractive component. the static component features geometry, textures,3d sound, and animation. the interactive component contains a flexibleprogrammability that can be added to a vrml file through the use of javacode, another internet technology. this addition of java allows not onlygraphics data to be exchanged with vrml but also behaviors. vrml isboth comprehensive and unfinished, with its current draft exceeding several hundred pages.complex issues surrounding realtime animation in vrml 2.0 includeentity behaviors, userentity interaction, and entity coordination. many factors are involved. to scale to many simultaneous users, peertopeer interactions are necessary in addition to clientserver query and response. an approved specification for internal and external behaviors is nearly complete.vrml 2.0 will provide local and remote hooks (i.e., an applications programming interface, or api) to graphical scene descriptions. dynamic scenechanges will be stimulated by any combination of scripted actions, messagepassing, user commands or behavior protocols (such as dis or java). thus,the forthcoming vrml behaviors standardization will simultaneously providesimplicity, security, scalability, generality, and open extensions.vrml is not yet complete, and there is still ongoing work. three specific areas being addressed include definition of an external api, definition ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda59tainment industry places strong emphasis on developing proprietary systems and standards that preclude interoperability. mattel, for instance,encrypted data output from its power glove input device so that it couldnot be used with competitorsõ game devices. nintendo and sega gamemachines cannot interoperate with each other or with computerbasedvideo games. a flight simulator game produced by spectrum holobyteinc. cannot be used in a mock fight against strategic simulation inc.õsback to baghdad game. even within the multiplayer networked games,each player uses the same game program. commercial standards havetherefore not sought interoperability between independent systems, buthave attempted to allow independently produced software titles to integrate with the same user frontend software (such as operating systems,a default browser scripting language, and compression technology. thepurpose of the external api is to provide a way for web developers to writeprograms that are able to drive a vrml simulator or a vrml browser. acall has been issued requesting proposals for this external api, and thevrml community expects to have that finalized in 1997. the purpose ofthe default scripting language is to have a standard language that can beembedded in a vrml file, a language understood by every vrml browser.a call has been requested for proposals for this language.the purpose of the compression technology call is to be able to compressvrml data, hence minimizing bandwidth requirements on the internet. aparticular response to this call is notable in that it is a joint proposal betweenibm and apple computer. the proposal is for the binary compression ofvrml files and is significant because ibm and apple have decided to openup their patents on geometry compression, providing them free to the internet.ibm and apple are providing royaltyfree licenses to vrml developers for thiscompression. this is a significant step in the types of collaboration the internetenvironment seems to be bringing out in the commercial world.the vrml community is taking steps to ensure widespread adoption.the major step in this direction is that a vrml consortium is being formedas a permanent fixture of the internet community. additionally, the international organization for standardization (iso) has picked up vrml as the3d metafile standard, a selection it has been working on for quite a fewyears. by selecting vrml, iso changed the way it normally does business.for the 3d metafile standard, iso put aside its normal process of buildingits own standard. instead it opted to adopt vrml as it is today in order tofinish quickly. the entire iso standards process for vrml is expected to becompleted within just 14 months, cutting literally 75 percent of the timethat it normally takes to create a standard.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60modeling and simulationweb browsers, or graphics libraries) so that players with different computer systems can play each other. standards such as vrml 2.0,opengl, and directx are aimed in this direction (box 2.3). as a result ofthese standards, a user can use the same software to run a variety ofgame applications.research areasgrowing interest in networked simulation suggests that research intostandards and architectures for interoperability will continue to be needed. areas of particular interest include protocols for networking virtualenvironments, architectures to support interoperability, and interoperability standards.virtual reality transfer protocolresearchers in advanced browser and networked game technologiesare beginning to have similar concerns regarding interoperability. thedesire from the browser side is for interactive 3d capabilities, but thevrml standard does not have the ability to support peertopeer communicationsñthe type of communications required for networked interactive gaming. browsers allow heterogeneous software architectures tointeroperate, thanks to the http standard.additional work is ongoing toward the development of a standardfor networked virtual environments. a 1995 national research councilreport identified networking as one of the critical bottlenecks preventingthe creation of largescale virtual environments (lsves) as ubiquitouslyas home pages on the web.30 numerous important component technologies for lsves have been developed, but that work is not yet complete,and significant research and integration work remain.31 some of the integration work is to merge the ideas from the lsve research communitywith work from the internet/world wide web community. the integration effort discussions are occurring under various titlesñthe virtual reality transfer protocol and the ietfõs largescale multicast applicationsworking group.32among the component technologies that have enabled rapid exponential growth of the web are html and http. html is a standardizedpage markup language that allows the placement of text, video, audio,and graphics in a nonplatformdependent fashion. html is being extended into four dimensions with vrml via the addition of 3d geometryand temporal behaviors. http is the hypertext transfer protocol, an applications layer protocol used to serve html pages and other informationacross the internet. http binds together several dissimilar protocols inmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda61cluding the ftp, telnet, gopher, and mailto protocols; hence, it is an integration or metaprotocol. to support lsves across the internet, it is expected that a continuum of dissimilar protocols will have to be integratedinto a single metaprotocol, an applicationslayer protocol called the virtual reality transfer protocol (vrtp).33 at a minimum, vrtp will combinehttp (for url service), peertopeer communications (such as dis and itsrelatives), multicast streaming (for audio/video streams), java agents,heavyweight object server protocols (such as corba and activex), andnetwork monitoring.with vrtp and by using the existing internet infrastructure, webscalable lsves will be constructible. vrtp will be an open architecture thatwill use standardsbased publicdomain software and reusable implementations, all taking advantage of the sustained exponential growth ofòinternetworkedó global information. the vrtp project is ongoing andtaking a similar standards approach to that used for vrml, an open,public, webbased forum for technical discussion and adoption.architectures for interoperabilityoutside the vrml/vrtp communities, there is little academic research on solving the network software architecture interoperability problem. nevertheless, the benefits of additional research could be large, andthere are many unsolved research problems. the key to solving the network software architecture problem is to understand that doing so in ascalable way will require attention not just to networking issues but alsoto networking and software architecture issues. this means that onecannot just design an applicationslayer protocol to establish messageformats. attempts to design distributed simulations must consider thescarcity of available network bandwidth and processor cycles and mustattempt to minimize latencies across the network. bruteforce methodsinvolving large computers can do simple aggregation to help minimizebandwidth, but such methods are expensive and limited. distributedsolutions that work with both network bandwidth and processor cyclelimitations are inherently more scalable.34 realtime simulation requireshighperformance systems and low communications latency. addingmore layers of abstraction and protocol, as is common for achieving interoperability, can work against the need to meet the latency and performance requirements of networked simulations. research into applicationlevel protocols and architectures must take these considerations intoaccount.from the networked games perspective, heterogeneity in software architecture is not yet possible, although some research is being done. thedesire to build largescale gaming, on the order of thousands of players inmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62modeling and simulationthe same virtual world, may require game companies to move toward moremalleable standardized protocols. game companies will have to decidehow to define their applicationslayer protocols, again the same thing thateveryone in the largescale virtual world must be able to do. one proposalbeing considered is for the creation of an applicationslayer protocol calledgamescript. the purpose behind gamescript is to define a standard applicationslayer protocol that allows games designed by different manufacturers to communicate. one of the most often described uses for gamescript isthat players in one game see players in neighboring games at the boundaries of their virtual worlds. this serves as a teaser for game players todeposit money and try the next game. several telephone companies andsmall venturecapitalfunded startups are working on this, but no newproducts have been announced yet. gamescript work is similar to hlaand to the virtual reality transfer protocol work.interoperability standardscommon interoperability standards could have benefits to both dodand the entertainment industry, enabling them to solve common problems with common solutions. at present, there is no consensus in thegames industry on the desirability of a common set of interoperabilitystandards. while some game developers see common standards as ameans of facilitating attempts to move networked games onto the internet, many do not yet consider common standards a high priority. according to warren katz of m−k technologies, resistance to common interoperability standards is generally based on four factors:¥technical considerationsñcommon standards tend to be designedto accommodate a wide range of potential uses and therefore are notoptimal for any particular use. given existing limitations in bandwidthfor internetbased games (most potential users connect to the internet viamodems that communicate at 14.4 or 28.8 kilobits per second), manygame companies prefer to design custom protocols that maximize performance.¥notinventedhere syndromeñmany commercial firms have a biasagainst technology developed outside their own organization. engineersin many companies believe they can develop better protocols that willprovide a more elegant solution to a problem or that will speed processing times considerable. acceptance of an existing solution implies thatthey are incapable of doing better.¥strategic value of proprietary solutionñproprietary networking protocols are viewed as a strategic competitive advantage. use of a publicstandard would eliminate one element of advantage by allowing competmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda63itors to use the same technology. in addition, use of a public standardcould signal that a company is unable to develop a better solution.¥controlñadoption of an industry or public standard reduces thecontrol a company has over its protocols. standards committees determine changes to the protocol. companies that control their own protocols can upgrade them at their own pace, as the need arises.these factors have, to date, stymied the use of dis standards in theentertainment industry. according to warren katz, many video gamecompanies have examined dis protocols for suitability in their games,but few have implemented them. some companies have found dis protocols to be too big and complex, performing operations that were notrelevant to video games and slowing the performance of the system.35others view dis as a standard for military applications and do not consider it appropriate for nonmilitary games. as a result, the dis protocolshave not been embraced in an unmodified form by any game company.several game companies have developed protocols derived from dis thatinclude only those functions needed to support their applications. eachof these implementations is proprietary to the developing company andnot interoperable with other companiesõ protocols.many companies developing networked games attempt to use theirproprietary protocols to their competitive advantage. proprietary solutions serve as a means of differentiating one companyõs products fromanotherõs and, possibly, of generating revenues through licensing. shouldone company develop a set of standards that is perceived as superior insome critical respects (whether allowing greater numbers of participantsor by offering better games), it can make its games more attractive togame players. furthermore, other companies might want to developgames that interoperate with that standard. the standard developer cancharge a licensing fee that generates revenues in addition to whateverrevenues it makes from selling its games. use of a common or publicstandard does not provide such opportunities.not all companies will necessarily follow this business model. somegame companies might, for example, see their competitive advantage inthe content of their games, not necessarily their networking capabilities.they might attempt to develop a protocol that they license freely in thehope that it will become widely adopted and facilitate growth in themarket for networked games, leading to more sales of their titles. adoption of this model will require a shift in the current business model ofmost video game companies. some impetus for this shift may followfrom growth in the market for multiplayer internet games, but none hasyet been seen in the games market.as the internet games industry matures, it is possible that commonmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64modeling and simulationstandards for interoperability, such as hla, could become of interest togame developers as a means of allowing them to reuse portions of onesimulation to populate another. anita jones, dodõs director of defenseresearch and engineering through may 1997, suggested at the workshopthat as games become more complex, incorporating more players and agreater number of possible types of interactions between and among players, game developers may shift to a new product development strategyin which they construct games from components already developed forother simulations. gilman louie, of spectrumholobyte, suggested thatinternetbased games may encourage such change. much like televisionor cable, internet channels will need a great deal of programming withfrequent updates and new activities so that users can experience something new to do every time they log on. the code base will need to bedesigned to allow easy upgrades so that designers can replace particularobjects without completely redesigning the system.36others at the workshop suggested that hla might be advantageousin allowing realtime simulations to interoperate with simulations thatprogress faster or slower than real time. in the video games world thiscapability would mean that a highlevel strategy game that typically runsfaster than real time could interoperate with a realtime simulator: aturnbased chess game could interoperate with a simulation of the motion of the pieces. though these capabilities could be very useful in agame environment, it would be unreasonable to assume that any gamescompany would adopt hla without a strong outside influence. themore likely scenario, according to warren katz, is that a game companywill adapt desired features of hla within its own proprietary protocol.computergenerated charactersone of the major challenges in creating a useful simulation system ispopulating simulated environments with intelligent characters and groupsof characters. while some or even many of the entities present in simulatedworlds may be controlled by human operators who are networked into thesimulation, many are likely to be operated by the computer itself. suchcomputergenerated characters are a critical element of both defense and entertainment systems and serve a wide range of functions. computergenerated characters may serve as an adversary against which a game player oruser of a training system competes, such as an opponent in a computerizedchess game or an enemy aircraft in a flight simulator. at other times theymay serve as collaborators that guide participants through a virtual worldor serve as a crew member. in large networked simulations, computergenerated characters may control the actions of elements for which humancontrollers are unavailable, whether a rival tank, a wingman, or a copilot.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda65computergenerated characters in entertainmentvirtually all sectors of the entertainment industry are interested incomputergenerated character technologies as a means of creating morebelievable experiences for participants and allowing greater automationof services where possible. companies in the video games, virtual reality, and filmmaking sectors are developing or have deployed productsthat incorporate computergenerated characters. since the creation ofcompelling virtual characters holds such allure, whoever can developcompelling complex characters in a rich fantasy world available throughan accessible medium at an affordable price stands to profit handsomely.it is therefore likely that any company that devises a successful approachto solving this problem will be disinclined to share the enabling technologies in order to protect its competitive advantage.video gamesalmost every genre of computer games, whether it be sports, action,strategy, or simulation, depends on computergenerated opponents. theability of a game to attract and entertain players is directly linked to thequality of the computergenerated competitors in a game. all of the bestselling pc games (chessmaster, madden football, command and conquer,grand prix ii, civilization, balance of power, falcon 3.0, and ef2000) featurecomputergenerated opponents that challenge users. gilman louie ofspectrum holobyte estimates that three of the four years required toproduce a new video game are dedicated to developing algorithms forcontrolling computergenerated forces.increasingly capable computergenerated opponents have been incorporated into video games since the first commercial video game wasintroduced in 1970. nutting and associatesõcomputer space allowed users to control a rocket that was pitted against two computercontrolledflying saucers. the player avoided the flying saucerõs missiles whiletrying to steer its missile into one of the saucers. the flying saucers werecontrolled by a simple random function. after a few short months, players were able to quickly master the game and earn bonus time; soon after,players became bored with the game and stopped playing. learningfrom this experience, the designers of the next major video game, pong,replaced computergenerated agents with a second joystick so that players played against each other rather than a computer. in the early 1980s,atari games created what many considered to be the first credible strategic military simulation on a personal computer, eastern front. playersconfronted a computerbased challenger that relied on a simple but effective rulebased system. the system used a series of òifthenó statementsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66modeling and simulationto determine the computerõs response to a playerõs move. continuedadvances in computer technology and computergenerated forces enabledthe creation of more sophisticated agents in games such as harpoon andaegis, as well as panzer general. pcbased games further pushed thedevelopment of highquality computergenerated opponents. unlikemost dedicated video games (with game boxes, such as those manufactured by nintendo, sega, and sony), which are designed for simultaneous play by two to four players, pcs are generally used by one personat a time and games are designed for individual play. pc games therefore demand development of effective computergenerated forces, andpcs typically have microprocessors with sufficient power to supportmore complex computergenerated forces.future trends in video games will heighten the need for computergenerated forces and characters. many multiplayer and online gameswill feature persistent universes that continue to exist and evolve evenwhen a particular player is not engaged in the game. these games willtake place over a significant span of time, at times without a definitiveend. they will be similar to multipleuser domains in that users cancome in to the game and exit at will. persistent universes are critical toeffective online games because they negate the need to coordinate largenumber of players and schedule games; in a persistent universe the gameis always being played. such games also get around the need to play anentire campaign or game in one sitting, enabling players to enter and exitas their schedules permit. at the same time, such games pose severalproblems: (1) the movement of players in and out of the game may bedisorienting for the other players and destroys the continuity of thegame;37 (2) game masters will not be able to ensure that enough realplayers are available at any given time to make the game enjoyable forparticipants; and (3) it may be hard to generate an environment that givesplayers a large enough role and provides the necessary rewards to keepthem coming back. the solution to some of these problems is to create anenvironment that is fully populated by computercontrolled forces: either automated forces that are entirely controlled by the computer orsemiautomated forces that are given highlevel instructions by a real player but are then controlled by the computer. when players enter the environment, they will be able to replace one of the automated elements untilthey log off; then the computer will regain control. players may also givegeneral orders before logging off to keep units on a strategic or tacticaldirection until they return. the entertainment industry has begun tomake progress in this area. a handful of realtime games, such as command and conquer, allow the player to control game pieces at a high level,giving the player instructions as to where to move or what action to takemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda67but not specifying the details of the process. additional work will enablethe broader use of such techniques.locationbased entertainmentcomputergenerated character technologies also appear in immersivevirtual reality attractions. walt disney companyõs aladdin attraction, forexample, puts the participant into a virtual environment with many simulated individuals performing throughout the virtual world.38 characterssuch as shopkeepers, camel herders, the sultanõs guards, and others populate the simulated city of agrabah. participants experience this attractionthrough headmounted displays and spatialized headphones. they sit on asaddle and hold a section of persian carpet that serves as their controllerand enables them to fly their magic carpet around the city. as they explorethe city, they encounter characters who go about their own business butreact to the presence of the participant. behaviors are programmed intothese characters and others. all characters react to the guestõs presence;some of them have some intelligence designed into them, and they attemptto provide useful information to the guests, based on their current circumstances.in other entertainment media, books, film, and television, there areextensive examples of intelligent agents in synthetic worlds. in warnerbrotherõs 1994 film disclosure, an angelic avatar assists the protagonist insearching a virtual reality library representing the computerõs file system. in the current television series, star trek voyager, the shipõs physician is a holographic projection with intelligence and a database compiled from the expert knowledge of thousands of other physicians.one of the standards of persistent virtual worlds and characters isthe 1992 book snowcrash by neal stephenson. snowcrash defines a persistent virtual world known as the metaverse that is mostly populated byreal people who go there by donning an avatar that represents them inthat space. there are also totally synthetic characters, of greater or lessercapability and complexity, who interact with real characters in themetaverse as if they were simply avatars for real people. today, thesecomplex humanmimicking synthetic characters are simply science fiction. the challenge is to make them a reality for worlds of entertainmentas well as worlds for training.filmthe film industry has also expressed interest in computergeneratedcharacters and digital actors of various kinds. digital effects studios arenow creating threedimensional digital data sets of actors, such as tommodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68modeling and simulationcruise, denzel washington, and sylvester stallone.39 work in digitalactors is attempting to generate digitized versions of real actors that canbe used in making films. while one motivation for developing digitalactors is to avoid the high costs of hiring real actors, the true motivationsinclude the ability to create additional scenes, if necessary, after a realactor has finished a film and to perform actions that real actors cannot orwill not do, such as dangerous stunts.digital actor technology can also allow directors to create new characters that combine elements of existing actorsñor to resurrect dead stars.gte interactive, for example, recently unveiled a digitized likeness of marilyn monroeñcreated by nadia magnenatthalmannñthat can chat withvisitors on the world wide web and respond to typed questions withspeech and facial expressions.40 a short film starring the computergenerated marilyn, rendezvous ‹ montreal, also has been created. digital actorsare seen as a key element of interactive media.41 interest has become largeenough to have spawned a conference on virtual humans in june 1996; asecond conference was held in june 1997. the goal of such efforts is not justto incorporate existing twodimensional video images into film (e.g., as wasdone in forrest gump) but to allow films and other sorts of entertainment tobe based around digital characters that act and perform various roles.dod applications of computergenerated charactersdod has a strong interest in what it calls computergenerated forces(cgfs). cgfs fall into two categories: (1) semiautomated forces (safs)that require some direct human involvement to make tactical decisionsand to control the activities of the aggregated force and (2) automatedforces, which are completely controlled by the computer. both kinds ofcomputergenerated forces are under development now for military systems and will find extensive application in modeling and simulation asthe technology continues to mature.dod systems use cgfs for a variety of applications. in systemsdesigned to train individual war fighters, autonomous forces are used tocreate adversaries for trainees to engage in simulated battles. in largenetworked training simulations, computergenerated characters are widely used to control opposing forces since it is too expensive to have all theopposing forces controlled by experts in foreign force doctrine. for suchscenarios the military has also pioneered the development of safs, whichare aggregated forces (such as tank platoons, army brigades, or fighterwings, as opposed to individual tanks, soldiers, and aircraft) that requirehuman control at a high level of abstraction. rather than controllingspecific actions of individual elements of the unit, the saf operator provides strategic direction, such as moving the unit across the river or flymodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda69ing close air support. the computer directs the forces to carry out thecommand. hence, safs provide a way for training highranking commanders who must control the actions of thousands of soldiers on thebattlefield. to date, most training tools have been directed toward standalone training simulators and parttask trainers that train individuals andsystems such as simnet that train small groups of soldiers to work together on the battlefield.there is now a diverse and active interest throughout the dod modeling and simulation community in the development of computergenerated forces. darpa is sponsoring the development of modular semiautomated forces for the synthetic theater of war program, which includesboth intelligent forces and command forces. this effort also involvesdevelopment of a commandandcontrol simulation interface language.it is designed for communications between and among simulated command entities, small units, and virtual platforms. the military services,specifically the armyõs close combat tactical trainer program, are nowdeveloping opposing forces and blue forces (friendly forces) to be completed in 1997. the british ministry of defence also is developing similarcapabilities using command agent technology in a program called command agent support for unit movement facility. dod has several programs to improve the realism of its automated forces, such as darpaõsintelligent, imaginative, innovative, interactive what if simulation system for advanced research and development (i4wissard). academicand industrial interest in this technology led to the first internationalconference on autonomous agents in february 1997 in marina del rey,california.common research challengesthe challenge for todayõs researchers is to develop computergenerated characters that model human behavior in activities such as flying afighter aircraft, driving a tank, or commanding a battalion such that participants cannot tell the difference between a humancontrolled force anda computercontrolled force.42 doing so can help prevent participantsfrom looking for and taking advantage of the gaps in a logic routineinstead of developing skills that can be applied with or against otherhuman participants (an old pilotõs adage is, òif you ainõt cheating, youainõt trying!ó). in his 1996 chess match with the ibm computer deep blue,for example, gary kasparov learned the computerõs tendencies duringhis first losing game and exploited those tendenciesñand the computerõslack of adaptabilityñto come back and win the tournament. he was lesssuccessful in his 1997 match because deep blue had been programmed tomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70modeling and simulationdevelop strategies like a human and could conceive of and execute movesunanticipated by kasparov.43the key is to find ways to implement computergenerated characters that behave convincingly like human participants for extendedperiods of time. doing so requires research to develop agents that (1)can adapt their behaviors in response to changes in the behavior ofhuman participants, (2) accurately model the behavior of individualentities (as opposed to aggregated units), and (3) can be easily aggregated and disaggregated.adaptabilitya significant problem facing the development of automated forces is that humans learn and adapt faster than most existing computeralgorithms. to date, games have been short enough that computergenerated forces based on specified scripts or simple òifthenó rulescould provide enough of a challenge for most players, but with persistent universes simple rulebased systems will not be good enoughto control automated forces. safs used in dod systems are typicallybased on aggregated behaviors of tank or aircraft crews. operationsare extremely regimented; tank elements, for instance, operate on thebasis of the armyõs combat instruction sets, which were relativelyeasy to codify. dod is also attempting to create automated safswith behaviors that can adapt. efforts in these areas are resulting ina shift from safs that are algorithm based to ones based on artificialintelligence (ai). the first experiment was with a system calledsoar, developed by carnegie mellon university, the university ofsouthern california, and the university of michigan.most such work is concentrated on knowledge acquisition by thesaf using ai techniques such as expert systems and casebased reasoning. expert systems are developed by interviewing experts to discoverthe rules of thumb used to solve problems and then putting that information into the software in a way the computer can use. casebased reasoning represents an alternative approach in which safs learn from theirown successes and failures in simulations. the saf acquires knowledgefrom new experiences in real time and adds it to its knowledge base forlater use. the knowledge base consists of many cases that the computeruses in real time to match the scenario it is facing and respond appropriately. this technique is the basis for machine learning in dodõsi4wissard program. currently, it is done manually during an afteraction review, but ideally the computer would do it automatically. forexample, a pilot could train the computer by dogfighting with it. if thepilot performed a maneuver the computer had never seen, it would addmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda71the trick to its knowledge base and respond appropriately. this couldprovide a richer training experience for the pilot and make the simulatortraining useful longer.44additional experimentation is under way using complex adaptivesystem techniques to generate new behaviors. as part of a darpa program, mcdonnell douglas has developed a system that uses genetic algorithms45 to develop new behaviors and tactics for military simulations.in previous trials, tactics developed by the system were used in simulators and shown to be effective for military operations.modeling individual behaviorsa related challenge is developing computergenerated characters thatmimic individual behavior rather than group behavior.46 group behaviorcan often be modeled using statistical modeling and rulebased decisionprocesses. the goal is to develop group actions that seem reasonable, butreasonable is an easier test than humanlike. did that automated battalionmove its tanks in a reasonable and believable fashion? did the group reactusing appropriate doctrine? it is easier to hide errors in decision makingwith a large group of units than with a computergenerated individual. it ismore difficult to model and create automated individuals that users cancommunicate and react to that is believably human. within dod, saflevel simulation has typically gone as low as an entity like a tank or aircraft.individual soldiers or crew members have not generally been represented,though work is ongoing in this area. as dod explores more opportunitiesfor training individual soldiers (dismounted infantry), the need to haverealistic, intelligent simulated individuals becomes acute.human representationsresearch is also needed to develop ways of creating realistic digitized humans that look, move, and express emotion like their real counterparts. dod has increased its efforts in simulating and modeling individual soldiers in synthetic environments through its individualcombatant simulation objective. a joint effort is under way between theu.s. armyõs simulation, training, and instrumentation command (stricom) and the army research laboratory. one of the key advancesrequired for developing lowcost solutions to this problem are technologies for visualization of human articulation in realtime networked environments. the entertainment industry is building on motioncapturetechniques pioneered by dod for use in developing games and creatingspecial effects. these techniques track the movements of various jointsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72modeling and simulationand extremities as real characters perform a given set of tasks. the datacan then be used to create more realistic synthetic effects.supporting natural language voice communications also is important. during networked play, voice support is critical for coordinatedactivities. the computergenerated character must interpret the voiceinput, react, and acknowledge the user using an equally natural voice.the voice must also indicate stress and the emotional state of the computergenerated character. the user must care about the automated forces and arrive at the same conclusions whether or not the forces undercontrol are human or computer generated. there are many situations inwhich a player would move a unit into a suicidal situation with a computergenerated character but would choose not to if the force was human.aggregation and disaggregationadditional research is also needed in the area of aggregation anddisaggregation. in large simulations, inactive individual units, such astanks or soldiers, are often aggregated into higherlevel units, such astank battalions or platoons, to minimize the number of elements the system must track and to allow higherlevel control of operations (such asby a field commander). in doing so, information about the individualelements is lost, as only average values of mobility or capability are retained for the aggregated unit. thus, when the aggregated unit becomesactive, the individual elements cannot be disaggregated into their original form. each tank, for example, will be assigned the average mobilityand firepower capabilities of the entire grouping rather than capabilitiesconsistent with those it had before aggregation. such inconsistencies notonly limit the fidelity of the simulation but also generate incongruitiesamong the representations of a simulation perceived by different participants (such as the field commander who sees aggregated levels of capability and tank commanders who see their own disaggregated capabilities). though not crucial in all simulations or all engagements, suchinaccuracies do limit the fidelity of simulations and will become moresignificant as simulations move toward incorporating individual warriors and participants. improved methods of aggregation and disaggregation that preserve more state information (possibly in a standardizedformat) could minimize the amount of information the simulation mustretain while preserving greater fidelity and consistency.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda73spectator rolesanother area in which dod and the entertainment industry haveoverlapping interests is in developing technology for incorporating spectators into models and simulations. as jacquelyn ford morie noted during the workshop, not everyone involved in digital forms of entertainment will want to be direct participants. some will prefer to engage as aspectator, similar to sports such as baseball, football, and tennis in whichonly a small percentage of the participants actually play in a match andmuch of the industry is built around the fans. morie believes that òthereis a potentially huge market to be developed for providing a substantialand rewarding spectator experience in the digital entertainment realmó(see position paper by morie in appendix d). as morie notes, being aspectator does not necessarily mean being passive; it is about being aparticipant with anonymity in a crowd, providing a less threatening forum in which people can express themselves.dod has already expressed an interest in this type of capability. therole of the òstealth vehiclesó has become increasingly important in defense simulations. such vehicles are essentially passive devices that allow observers to navigate in virtual environments, attach to objects in theenvironments, and view simulated events from the vantage point of theparticipant. as multiplayer games become more sophisticated and interesting, such a capability may evolve into a spectator facility that willallow novices to observe and learn from master practitioners. populargames may evolve to the level of current professional sports with teams,stars, schedules, commentators, and spectators.tools for creating simulated environmentsanother area in which dod and the entertainment industry havecommon interests is in the development of software and hardware toolsfor creating simulated environments. such tools are used to create andmanipulate databases containing information about virtual environmentsand the objects in them, allowing different types of objects to be placed ina virtual environment and layers of surface textures, lighting, and shading to be added. for games this may be a 3d world that is realistic (suchas a flight simulator) or fantastic (like a space adventure), in which anindividual interacts directly with the synthetic world and its characters.for film and television, simulated models are often used as primary orsecondary elements of scenes that involve real actors, while in other casesthe entire story is built around synthetic characters, be they traditionaltwodimensional (2d) animations or more advanced 3d animations. formodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74modeling and simulationdod these worlds are synthetic representations of the battle space(ground, sea, and air) and virtual representations of military systems.sophisticated hardware and software tools for efficiently constructing large complex environments are lacking in both the defenseand entertainment industries. at the workshop jack thorpe of saicstated that existing toolsets are quirky and primitive and require substantial training to master, often prohibiting the designer from including all of the attributes desired in a simulated environment (seeposition paper by thorpe in appendix d). improved tools wouldhelp reduce the time and cost of creating simulations by automatingsome of the tasks that are still done by hand. alex seiden, of industrial light and magic, claims that software tools are the single largestarea in which attention should be focused. animators and technicaldirectors for films face daunting challenges as shots become morecomplicated and new realtime production techniques are developedto model, animate, and render synthetic 3d environments for filmand video.entertainment applications and interestsfor digital film and television, special effects and animation are performed during the preproduction and postproduction processes. preproduction brings together many different disciplines, from visual design to storyboarding, modeling to choreography, and even complete storyboard simulation using 2d and 3d animations. postproduction takes place after all ofthe content has been created or captured (live or otherwise) and uses 2dand 3d computer graphics techniques for painting, compositing, and editing. painting enables an editor to clean up frames of the film or video byremoving undesirable elements (such as deleting a microphone and propsthat were unintentionally left in the scene or an aircraft that flew across thesky) or enhancing existing elements. compositing systems enable artists toseamlessly combine multiple separate elements, such as 3d models, animations, and effects and digitized liveaction images into a single consistentworld. matched lighting and motion of computer graphics imagery (cgi)are critical if these digital effects are to be convincing.in the games world the needs for contentcreation tools are similar.realtime 3d games demand that realworld imagery, such as photographic texture maps, be combined quickly and easily with 3d models tocreate the virtual worlds in which pilots fly. in the highly competitivemarket that computer game companies face, time to market and productquality are major factors (along with quality of game play) in the successof new games. this challenge has been eased somewhat in the past fewyears as companies have begun offering predefined 3d models and texmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda75tures that serve as the raw materials that game and production designerscan incorporate into their content.despite the enormous cost savings that can be enjoyed from automating these processes, entertainment companies invest little in the development of modeling and simulation tools. most systems are purchased directly from vendors.47 film production companies using digitaltechniques and technologies tend to write specialpurpose software foreach production and then attempt to recycle these tools and applicationsin their next production. typically, little time or funding is available forexploring truly innovative technologies. the time lines for productionsare short, so longterm investments are rare. leveraging commercialmodeling and animation tools from both the entertainment world(alias|wavefront, softimage, etc.) and dod simulation (multigen, coryphaeus, paradigm simulation) is starting to form a bridge between theentertainment industry and dod.dod applications and interestsdod faces an even greater challenge in its modeling and simulationefforts. because of the large number of participants in defense simulations, the department requires larger virtual environments than the entertainment industry and ones in which users can wander at their ownvolition (as opposed to traditional filmmaking in which designers needto create only those pieces of geometry and texture that will be seen inthe final film). beyond training simulations, contentcreation tools arepotentially useful in creating simulations of proposed military systems tosupport acquisition decisions. dod could use such models to prototypeaircraft, ships, radios, and other military systems. the key would belinking conceptual designs, computeraided engineering diagrams, analysis models, or training representations into a networked environmentthat would enable dod to perform òwhat if?ó analyses of new products.finding some way to allow these varied types of data to fit into a common data model would greatly facilitate this process.like the entertainment industry, dod lacks affordable productiontools to update simulation environments and composite numerous cgielements. while its compositing techniques are useful and efficient fordeveloping certain types of simulation environments, they cannot handlethe complexity demanded by some highfidelity applications. some models and simulation terrain must be built and integrated using motion,scale, and other perceptual cues. here, dod personnel encounter problems similar to those of entertainment companies that set up, integrate,and alter cgi environments. human operators can be assisted by appropriate interactive software tools for accomplishing these iterative tasks.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76modeling and simulationhaving better tools to integrate and create realistic environments couldplay a major role in the overall simulation design of training systems,exploring simulation data, and updating simulation terrain. interactivetools could empower more individuals to participate in this process andwould increase strategic military readiness.research challengesdatabase generation and manipulationboth the entertainment industry and dod have a strong interest indeveloping better tools for the construction, manipulation, and compositing of large databases of information describing the geography, features, and textures of virtual environments. simulations of aircraft andother vehicles, for example, require hundreds or thousands of terraindatabases; filmmakers often need to combine computergenerated images with liveaction film to create special effects. most existing systems formodeling and computeraided design cannot handle the gigabyte andterabyte data sets needed to construct large virtual worlds. as internetgames companies begin to develop persistent virtual worlds and architectural, planning, and military organizations develop more complete andaccurate models of urban environments, the need for software that cancreate and manipulate large graphics data sets will becoming more acute.at dod the data used to create these databases are typically captured inreal time from a satellite and must be integrated into a completed database in less than 72 hours to allow rapid mission planning and rehearsal.todayõs modeling tools can be very powerful, allowing users to create realtime models with texture maps and multiple levels of detail using simple menus and icons. some have higherlevel tools for creatinglarge complex features, such as roadways and bridges, using simple parameters and intelligent modeling aids. at the assembly level, new toolsuse virtual reality technology in the modeling stage to help assemblelarge complex environments more quickly and intuitively. still, modeling tools have not gotten to the point of massive automation. there aresome automated functions, but overall responsibility for feature extraction, creation, and simplification is in the hands of the modeler. moreresearch is needed in this area.48bill jepson from ucla is exploring systems for rapidly creating andmanipulating large geospecific databases for urban planning. with amultidisciplinary research team, he has designed a system capable ofmodeling 4,000 square miles of the los angeles region. it uses a clientserver architecture in which several multiterabyte databases are storedon a multiprocessor system with a server. communications betweenmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda77client and server occur via asynchronous transfer mode, at about 6 megabytes per second. actual 3d data are sent to the client based on thelocation of the observer, incorporating projections of the observerõs motion. additional research is under way to link this system with data fromthe global positioning system so that the motions of particular vehicles,such as city buses, can be tracked and transmitted to interested parties.similar systems could be useful for the secret service or the federal bureau of investigation for security planning or for u.s. special forces ordismounted infantry training operations in a specific geographic locale.other work at the university of california, berkeley, is exploring theautomatic extraction of 3d data from 2d images.49 these methods arelikely to play a large role in the future in the rapid development of realistic 3d databases.another area of possible interest to both the entertainment industryand dod is in the development of technologies that allow image sequence clips to be stored in a database. this would permit users in boththe defense and entertainment communities to rapidly store and retrievevideo footage for use in modeling and simulation. a prototype systemhas been developed by cinebase, a small company working with warnerbrothers imaging technology. additional development is required tomake the technology more robust and widely deployable.additional efforts to develop more standardized formats for storingthe information contained in 3d simulated environments would be beneficial to both dod and the entertainment industry. a standard formatcould be developed that allows behaviors, textures, sounds, and someforms of code to be stored with an object in a persistent database. suchefforts could build on the evolving vrml standard. the goal is to devisea common method for preserving and sharing the information inherentin 3d scenes prior to rendering.50compositingboth dod and the entertainment industry are interested in softwaretools that will facilitate the process of combining (or compositing) visualimages from different sources. such tools must support hierarchy andbuilding at multiple levels of detail: they must allow a user to shapehills, mountains, lakes, rivers, and roads as well as place small items,such as individual mailboxes, and paint words on individual signs. theymust also allow designers to develop simulated environments in piecesthat can be seamlessly linked together into a single universe. this needwill become more acute as the scale of distributed simulations grows.existing computeraided design tools do not have the ability to easilymodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78modeling and simulationadd environmental features, such as rain, dust, wind, storm clouds, andlightning, to a simulated scene.there are many unsolved compositing problems in pre and postproduction work for filmmaking that are directly related to simulation andmodeling challenges. for example, a need exists for postproduced lightmodels for digital scenes and environments. to create appropriate lighting for composited realistic liveaction scenes, lighting models must affect digitized images that were captured under variable lighting conditions. such a simulation problem is encountered when realisticphotographic data are composited into simulation data and the lightingmust be interactively adjusted from daylight to night during persistentsimulations. here, it is necessary to develop lighting models that imageprocess photographic data to provide postproduced lighting adjustmentsafter scenes have been captured. solutions to these problems do notexist, yet the research would be applicable to both the entertainment industry and dod.opportunities may exist for dod and the entertainment industry toshare some of the advances they have made in designing systems forcreating models and simulation. dod might be able to use some of theadvanced compositing techniques that have been developed by the entertainment industry to integrate liveaction video with computer graphics models. the entertainment industryõs software techniques for matching motion and seamlessly integrating simulated scenes into a virtualenvironment might also be beneficial to dod. however, most entertainment software is extremely proprietary. it will be necessary to addressproprietary issues and methods of information exchange before extensive collaboration can occur between the entertainment industry anddod. conversely, some dod technologies might prove to be very beneficial for entertainment applications as well. at the workshop, delllunceford, of darpa, suggested that some of the technologies developed as part of dodõs modular semiautonomous forces (modsaf) program might be useful in creating some of the line drawings used in preproduction stages of filmmaking. modsaf cannot support the detailedgraphical animation needed for facial expressions, but it could facilitatethe simpler earlier stages of production in which characters are outlinedand a storyõs flow is tested.interactive toolsinteractive tools that facilitate the creation of simulations and modelsand that can be used for real data exploration could be valuable to boththe entertainment industry and dod. the computer mouse and keyboard are extremely limited when creating cgi scenes, and individualsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda79are often impaired or constrained by these traditional input devices. arecent project of the national center for supercomputing applicationslocated at the university of illinois at urbanachampaign resulted in aninteractive virtual reality interface to control the computer graphics camera in 3d simulation space. the project created an alternative virtualreality computer system, the virtual director, to enhance human operator control and to capture, edit, and record camera motion in real timethrough highbandwidth simulation data for film and video recording.this interactive software was used to create the camera choreography oflarge astrophysical simulation data sets for special effects in the imaxmovie, cosmic voyage. this project has proven to be valuable for filmproduction as well as scientific visualization. such uses of alternativeinput devices to explore and document very large data sets are nonexistent in commercial production because of the time line required to develop such technology, yet this type of tool is extremely important to solvemany problems in the entertainment industry as well as dod simulationand modeling.conclusionas this chapter illustrates, the defense modeling and simulation community and the entertainment industry have common interests in a number of underlying technologies ranging from computergenerated characters to hardware to immersive interfaces. enabling the two communitiesto better leverage their comparative strengths and capabilities will require that many obstacles be overcome. traditionally, the two communities have tended to operate independently of one another, developingtheir own end systems and supporting technologies. moreover, eachcommunity has developed its own modes of operation and must respondto a different set of incentives. finding ways to overcome these barrierswill present challenges on a par with the research challenges identified inthis chapter.notes1.for a more comprehensive review of research requirements for virtual reality, seenational research council. 1995. virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges,nathaniel i. durlach and anne s. mavor, eds. national academy press, washington, d.c.2.dod has several ongoing programs to extend the militaryõs command, control, communications, computing, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems to the dismounted combatant. these include the defense advanced research projects agencyõssmall unit operations program, sea dragon, force xxi, and army after next.3.latency is not the only factor that causes simulator sickness, and even completelymodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80modeling and simulationeliminating latency will not eliminate simulator sickness. see position paper by eugenia m.kolasinski in appendix d.4.this subsection is derived from a position paper prepared for this project by thedefense modeling and simulation office; see appendix d.5.sheridan, t.b. 1992. telerobotics, automation, and human supervisory control. mitpress, cambridge, mass.6.for a more complete description of the simnet program see van atta, richard, etal., 1991, darpa technical accomplishments, volume ii: an historical review of selected darpa projects, institute for defense analyses, alexandria, va., chapter 16; and u.s. congress,office of technology assessment, 1995, distributed interactive simulation of combat, otabpiss151. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., september.7.u.s. congress, office of technology assessment, distributed interactive simulation ofcombat, p. 32, note 6 above.8.gilman louie, spectrum holobyte inc., personal communication, june 19, 1996.9.pausch, randy, et al. 1996. òdisneyõs aladdin: first steps toward storytelling invirtual reality,ó acm siggraph õ96 conference procedings: computer graphics. association for computing machinery, new york, august.10.rtime inc. introduced an internetbased game system in april 1997 that supports100 simultaneous players and spectators. see rtime news,vol. 1, february 1, 1997.11.the national research councilõs computer science and telecommunications boardhas another project under way to examine the extent to which dod may be able to makebetter use of commercial technologies for wireless untethered communications. a finalreport is expected in fall 1997. another project to examine dod command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence systems was initiated in spring 1997.12.specifications for implementing multicast protocols over the internet are outlined bys.e. deering in òhost extensions for ip multicasting,ó rfc 1112, august 1, 1989, availableonline at http://globecom.net/ietf/rfc1112.html. see also braudes, r., and s. zabele,òrequirements for multicast protocols,ó rfc 1458, may 1993.13.as such, multicast stands in contrast to broadcast, in which one designated sourcesends information to all members of the receiving community, and to unicast systems inwhich a sender transmits a message to a single recipient.14.this capability is called routing spaces. it will permit objects to establish publishregions to indicate areas of influence and subscription regions to indicate areas of interest.when publish and subscription regions overlap, the rti will cause data to flow betweenthe publishers and the subscribers. the goal of this effort, and the larger data distributionmanagement project, of which it is part, is to reduce network communications by sendingdata only when and where needed. see defense modeling and simulation office, hladata distribution management: design document version 0.5, feb. 10, 1997; available onlineat http://www.dmso.mil/projects/hla/.15.internet engineering task force, òlarge scale multicast applications (lsma) charter,ó available online at http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/lsmacharter.html.16.much of the material in this section is derived from a position paper prepared forthis project by will harvey of sandcastle inc.; see appendix d.17.deployment of a new algorithm for queue management, called random early detection, may help greatly reduce queuing delays across the internet.18.floyd, s., and v. jacobson. 1993. òrandom early detection gateways for congestion avoidance,ó ieee/acm transactions on networking 1(4):397413; wroclawski, j. 1996.òspecification of the controlledload network element service,ó available online as ftp://ftp.ietf.org/internetdrafts/draftietfintservctrlloadsvc03.txt.19.clark, d. 1996. òadding service discrimination to the internet,ó telecommunicationspolicy 20(3):169181.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda8120.sandcastle inc., an internetbased game company, is one source of research on synchronization techniques.21.dod defines modeling and simulation interoperability as the ability of a model or simulation to provide services to and accept services from other models and simulations and touse the services so exchanged to enable them to operate effectively together. see u.s.department of defense directive 5000.59, òdod modeling and simulation (m&s) management,ó january 4, 1994, and u.s. department of defense, under secretary of defense foracquisition and technology, modeling and simulation (m&s) master plan, dod 5000.59p,october 1995.22.all participants in a simulation do not need an identical representation of the environment. individual combatants, for example, will differ from fighter pilots in the amountof terrain they can see and the sensor data (radar, infrared, etc.) available to them. the keyis ensuring that their views of the environment are consistent with one another (e.g., that allplayers would agree that a given line of trees obstructs the line of sight between two participants in the simulation).23.dis conveys simulation state and event information via approximately 29 pdus.four of these pdus describe interactions between entities such as tanks and personnelcarriers; the remainder transmit information on supporting actions, electronic emanations,and simulation control. the entity state pdu is used to communicate information about avehicleõs current position, orientation, velocity, and appearance. the fire pdu containsdata on weapons or ordinance that are fired or dropped. the detonation pdu is sent when amunition detonates or an entity crashes. the collision pdu is sent when two entities physically collide. the structure of each pdu is regimented and changed only after testing andsubsequent discussion at the biannual dis workshops convened by the institute for simulation and training at the university of central florida.24.macedonia, michael r. 1995. òa network software architecture for largescalevirtual environments.ó ph.d. dissertation, naval postgraduate school, june; available fromthe defense technical information center, fort belvoir, va.25.defense modeling and simulation office, hla management plan: highlevel architecture for modeling and simulation, version 1.7, april 1, 1996.26.the navy alone has over 1,200 simulation systems that do not currently comply withhla. a compliance monitoring reporting requirement and waiver process, similar to theada waiver process, were put into place. each affected service is to fund retrofits of simulation systems from their own budgets.27.ordering information is available on the dmso web site at http://www.dmso.mil.28.the computer science and telecommunications board workshop provided an opportunity for representatives from internet game companies to learn more about hla.several agreed to review the specifications to see if they would be applicable to them29.lantham, roy. 1996. òdis workshop in transition to. . . what?,ó real time graphics5(4):45.30.national research council. 1995. virtual reality: scientific and technological challenges, nathaniel i. durlach and anne s. mavor, eds. national academy press, washington, d.c.31.macedonia, michael r., et al. 1995. òexploiting reality with multicast groups,óieee computer graphics & applications, september, pp. 3845.32.brutzman, don, michael zyda, and michael macedonia. 1996. òcyberspace backbone (cbone) design rationale,ó paper 961599 in proceedings of the 15th workshop on standards for dis, institute for simulation and training, orlando, florida; brutzman, don,michael zyda, kent watsen, and michael macedonia. 1997. òvirtual reality transfer protocol (vrtp) design rationale,ó accepted for the proceedings of the ieee sixth internationalmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82modeling and simulationworkshop on enabling technologies: infrastructure for collaborative enterprises (wetice õ97),held june 1820, 1997, at the massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, mass.33.brutzman et al., 1996, òcyberspace backbone (cbone) design rationale,ó and brutzman et al., 1997, òvirtual reality transfer protocol (vrtp) design rationale,ó note 32 above.34.macedonia, òexploiting reality with multicast groups,ó note 31 above.35.a standard 14.4kilobitpersecond modem can transmit or receive a standard dispacket in approximately 80 milliseconds, meaning that only about five players can participate in a realtime interactive game if each must send and receive messages (updatingpositions, velocities, etc.) to and from each other player at each stage in the game andlatencies must be kept below 100 milliseconds.36.from this perspective the code base is like the way a television studio thinks of itsets, props, and sound stages. the code base needs to be able to be data driven so that newepisodes can be created in less than a week instead of a couple of years. programming willbe developed using scripting tools that allow writers and designers to quickly develop newstories. these tools will be important to help the writers and designers not only create newenvironments but also direct automated units and characters to òperformó new roles for thenew scenarios.37.for example, a player may be flying an f15 along with a wingman when a pair ofenemy migs engages them in battle. as a player breaks into a turn, he or she may realizethat the wingman has disconnected (intentionally or unintentionally) from the game.38.the aladdin attraction is something of an anomaly in that walt disney imagineeringapproached it not only as a theme park attraction but also as scholarship. it publishedresults of its research in the open literature. see pausch, randy, et al. 1996. òdisneyõsaladdin: first steps towards storytelling in virtual reality,ó acm siggraph ô96 conference proceedings: computer graphics. association of computing machinery, new york, pp.193203.39.fryer, bronwyn, òhollywood goes digital,ó available online at http://zeppo.cnet.com/content/features/dlife/index.html.40.ditlea, steve. 1996. òôvirtual humansõ raise legal issues and primal fears,ó newyork times, june 19; available online at http://www.nytimes.com/library/cyber/week/0619humanoid.html.41.magneanat thalmann, n., and d. thalmann. 1995. òdigital actors for interactivetelevision,ó proceedings of the ieee, august.42.an agent that could meet this requirement would satisfy the òturing test.ó alanturing, a british mathematician and computer scientist, proposed a simple test to measurethe ability of computers to display intelligent behavior. a user carries on an extendedcomputerbased interaction (such as a discussion) with two unidentified respondentsñonea human and the other a computer. if the user cannot distinguish between the human andthe computer responses, the computer is declared to have passed the turing test and todisplay intelligent behavior.43.chandrasekaran, rajiv. 1997. òfor chess world, a deep blue sunday: computercrushes kasparov in final game,ó washington post, may 12, p. a1.44.u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1995. distributed interactive simulation of combat, otabpiss151. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., september, pp. 123125.45.genetic algorithms are computer programs that evolve over time in a process thatmimics biological evolution. they can evolve new computer programs through processesanalogous to mutation, crossfertilization, and natural selection. see holland, john h. 1992.ògenetic algorithms,ó scientific american, july, pp. 6672.46.the national research council is conducting another project on the representationof human behaviors in military simulations. see national research council. 1997. repremodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting a common research agenda83senting human behavior in military simulationsñinterim report, richard w. pew and anne s.mavor, eds. national academy press, washington, d.c.47.paul lypaczewski of alias|wavefront estimates that the market for offtheshelfmodeling and simulation tools is about $500 million per year.48.see national research council, virtual reality, note 30 above.49.debevec, p.e., c.j. taylor, and j. malik. 1996. òmodeling and rendering architecture from photographs: a hybrid geometry and imagebased approach,ó proceedings ofsiggraph õ96: computer graphics. association of computing machinery, new york, pp.1120.50.the process of rendering computer graphics is the process of making frames fromobjects with motion so they can be displayed by the computer or image generator.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.843setting the process in motionencouraging the defense and entertainment industries to work together to strengthen the technology base for modeling and simulationwill require more than a common research agenda. as workshop participants noted, large cultural barriers exist between the u.s. department ofdefense (dod) and the entertainment industry that will impede attemptsto work together. if collaboration is to succeed, these barriers must beovercome and a process must be established to facilitate the kinds ofcollaboration that could advance this nationõs modeling and simulationtechnology base. consideration needs to be given to coordinating theresearch agendas of the two communities, such as through greater sharing of information, and to structuring cooperative research. in addition,both dod and the entertainment industry will need to workñindividually and collectivelyñto ensure the continued viability of the researchbase from which both communities draw. they must ensure that humanresources are developed that have the requisite skills for creating effective computerbased simulations and that adequate funding is providedto sustain the research base, particularly at the university level. doing sowill require additional input and advice from the academic community,whose participation in the workshop was limited.overcoming cultural barriersthe entertainment industry and dod are two different cultures, withdifferent languages, different business models, and separate communimodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion85ties of constituents (box 3.1). to date, they have operated relatively independently of one another. though some sharing of technology and research has occurred, much of the technology transfer has been mediatedthrough the university research community; few direct connections havebeen made between companies actively engaged in developing entertainment products and services and dod.movement of people between dod and the entertainment industryis limited. many people from the entertainment industry were reluctantto participate in the workshopñor serve on the steering committee thatconvened the workshopñbecause of the projectõs connection with defense and their impressions that few opportunities exist for collaboration.nevertheless, workshop participants provided personal examples of thekey movements of people between the two communities that have crosspollinated each otherõs efforts: eric haseltine, vicepresident of researchand development and chief scientist at walt disney imagineering, beganhis career in flight simulation at hughes aircraft company; and carlnorman, a senior producer with the games company strategic simulations inc., is a former marine officer who later worked on simulation andtraining systems for the corps. yet most workshop participants agreedthat a movement of people between defense and entertainment is not thetrend. jordan weisman, of virtual world entertainment, remarked thatemployee migration between the entertainment industry and dod isminimal and that this is a contributing factor to the minimal amount oftechnology transfer between the two communities. such differences bothinfluence and are influenced by differences in the business models thatthe two communities follow. overcoming them will require efforts toimprove communication between members of the two communities.different business modelsdod and the entertainment industry differ significantly in theirgoals, motivations, and methods of doing business. these differencesmake it difficult for the communities to work together to advance thetechnology base for modeling and simulation, but with sufficient intereston both sides, ways can be found to overcome these obstacles. while fewformal attempts at coordinating research or conducting joint researchhave been tried, a handful of companies have successfully transitionedfrom defense work to commercial work, demonstrating the possibility ofsuccess. further attempts to facilitate greater coordination of researchactivities between dod and the entertainment industry will have to buildupon these examples to find ways to bridge the gap between the twocommunities.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86modeling and simulationbox 3.1from dod to entertainment: a personal journeyrobert jacobs, president and director of illusion inc., recounted at theworkshop some of the cultural differences he has noticed between the defense modeling and simulation community and the entertainment industry.illusion inc. has its roots in defense simulation, owing to work on dodõssimulation network (simnet) project. in 1994 the company merged withanother company as part of an effort to develop simulationbased systemsfor entertainment. as of 1996, roughly 80 percent of illusionõs revenuesderived from entertainment systems.what we discovered immediately was an enormous culture shock.our entertainment partners had a different way of thinking than we did.the basis for pricing defense work, for example, is cost. there are severaldifferent kinds of contractual formats that are used to govern what defensecontractors can charge for their time and for their products, but all of themhave as the base what it costs to do the job and some allowance for reasonable profitñthe amount of which depends on whether the client or thecontractor takes the risk. in the commercial world, things are very different. you get a good idea, you invest your own money and effort in bringing that idea to fruition, and then you charge what the market will bear.what the market will bear depends on what the other companies are doing and what the perceived value of the product is to the ultimate consumer, the public. you have to be pretty confident of your instincts in thatkind of an arena to invest significant money in bringing a product to market. if you donõt make it, you canõt go back for an overhead rate adjustment and you canõt tell the client ògee, iõm sorry i underestimated thisthing, and youõve got to help me out here.ói suggested that illusionõs new partners ought to fill out time sheetsand allocate their time to the jobs they were working on. they didnõtunderstand why that was necessary because they said, òweõre going towork all year, and at the end of the year whatõs left over after we payeverybody is the profit. so why do we have to keep track of all this stuff?ówell, we keep track of all that stuff because we still do dod work, too,and the auditors want to see what weõre doing all the time, not just whileweõre working on defense work.there is also a big difference in what is considered important in thebusiness. we had a client come in and ask us to describe the technicalapproach for the system we were developing. i proudly launched into avery detailed description of the marvelous new motion system that wewere using on a ride we were building and how it has advanced servoactuators, and it is very fast and high performance, and it was a terrificbargain compared to what was available in the marketplace. i noticedthat the clientõs eyes were glazed over; what the client really wanted toknow was what the ride was like and what the story was that accompanied it. so, i let my partner from the entertainment industry describe it,and the client was much happier. i thought that the technical details wereterrific, but nobody cares about that kind of thing. what they want toknow is what theyõre going to get for the money they pay in terms of thecustomerõs experience.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion87some of the more notable differences between the dod and entertainment communities are listed below:¥time horizons. military research and development programs typically span several years; it is not unusual for a largescale program totake a decade or more to complete. products are often designed to beused for long periods of time, with requisite upgrades and support.1 entertainment projects are generally much shorter in duration. game companies may spend up to three years developing a new product; film companies will also spend a year or two producing a new film. littleattention is given to upgrades and support for older products. manygame companies, in fact, intend for their games to become obsolete soonso that customers will buy new versions.¥market structure. defense contractors serve a single customer(dod) that, though comprised of many heterogeneous parts, operateswith a fairly consistent business model and a standard set of procurement policies. typically, dod specifies up front the requirements of asystem it wants developed and invites contractors to design a systemthat will meet the specifications. contractors are generally reimbursedfor their expenses plus a fixed profit. entertainment companies, in contrast, serve diverse markets, with varied tastes and business models.companies must identify market needs, formulate creative concepts thataddresses those needs, and invest their own capital in developing theconcept. they must also invest considerable effort in marketing newproducts to consumers, who may or may not buy the product in the end.¥profitability. most defense contracts specify the profit a contractormay make on a given project, typically on the order of 6 percent. entertainment companies have no guarantees on profits and assume large riskswith each undertaking. at the same time, successful projects in the entertainment industry can generate profit margins of 100 percent or more;the film industry relies on a limited number of such blockbuster hits tounderwrite its operating expenses and compensate for the more numerous failures. nevertheless, the great potential profitability of entertainment products limits the enthusiasm with which entertainment companies would embrace defenserelated work.¥research. dod operates a large research and development program with fairly centralized budgeting and direction. military needs aretranslated into technical requirements that spur research programs. in1996, dod spent $688 million on basic and applied research in computerscience and mathematics. the entertainment industry lacks any coordinated direction of research. individual firms select research projects thatmeet their business needs. according to alex seiden, of industrial lightand magic, most companies in the entertainment industry do not conmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88modeling and simulationduct longterm research; scientists and engineers in film and game production environments, in particular, are primarily interested in solvingthe problems at hand on a short time line coupled to a movie premier orgame releaseñoften only three months. a few entertainment companies,such as disney, do invest more in longerterm research and developmentproducts, but such companies are few in number.¥intellectual property. entertainment companies have strong concernsover intellectual property rights and endure great pains to ensure control.despite the rapid product cycles in the entertainment industry, many products build on technology incorporated into earlier products or adhere toproprietary standards and architectures that have longer useful lifetimes.while defense contractors have similar interests and concerns, working forthe federal government often implies a lack of control over intellectual property rights that entertainment companies would not tolerate.such differences pose hurdles to any attempts to bring the entertainment industry and dod closer together to develop modeling and simulation technologies. indeed, defense contractors have generally failed intheir attempts to diversify into commercial markets of many kinds because of the great differences in business practices.2 defense contractorswho spend internal research and development money on projects withcommercial implications find they have great difficulty spinning off successful projects to commercial industry.3similarly, the entertainment industry complains that dodõs bureaucracy inhibits its desire to do defenserelated work. many small companies,such as video game designers and manufacturers of peripheral devices,lack the resources (money and staff) to adhere to dodõs acquisition regulations, which cover both the purchase of finished products and many research and development activities. given the growing markets for entertainment products and the potential profitability of successful products,many entertainment companies do not find working with dod to be anattractive alternative to their usual entertainment efforts. according to buzzhoffman, of thrustmaster inc., òdeveloping products for the mass commercial market offers far more opportunities for profit than defense department contracts.ó until the potential benefits of collaboration becomemore apparent to the entertainment industry and the associated costs canbe reduced, formal collaboration will be difficult to initiate.4facilitating coordination and cooperationa first step toward bridging the gap between the defense modelingand simulation community and the entertainment industry would be toencourage greater sharing of information between the two communities.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion89dod and the entertainment industry have a great deal to learn from oneanother, and open collaboration and crossfertilization could allow eachto tap into the otherõs knowledge and better target its own research programs. eric haseltine, of walt disney imagineering, claimed at the workshop that òthe thing that the entertainment industry can get the mostfrom dod is just knowing whatõs been done, so they donõt have to reinvent the wheel. if there were some places where [the entertainment industry] could go to find out whatõs been done before we go off and do itourselves, that would be hugely valuable.ófew participants from dod or the entertainment industry seem toknow how to effectively exchange information between the two communities, nor are they generally aware of the mechanisms that might exist. manyworkshop attendees agreed that connections between dod have been informal and based on a limited number of personal contacts; there is a general frustration in both communities regarding ways to connect to solve problems that might be common to both. a number of workshop attendeescomplained that it sometimes seems easier to get information for productdevelopment from outside sources rather than government agencies, precluding many opportunities for collaboration. at the same time, workshopparticipants acknowledged that the entertainment industry is very fragmented and that no centralized mechanism exists for collecting informationor learning about the needs of the industry as a whole. while some attempts have been made, through such organizations as the technologycouncil of the society of motion picture and television engineers, theyhave been limited in scope and success. because the entertainment industry is very competitive and proprietary, entertainment companies do notfreely share information about research programs or interests, and the frequent changes in employment make individual connections fleeting.one mechanism for promoting informal information sharing betweenmembers of the defense modeling and simulation community and theentertainment industry and breaking down cultural barriers is to encourage attendance at relevant conferences that cross industry boundaries.to date, entertainment companies have not been well represented at conferences on defense modeling and simulation, nor have members of thedefense industry been prominent at entertainment industry conferences.the association of computing machineryõs annual special interest groupin computer graphics (siggraph) conference provides a forum andmarketplace for exciting ideas combining research, art, education, andbusiness in computer graphics but lacks a significant military presence.other important conferences are the computer game developerõs conference, which has seminars and roundtable discussions on many topicsrelevant to modeling and simulation, and the annual electronic entertainment expo, which has large exhibits and presentations related to inmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90modeling and simulationteractive entertainment. several members of the entertainment industrystated that dodõs lack of participation at such conferences is a majorfactor behind their belief that the department has little to offer the entertainment industry in the way of relevant research or technology. bypresenting more work at such conferences or setting up booths on convention floors, dod could help artists, software developers, and executives in the entertainment industry learn about relevant dod technologyand research. at the same time, dod would be able to see and hearabout current developments in the entertainment industry that will enterthe marketplace 18 to 24 months later and start to make the social connections that always facilitate information flow.one way to help bridge the gap between dod and entertainmentindustry standards initiatives is for representatives from each community to attend the otherõs meetings. for example, the highlevel architecture (hla) communityõs architecture management group (amg) couldincorporate representatives of the internet community and of the networked games community, thereby providing them a platform for discussions and information exchanges. greater representation from thedistributed interactive simulation (dis) community also might be considered by the amg. in return, the communities engaged in developingvirtual reality modeling language (vrml) and virtual reality transferprotocol (vrtp) standards could encourage dodõs hla community toattend its forums, such as the vrml consortium. currently, the onlydod representation at that consortium is through a membership paidfor by the npsnet research group of the naval postgraduate school.the defense modeling and simulation office (dmso) should considerjoining the vrml consortium to benefit from the work going on thereand from the contacts.while seats on each otherõs technical guidance boards are one methodof collaboration, another is establishment of an annual workshop similar tothe successful dis workshops. the workshop could build on the initialeffort hosted by the computer science and telecommunications board(cstb) as part of the present project, which demonstrated the mutual benefits of bringing together members of the defense and entertainment communities. the goal of an annual workshop would be to attract technicalpapers and presentations from dod, the entertainment industry, and theinternet community. unlike the dis workshop, the papers for this newworkshop would be peer reviewed and the workshop should be held at auniversity center set up to shepherd the process and to provide a neutralmeeting ground for defense and entertainment participants, similar to theinstitute for simulation and training at the university of central florida.the workshop could be funded jointly by industry and dod.additional progress toward collaboration in interoperability stanmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion91dards may emerge from the newly formed simulation interoperabilitystandards organization (siso). siso is a reorganization and replacement of the group that developed dis standards. it will continue toexpand the semiannual workshops started by dis but will separate standards development work from the workshops. siso was establishedprimarily to broaden interests from the realtime, platformlevel simulations of dis to all forms of interoperable simulations. sisoõs mission isto (1) continue to support dis standards, (2) assume responsibility forcommercializing dodõs hla standards, and (3) develop simulation interoperability standards for any organization that needs them. sisosponsored a oneday seminar in january 1997 and its first simulationinteroperability workshop in march 1997, both of which tried to attractparticipation from the entertainment industry. to date, participation bythe entertainment industry appears to have been limited by a lack ofinterest in interoperability standards and by the perception that sisoõsinterest is in defense simulation and propagation of the hla.at cstbõs workshop, several different models were discussed forfacilitating collaborative work that could benefit both defense and entertainment. one possibility is for joint funding of university research intechnologies associated with modeling and simulation, such as computergraphics, networking, and computergenerated characters. universityresearch has played a key role in developing modeling and simulationtechnology and in disseminating that technology, largely through students, to both the entertainment and the defense industries. alternatively, a few companies have demonstrated the possibility of operating inboth the defense and the entertainment communities, either by developing technologies and products that support both industries or simplydrawing on research in both fields to make separate defense and entertainment products.5 as robert jacobs, of illusion inc., stated, òwe wantto stay in the defense world as well as the entertainment world becauseof the access to wonderful technology that we recognize exists there. wethink that the technology transfer happens much more effectively if thecompany is working in both environments.óthe federal government has also established programs to encouragetransfers of technology and cooperative research between governmentand commercial organizations. the small business innovative researchprogram, which earmarks a percentage of federal research and development budgets for small business, requires award winners to submit plansfor commercializing their technologies. the federal technology transferact requires all federal laboratories with research and development budgets above a certain threshold to each establish an office of research andtechnology applications to promote technology transfer. these officesare authorized to both license federal technology to commercial industryand to enter into cooperative research and development agreementsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92modeling and simulation(cradas) with commercial companies. under cradas, federal laboratories and private companies may work jointly on projects of mutualinterest: laboratories may contribute researchers or facilities to an endeavor; industry may contribute researchers, facilities, or funding. ingeneral, laboratories are authorized to negotiate intellectual propertyagreements that reflect the relative contributions of government and industry to a project.6 in the defense modeling and simulation communitythe technology transfer program of the naval air warfare center training systems division is playing a lead role. the navyõs office of training technology and dmsoõs information analysis center also coordinate technology transfer activities, but it is not clear that such activitieshave successfully transferred technology to the commercial sector.two programs exist within the federal government to foster linkages between government laboratories and industry. the federallaboratory consortium helps industry understand technology transfer and assists with referrals to appropriate government agencies.the national technology transfer center, a federally funded centerlocated in west virginia, also helps researchers from industry solveproblems by linking them with relevant experts at federal laboratories. such programs are not well publicized or well known withinthe entertainment industry and therefore have not served as effectivevehicles for sharing information as yet.other techniques might be useful in stimulating collaborative workbetween dod and the entertainment industry. at the workshop, jordanweisman suggested funding competitions to stimulate the entertainmentindustry to work on topics that are interesting to dod researchers. suchcompetitions do not need to have large monetary rewards, just great promotional opportunities. for example, a $10,000 prize has been established for computer chess systems. alternatively, an internet site couldbe set up specifically to exchange information between dod and theentertainment industry concerning hot topics in modeling and simulation. often there is no need to transfer algorithms; just knowing thatsomeone else has solved a problem and seeing the solution in action willoften spur the creation of better solutions. thus, dissemination of information on existing developments might be enough to enable the twocommunities to benefit from each otherõs successes.human resourcesworkshop participants agreed that one of the most significant stepsthe entertainment industry and dod can take to jointly advance modeling and simulation is to ensure a continued supply of welleducatedworkers and researchers. both the entertainment industry and dod aremodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion93critically dependent on skilled workers who understand how to developsimulations that are visually pleasing and who can resolve the technicalproblems associated with largescale distributed simulations, such as latency, graceful degradation of performance as scale increases and network latencies lengthen, and maintenance of consistent state informationacross large numbers of simulators. the development of workers with amixture of technical and artistic capabilities represents a particular challenge because of its interdisciplinary nature. whereas computer scienceand electrical engineering departments will train technical workers toaddress questions about networking and distributed simulation, the creation of visually literate workers demands cooperation between engineering and art departments, which are separated by large cultural andinstitutional gaps.demand for workers with an understanding of the artistic and technical considerations embodied in modeling and simulation is growingfaster than the supply.7 such people are important not only in entertainment and defense but in manufacturing industries as well, where theycan help design automobile, aircraft, and defense systems. workshopparticipants indicated a shortage of talented, highquality, experiencedpeople to develop virtual environments, modeling and simulation software, digital animation, design, and scripting of virtual worlds. òask theproduction manager of any effects studio,ó reported alex seiden, of industrial light and magic, òand [he or she] will tell you their biggestproblem is the shortage of skilled animators and technical directors.óseveral workshop participants noted that the rapid pace at which technology is evolving is reducing the number of individuals who know howto effectively exploit the new technologies. scott watson, of walt disneyimagineering, suggested that experienced programmers who deal withmultiplayer multiprocessor technical problems are at a premium. heestimated that less than 5 percent of the programming population understands such issues.as ed catmull, of pixar animation studios, noted, u.s. entertainment companies are raiding foreign countries for talented animators. asa result, salaries for talented animators are rising rapidly. starting salaries for animators range from $60,000 to $100,000 per year. productioncompanies tend to bid up salaries as they hire away each otherõs workersin order to learn about new technologies and techniques. continuedsalary growth in the entertainment industry could make dod less able toattract top talent. it has already experienced problems retaining top information technology officers, both because of limited avenues for advancement at dod and lucrative offers from commercial industry.8 according to john latta, a consultant with 4th wave inc., rapid expansionof threedimensional graphics capabilities (in hardware and software)modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94modeling and simulationwill continue to strain the talent pool, especially among women and minorities who are already underrepresented in this type of work. according to many workshop participants from the entertainment industry, theshortage of qualified workers is the single most confounding issue in thedigital film effects and gaming industries today.9digital artists and designers are particularly valuable in creating visual models and designing graphical interface tools. eric haseltine, ofwalt disney imagineering, has found that the bestdesigned computeruser interfaces are not created by computer scientists or human factorsengineers but by artists and designers who are visually literate (box 3.2).while disney funds and employs many university graduates with suchtraining, the demand is much greater than the supply. likewise, digitaldesigners are in demand for creating virtual spaces for the internet. mibox 3.2visual literacytom west, author of in the mindõs eye, discusses visual literacy in relation to advances in computer graphics: òit will be left to humans to maximize what is most valued among human capabilities and what machinescannot doñand increasingly these are likely to involve the insightful andintegrative capacities associated with visual modes of thought.ó threedimensional (3d) computer graphics experts extrapolate from software algorithms to graphical models and scenes; visual literacy informs individuals with creative solutions that help bridge this gulf and provide innovation.for example, an extremely valuable skill is efficiently enhancing a 3d simulated environment with realistic light, shade, and geometry while successfully managing computational and technical constraints. mastering theeconomy of detail, color, compositing, and visualization techniques canprovide realism to simulations. knowledge of these types of computergraphics techniques involves a combination of visual literacy and technicalexpertise. while this highly developed combination of skills is difficult tofind in a single individual, workshop attendees argued that it would providemore powerful simulations that bring about believability and convincingvirtual worlds, with computational economy. this type of skill set directlyoverlaps with the needs of both the entertainment industry and the dodsimulation community. visual literacy crosses into the boundary of art anddesign education, and many workshop attendees believe it important thatsuch educational needs be reported.source: west, thomas g. 1991. in the mindõs eye: visual thinkers,gifted people with learning difficulties, computer images, and the ironiesof creativity. prometheus books, buffalo, new york, p. 254.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion95crosoft corporation is employing increasing numbers of designers for itsvchat and other social virtual spaces. the company has found that interdisciplinary and multigender teams of artists and computer scientists create the richest interactive social spaces for the internet.10the need for visually literate workers may also become more apparent in the defense industry, as dod attempts to make its simulationsmore engaging and believable to participants. fidelity will continue tobe important in dodõs training simulations, but the fidelity of defensesimulations is only part of the greater problem. as danny hillis, of disney, observed at the workshop:if you think of the basic problem of what these [training] simulators arefor, it is not a problem of simulation. we are not trying to simulate thereality of, letõs say, a tank. the problem is not to get something thatlooks like a tank. the problem is instead to cause a change in the personõs mind, so that when they get into a real tank in a battlefield, they dothe right thing.in this view, the goal of a simulation is not to approximate reality asnearly as possible, but to present individuals with the appropriate set ofcues to produce the training effect desired. creating the desired changein a personõs mind requires a suspension of disbelief in the individualwho is experiencing, interacting, and making decisions in the simulation.it requires a complex combination of attributes that engage and teach theuser. being able to express such traits in virtual environments is a communication skill, and animators are trained in ways to map human behavior to models and motion. many workshop participants (from boththe entertainment industry and dod) believe that these types of talentshave historically been considered less important than technical skill andfidelity in defense training applications. but as one dod participantnoted, òdod needs people telling them things they never knew abouthow their systems could be used.óother nontechnical skills also are becoming more important to modeling and simulation. for example, one challenge is to model human andcultural behavior in realistic interactive virtual spaces. creating a senseof social space in virtual reality is becoming more important to dod,according to some workshop participants. kirstie bellman, of the defense advanced research projects agency, noted that there is a sense ofsocial reality that is important in certain simulations, such as those represented by multiple user domains. understanding human behavior inthese artificial realities involves the expertise of multiple disciplines, combined as teams. learning why some of these places work while othersfails often requires the insight of anthropologists. increasing demandsfor dod to participate in noncombative activities, such as drug interdicmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96modeling and simulationtion and peacekeeping, demand increasing understanding of the humancomponent of behaviors, which needs to be incorporated into modelingand simulation. while dod has not historically funded some of theseareas, it is important to reexamine the funding domain with which itoperates.workshop participants from both the entertainment industry anddod agreed that crossdisciplinary programs blending computer scienceand art are needed to provide workers with the education to supportboth entertainment and defense applications of modeling and simulation. few university programs currently exist that combine visual literacy, digital design, computer science, and engineering; most universitieshave separate departmentsñor separate schoolsñfor engineering andthe arts. nevertheless, the naval postgraduate school recently established a masterõs degree program in modeling, virtual environments, andsimulation. after several years of operation as a twoyear program invancouver, the digipen school plans to open a fouryear accredited program in seattle, washington, that will concentrate on training students inthe creation of video games. the program combines courses in physics,math, and computer science with art and storytelling.11 the goal of suchprograms is not to provide graduates with narrow training in specifictechnologies or systems used for creating simulated environments but toensure that they are well grounded in the disciplines involved in modeling and simulation.creating such programs presents a challenge. according to alexsinger, an independent film director, some u.s. universities demonstratetremendous resistance to the whole range of computer studies within thearts. at the workshop, gilman louie, of spectrum holobyte inc., commented that òif youõre in a computer science program, the art department wonõt let you into their advanced classes. the same with computerscience departmentsñunless you change your major.ó this observationis often a result of classes being oversubscribed in a majorõs courses thatrelate to digital imaging; however, the shortage of crossdisciplinarycourses is related to the structure of universities. few u.s. universitiesprovide faculty with incentives to teach across disciplines; universitiesare divided into departments where funding and promotion are discipline specific. while there has been increasing emphasis on interdisciplinary work at funding agencies, such as the national science foundation,most such efforts have tended to focus on scientific and engineeringfields, not on merging science and engineering with art and design.trying to create an academic discipline that combines science andengineering with art creates specific problems. as with other fields ofscience and engineering, computer science rewards researchers for publishable research, the results of which are typically expressed mathematimodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion97cally. fields that combine computer science with art (e.g., computergraphics, virtual environments) have difficulty being recognized as serious areas of study, noted michael zyda, of the naval postgraduateschool, because they are new fields that are often viewed as applicationsof computer science rather than core research areas. proponents willhave to convince the computer science community that work in this fieldwill yield publishable results and that the arts can play more than a supportive role. according to one reviewer of this report, the siggraphcommunity has been working on this problem for several years, withlimited results.dod and the entertainment industry could take a more active role inencouraging the development of such programs, using existing fundingmechanisms as a lever. while dod has not historically funded educational programs in digital arts and design, these areas do appear to havea growing relevance to defense needs. other government agencies withinterests in education and workforce issues also may have an interest insuch programs.to further promote strengthening of the education system in thiscountry, both the entertainment industry and dod communities couldpromote internships to help students and administrators gain a betterunderstanding of realworld applications of modeling and simulation.formal arrangements might be made between universities, the entertainment industry, and dod research labs to create programs for internships. such programs may encompass more than just universities. during her tenure at the visual systems laboratory at the institute forsimulation and training, jacquelyn ford morie helped create such a program for undergraduate and high school students, the òtoy scouts.óthrough this program, students were given access to the laboratoryõsvirtual reality equipment and were given opportunities to develop innovative projects. researchers and professionals from the entertainmentindustry, dod, and the laboratory mentored the students, who developed several innovative applications of virtual reality technology (see theposition paper by morie in appendix d). similar programs at the highschool and vocational levels might be effective in filling the need forskilled workers in modeling and simulation.maintaining the research baseclosely related to the problem of developing human resources is theneed to maintain a strong base for research into modeling and simulation, especially at the university level. dod has historically played amajor role in funding university research in computer science. as recently as 1996, dod provided nearly half of all federal funding for universitymodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98modeling and simulationresearch in computer science; the national science foundation (nsf) provided most of the rest.12 early dod investments in university researchspurred development of many technologies that have turned into billiondollar industries that now lie at the core of both entertainment and defense modeling and simulation: workstations, graphics technology, andvirtual reality.13 such funding for university research has not only produced new knowledge and new technologies but also provided researchopportunities that are significant component of studentsõ education.òpeople,ó says ed catmull, òare the best products from research dollars.ómany workshop participants believe that the funding environmenthas changed in ways that could prove detrimental to the longterm viability of the technology base for modeling and simulation.14 attempts toreduce the federal budget deficit and trim defense spending have putadditional pressure on federal research expenditures. while total research funding for computer science has continued to grow in real terms,funding for basic research has remained flat since 1990. most of thegrowth in research funding is attributable to increases in funding forapplied research. workshop participants claim that governmentfundedresearch projects are now more product oriented than they used to be.15research contractsñeven for projects considered basic and applied researchñoften specify particular products, completion dates, and interimdeliverables. university researchers claim that this shift, while responsive to calls for greater accountability in publicly funded research, is incompatible with fundamental research, which by its very nature is speculative and unpredictable and more likely than productoriented researchto generate fundamental change. as ed catmull noted at the workshop:the thing that has benefited us all in the past are those programs wherepeople are free to pursue wilder visions, where [researchers] canõt seethings exactly clearly, but they themselves become the foundations onwhich we build growth in the future.others noted that nsf funding, though it has grown in recent years,entails a higher degree of administrative overhead; the need to generatefrequent proposals has taken critical research time away from researchers, including those at the nsffunded science and technology centerfor computer graphics and scientific visualization.16industry funding for university research has not compensated for thechange in federal funding. though total industry contributions to university research have grown in recent years, industry still supports just afraction of university research.17 workshop participants claimed that industry support for research in digital arts, virtual environments, and distributed simulation is especially small. many entertainment companiesdo not support university research because they are small and see themmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion99selves as users of technology more than developers. in addition, industry funding of university research is generally linked to specific industryneeds that are closely coupled with business priorities. as paul lypaczewski of alias|wavefront noted at the workshop, companies are in thebusiness of generating profits, so they fund those schools and those programs whose area of research and competencies are aligned with thetypes of problems that companies want to fix or understand better. companies also expect nearerterm returns from their research investmentsthan does the government. while industryfunded university research isnot necessarily incorporated immediately into products, it must movetechnology forward in ways that ultimately benefit industry; thus, funding decisions center around finding bodies of research that are applicableto both industry and university. corporate sponsors also tend to demand greater control over intellectual property that results from researchprograms, creating a requirement for greater secrecy, which limits thedissemination of new research knowledge.in addition, several workshop participants suggested that industry isnot contributing equipment to university laboratories as it did in the past.university researchers perceive a decline in contributions by traditionaldonors and note that many of the newer industry leaders have notstepped up to the challenge to provide donations. the lack of computerhardware and software technology affects the availability and quality oftechnology for research and training in universities by limiting the kindsof systems on which students may work.many of these concerns mirror changes seen in funding for scienceand technology generally. the demise of highprofile national initiativesto invigorate scientific and technical research programs (such as the spacerace or the cold war),18 constraints on federal budgets for science andengineering, and changes in patterns of industrial research and development (including the restructuring of corporate research laboratories atsuch companies as ibm, xerox, and at&t) influence the nature of research and development in many fields. resolution may therefore require action beyond the modeling and simulation community. nevertheless, to the extent that the modeling and simulation community cansuccinctly and accurately convey the nature of its concerns, such asthrough this report, it may be able to influence the process.concluding remarksas evidenced by the workshop, strong commonalities exist betweendefense and entertainment applications of modeling and simulation andin the technologies needed to support them. whereas dod has traditionally led the field and provided a significant portion of related fundmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100modeling and simulationing, the entertainment industry has made rapid advances in 3d graphicsgeneration, networked simulation, computergenerated characters, andimmersive environments. aligning the research agendas of these twocommunties to allow greater coordination of research developments,sharing of information, and collaborative research could provide an opportunity to more rapidly and economically achieve the goals of both thedefense and entertainment industries.linking these two communities represents a significant challenge;differences in business practices and culture need to be overcome in order to find mechanisms for cooperation and collaboration. additionalefforts will be needed to ensure adequate education of visually literatepeople who can create engaging simulated environments and to ensurefunding for continued research. success will rely on sustained commitment from both sidesñand from a shared belief that the benefits of collaboration are worth the costs. this workshop represented the first steptoward exploring the benefits and the costs of such collaboration; the factthat it attracted many participants from the entertainment industry, aswell as dod, suggests that some degree of mutual interest exists. additional steps will need to be taken to capitalize on that interest.notes1.dod has recently expressed some interest in leasing computer hardware and software for its systemsñespecially training systemsñin order to shorten the time required toacquire new technologies.2.u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1992. after the cold war: livingwith lower defense spending. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., chapter 6.3.lunceford, dell, defense advanced research projects agency, personal communication, november 6, 1996.4.however, as noted in chapter 1, at least one project is under way to develop asystem that can be used both as a military training device and a game, demonstrating thatcultural obstacles can potentially be overcome.5.bray, hiawatha. 1997. òbattle for military video game niche on,ó boston globe,april 16, p. 1.6.for a more complete discussion of federal technology transfer efforts and cradas,see u.s. congress, office of technology assessment, 1993, defense conversion: redirectingr&d, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.7.armour, barry. 1997. òa different kind of artist,ó computer graphics, february, pp. 2325.8.lardner, richard. 1997. òthe future of army automators,ó inside the army, april 29.9.such sentiments have been expressed outside the workshop as well. scott ross,president of digital domain, a leading digital effects studio, also has noted a growing needfor technical directors, animators, compositors, and digital artists in general. see òhollywood reporter,ó new media, july 31, 1996.10.stone, linda. 1996. òonline multimedia communities,ó speech before the fourthannual living surfaces conference: design for the internet, chicago, ill., november 16.11.wolkomir, richard. 1996. òthe school where itõs ok to major in fun and games,ósmithsonian, december, pp. 8697.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.setting the process in motion10112.in 1996 federal obligations for university research in computer science and mathematics totaled $593 million. dod provided $280 million, and nsf contributed $261 million. of the dod funding, darpa provided $184 million. see national science foundation. 1996. federal funds for research and developmentñfiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996.national science foundation, washington, d.c., table c58.13.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.14.the discussion of changes in the size, scope, and nature of research and development has implications far beyond those for the modeling and simulation community andare not discussed in detail in this report. cstb has another study in progress, òinformationtechnology research in a competitive world,ó that will more fully examine the implications of structural changes in the conduct of research and development in informationtechnology in universities, government, and industry.15.national science foundation. 1996. national patterns of r&d resources: 1996. national science foundation, washington, d.c., tables c25, c26, and c27. conversion toconstant 1996 dollars is based on gross domestic product deflators contained in table c1.16.the center includes computer graphics programs at brown university, the californiainstitute of technology, cornell university, the university of north carolina at chapelhill, and the university of utah. it has a longterm research mission (11 years) to helpimprove the scientific bases for the next generation of computer graphics environments(both hardware and software). its research is directed toward modeling, rendering, interaction, and performance.17.in real terms, total industry funding for university research (in all fields ofscience and engineering) grew nearly 60 percent between 1987 and 1996, but it stillrepresents just 7 percent of total university research funds. see national sciencefoundation. 1996. national patterns of r&d resources: 1996. national science foundation, washington, d.c., table c2.18.the space program generated many technologies related to modeling and simulation. satellite imagery and mapping together have been a significant driver of imagingtechnology.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105aworkshop agendasaturday, october 19, 19969:00 a.m.welcome and introductory remarksmichael zyda, committee chairanita jones, director of defense research and engineeringdanny hillis, walt disney imagineeringed catmull, pixar animation studios10:15break10:30session 1: electronic storytellingmoderator: donna coxpanelists:alexander singer, alex seiden, rebecca allen12:15 p.m.lunch, dining terrace1:30session 2: strategy and war gamesmoderator: gilman louiepanelists:kirstie bellman, peter bonanni, paul chatelier,mat genser, carl norman, scott randolph3:00break3:15session 3: experiential computing and virtual realitymoderator: joshua larsonmogalpanelists:ben delaney, mark bolas, scott watson, bill jepson,eugenia kolasinski, traci jones5:15reception, dining terrace6:00dinner, atriummodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106appendix asunday, october 20, 19969:00 a.m.session 4: networked simulationmoderator: michael zydapanelists:warren katz, robert jacobs, brian blau,will harvey, david king11:00break11:15session 5: lowcost simulation hardwaremoderator: jordan weismanpanelists:david clark, buzz hoffman, jeff potter,gary tarolli12:15 p.m.lunch, refectory1:30session 6: finding common groundmoderator: paul lypaczewskipanelists:jim foran, john latta, jacquelyn ford morie,jack thorpe3:00synthesis: setting the research agendamoderator: michael zydapanelists:steering committee3:45adjournmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.107bworkshop participantsrebecca allenuniversity of california atlos angeleskirstie bellmandefense advanced research projects agencybrian blauintervista softwaremark bolasfakespace inc.peter bonannivirginia air national guardf. t. casedefense advanced research projects agencyedwin e. catmullpixar animation studiospaul chatelierdefense modeling and simulationofficedavid chenrgb technology inc.david clarkintel corporationronald cobbartistjudith dahmanndefense modeling and simulationofficeben delaneycyberedge information servicesinc.clark dodsworth, jr.osage associatesmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108appendix bjames foransilicon graphics inc.john geddesames research centermathias genserspectrum holobyte inc.martin gundersenuniversity of southern californiawill harveysandcastle inc.eric haseltinewalt disney imagineeringjanet weisenford healynaval air warfare centerw. daniel hillisthe walt disney companybuzz hoffmanthrustmaster inc.james hollenbachdefense modeling and simulationofficerobert jacobsillusion inc.mark jeffersondefense modeling and simulationofficebill jepsonuniversity of california at losangelesanita jonesoffice of the secretary of defensetraci jonesu.s. army simulation, training & instrumentation commanddavid kingtotal entertainment networkeugenia kolasinskiconsultantjohn latta4th wave inc.richard lindheimparamount television groupgeorge lukesdefense advanced research projects agencydell lunceforddefense advanced research projects agencyfarid mamaghaniconsultantdennis mcbrideoffice of naval researchwilliam mcquayusaf wright laboratoryjacquelyn ford moriewalt disney feature animationstudioscarl normanstrategic simulations inc.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b109jeffrey potterreal 3ddavid prattjoint simulation systems/joint program officescott randolphspectrum holobyte inc.vance saundersball aerospace and technologies corporationalex seidenindustrial light and magicsteven seidenstickerconsultantsandeep singhalibm t.j. watson research centergary tarolli3dfx interactivejack thorpescience applications international corporationscott watsonwalt disney imagineeringmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110cbiographical sketches ofcommittee membersmichael zyda is a professor in the department of computer scienceat the naval postgraduate school (nps) in monterey, california. dr.zyda is also an academic associate and associate chair for academic affairs in that department. he has been at nps since february 1984. dr.zydaõs main research focus is computer graphics, specifically the development of largescale, networked, threedimensional virtual environments and visual simulation systems. dr. zyda was a member of thenational research council committee that produced the report virtualreality: scientific and technical challenges. he is also the senior editor forvirtual environments for the mit press quarterly presence, the journalof teleoperations and virtual environments. dr. zyda has been activewith the symposium on interactive 3d graphics and was the chair of the1990 conference, held in snowbird, utah, and chair of the 1995 symposium, held in monterey, california. dr. zyda began his career in computer graphics in 1973 as part of an undergraduate research group, thesenses bureau, at the university of california, san diego. he received ab.a. in bioengineering from the university of california, san diego, in1976; an m.s. in computer science/neurocybernetics from the universityof massachusetts, amherst, in 1978; and a d.sc. in computer science fromwashington university, st. louis, missouri, in 1984.donna j. cox is a professor in the school of art & design andassociate director for technologies in the school of art at the university of illinois, urbanachampaign. she is also codirector for scienmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c111tific communications and media systems at the national center forsupercomputing applications. ms. cox has exhibited computer images and animations in more than 100 invitational and juried exhibitsduring the past nine years, including shows at the bronx museum ofart in new york, the everson art museum in new york, the featuregallery in chicago, the feature gallery in new york city, the fermilab in chicago, and the museum of contemporary photography inchicago. she has authored many juried papers on computer graphicsand scientific visualization and received the colermaxwell medalfor excellence in 1989. her work has been reviewed or cited in morethan 75 publications, including time, national geographic, wall streetjournal, and ieee computer graphics and applications. ms. cox spent asabbatical working on an imax film, cosmic voyage, for the smithsonian institutionõs national air and space museum. as associate producer for scientific visualization and art director, she has orchestrated scientific visualization software, data, and design for pixaranimation studios, santa barbara studios, princeton university, theuniversity of california at santa cruz, the san diego supercomputercenter, and the national center for supercomputing applications.ms. cox received an m.f.a. in computer graphic arts and a b.a. fromfrom the university of wisconsinmadison.warren j. katz is vice president and cofounder of m−k technologies. his responsibilities include corporate operations, new business development, and program management. m−kõs corporate goalis to provide cuttingedge research and development services to thedepartment of defense in the areas of distributed interactive simulation (dis) and networked virtual reality (vr) systems and to convertthe results of this research into commercial products for the entertainment and industrial markets. m−kõs first commercial product,the vrlinkª developerõs toolkit, is the most widely used commercial dis interface in the world. it is an application programmerõstoolkit that makes possible networking of distributed simulations andvr systems. the toolkit complies with the defense departmentõs disprotocol, enabling multiple participants to interact in real time vialowbandwidth network connections. vrlink is designed for easyintegration with existing and new simulations, vr systems, andgames. from june 1987 to october 1990, mr. katz worked for bolt,beranek, and newman on the simnet project. he was the residentdrivetrain simulation expert, responsible for mathematical modelingof the physical systems and software development. mr. katz receivedb.s. degrees in mechanical engineering and electrical engineeringfrom the massachusetts institute of technology.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112appendix cjoshua larsonmogal is manager of product strategy for silicongraphicsõ light client division. he is responsible for supervising product management of the divisionõs products and for driving innovationinto commercial applications for the range of markets addressed by thedivision. he was previously the manager of the enabling technologiesgroup in the advanced systems division at silicon graphics, where heoversaw a group of product managers working on the opengl, irisperformer, open inventor, react, and imagevision library softwareproducts and the realtime and virtual reality market/technology spaces.in previous positions at silicon graphics, mr. larsonmogal served asmanager of the market development group, market manager for emerging technologies, product manager for advanced graphics systems, andsenior graphics software developer. in these positions he identified newgrowth markets for advanced graphics hardware and initiated silicongraphicsõ participation in markets for visual simulation, virtual reality,and interactive entertainment. he also initiated the product planningprocess for the infinite reality graphics subsystem, the followon to reality engine, managed the power vision (vgx) graphics workstation products, and developed featurebased solid modeling applications for computerintegrated design, analysis, and manufacturing. in 1985 mr.larsonmogal founded deneb robotics inc., where he designed the system architecture and developed the user interface for igrip, a softwareapplication for robot workcell simulation and offline training. as agraphics software developer at autotrol technology corporation, hedeveloped deviceindependent graphics libraries to support both computeraided design and computeraided facilities management applications. mr. larsonmogal received a b.s. degree in computer science fromcornell university.gilman louie has been chair of spectrum holobyte inc. since 1992.in 1982 mr. louie founded nexa corporation, a developer of entertainment software that later merged with spectrum holobyte. mr. louie isthe creator of the bestselling falcon air combat simulation, one of thecompanyõs leading brand franchises. he received a b.s. in business administration from san francisco state university.paul lypaczewski is part of the management team continuing tobuild and manage alias|wavefront in toronto. he is working with theformer executive vicepresident of wavefront to form a distributed development organization of engineers and support staff in toronto, california, vancouver, santa barbara, and paris. mr. lypaczewski continuesto manage corporate research and development (r&d) and oversees alllevels of development from product planning, product release, and stramodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c113tegic account management for all of the toronto products. mr. lypaczewski joined alias research inc. in february 1992 as part of a managementturnaround team. in his role as vicepresident of product development,he oversaw the restructuring of r&d and all levels of development fromproduct planning to product release for all alias products and was involved in legal and intellectual property issues associated with r&d.prior to joining alias, mr. lypaczewski worked at cae electronic ltd., aproducer of realtime systems, including flight training simulators, airtraffic control and energy control systems, and space systems, such as thecontrols for the space shuttleõs canadarm. mr. lypaczewski joined thecompany as an autopilot systems engineer and held a variety of management positions, including senior manager of simulator programs engineering and manager of avionics simulation. in these positions he wasresponsible for all project engineering and sales proposal support forflight simulation and computerbased training systems. mr. lypaczewski received a b.eng. degree from mcgill university and is a member oflõordre des ingenieurs du quebec.randy pausch is an associate professor of computer science, humancomputer interaction, and design at carnegie mellon university. he received a b.s. in computer science from brown university in 1982 and aph.d. in computer science from carnegie mellon in 1988. he has been anational science foundation presidential young investigator and a lillyfoundation teaching fellow. in 1995 he spent a sabbatical with the waltdisney imagineering virtual reality studio. dr. pausch is the author orcoauthor of five books and more than 50 reviewed journal and conference proceedings articles, is an active consultant with both walt disneyimagineering and xerox parc, and has served on a number of nationalresearch council panels.alexander singer began his career as a photojournalist and educational filmmaker. his 30year directing career has resulted in 250 television shows, several fulllength feature movies, and many commercials.his directorial credits include profiles in courage, police story, the fugitive,run for your life, hill street blues, lou grant, cagney and lacey, star trek:voyager, and deep space 9. mr. singer won an emmy for an episode ofthe bold ones (1972) and represented the series police story (1975) and lougrant (1979) for their emmys. he has lectured on film production, cinematography, and directing and has taught courses at private institutions,universities on two continents, the university of california at los angeles extension, and for the directors guild of america special projects. inaddition to his directorial work, mr. singer has, for the past several years,been a member of the global business network, a consulting group basedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114appendix cin san francisco with wideranging concerns centered on the global economy. recently, mr. singer was under contract as a film consultant touniversal studioõs orlando theme park and mca/matsushita. his workat mca/matsushita centered on the development of an entertainmentapplication for virtual reality technology.jordan weisman is chief creative officer for virtual world entertainment inc. this title recognizes his pivotal role as the principal creative architect at virtual world. acclaimed as one of the worldõs premiergame and software designers, mr. weisman has led the company to itspresent position atop the fledgling òexperienceó industry. in 1980 mr.weisman and his partner, ross babcick, formed the fasa corporation, afantasy roleplaying boardgame publishing company. as fasaõs president, jordan codesigned two of the top five bestselling games in theindustry, battletech and shadowrun. fasa now publishes multiple linesof fantasy and science fiction novels based on its game universes. it wasat fasa that mr. weisman began to develop the principles behind theinteractive games that virtual world entertainment now practices at virtual world. virtual world opened its battletech center in chicago inaugust 1990. as the first locationbased virtual reality center in theworld, it gave the public a taste of a technology that was formerly theprivate domain of the national aeronautics and space administrationand the military. mr. weisman has received numerous awards for gamedesign and has lectured extensively on virtual reality and game designaround the world.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.115dposition papersprior to the computer science and telecommunications boardõs october 1996 workshop on modeling and simulation, participants wereasked to submit a one to threepage position paper that responded tothree questions:1. how do you see your particular industry segment evolving overthe next decade (i.e., how will markets and products evolve)?2. what technological advances are necessary to enable the progressoutlined in your answer to question 1? what are the primary researchchallenges?3. are you aware of complementary efforts in the entertainment ordefense sectors that might be applicable to your interests? if so, pleasedescribe them.this appendix reproduces a number of these position papers. the papers examine technologies of interest to the entertainment industry andthe u.s. department of defense, as well as some of the barriers to collaboration. several of the papers are cited in the body of the report; substantial portions of some have also been incorporated there.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116appendix dbrian blauvrml: future of the collaborative 3d internetintroductionvrml (virtual reality modeling language) is the threedimensionalcomputer graphics interchange file specification that has become the standard for internetbased simulations. it is being used in many industries,and the momentum of the standard and industry acceptance continues togrow at a fast pace. most of the major software and hardware corporations are now starting serious efforts to build core vrml technologiesdirectly into business applications, scientific and engineering tools, software development tools, and entertainment applications.one of the most significant developments in the history of vrmlwas its adoption by silicon graphics inc. (sgi), netscape, and microsoftduring 19951996. this broad level of industry acceptance continues tochallenge the vrml community to provide an official international standard so that wide adoption will be possible. given that creation of vrmlcame from a unique and open consensusbased process, its future depends on continued innovation in the directions of true distributed simulations as well as efforts to keep the standards process moving forward.historical development of vrmlover the past two years the development of a standard for distributing 3d computer graphics and simulations over the internet has takenthe quick path from idea to reality. in 1994 a few san francisco cyberspace artisans (mark pesce, tony parisi, and gavin bell) combined theirefforts to start the vrml effort. their intention was to create a standardthat would enable artists and designers to deliver a new kind of contentto the browsable internet.in mid1995 vrml version 1.0 emerged as the first attempt at thisstandard. after an open internet vote, vrml 1.0 was to be based onsilicon graphicsõ popular open inventor technology. vrml was widelyevaluated as unique and progressive but still not useable. at this pointbroad industry support for vrml was coalescing in an effort to kickstart a new industry. complimentary efforts were also underway to deliver both audio and video over the internet. the general feeling wasthat soon the broad acceptance of distributed multimedia on the internetwas a real possibility and that vrml would emerge as the 3d standard.after completion of the vrml 1.0 standard, the vrml architecturegroup (vag) was established at siggraph 1995 and consisted of eightmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d117internet and 3d simulation experts. in early 1996 vag issued a requestfor proposals on the second round of vrml development. the call wasanswered by six industry leaders. through an open vote sgi emerged asthe winner with its moving worlds proposal. by this time over 100 companies had publicly endorsed vrml, and many of them were workingon core technologies, browsers, authoring tools, and content. at siggraph 1996 vag issued the final vrml 2.0 specification and made anumber of other significant announcements.to help maintain vrml as a standard, vag made several concretemoves. first, it started the process of creating the vrml consortium, anonprofit organization devoted to vrml standard development, conformance, and education. second, vag announced that the international standards organization (iso) would adopt vrml and the consensusbased standardization process as its starting place for an international 3dmetafile format.distributed and multiuser simulations using vrmlbased on the current state of technology, it is now obvious that distributed 3d simulations are clearly possible for a wide audience. distributed simulation is the broad term that defines 3d applications that communicate by standardsbased communications protocols. militarytraining, collaborative design, and multiuser chat are examples of suchapplications.widespread adoption of this technology depends on the followingkey technology factors: platforms, rendering, multimedia, and connectivity. today, the most popular platforms for accessing the internet aredesktop machinesñnamely, windows 95/nt and the macintosh powerpc family. these operating systems are running on computing platforms powerful enough to display complex 3drendered scenes. thetools are readily available as well, thanks to microsoftõs directx mediaintegration apiõs and activex internet controls as well as netscapeõslive3d and liveconnect developer platforms. these software tools, combined with powerful desktop processors, make it easy for software developers to create vrml technologies and products.another key aspect of development is the tight integration of multimedia into these platforms. hollywood and the video games industry seethe desktop pc as the next major platform for delivery of multimediacontent. this means vrml technology development will be accessible todevelopers of all types of integrated internetbased media.the final key is development of openprotocol communications standards suited for internet use. currently, the military uses distributedinteractive simulation (dis) as the communications protocol for trainingmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118appendix dapplications and has been successful to date. the integration of dis withinternet technology is key but not the entire solution. dis was developedonly for military applications. its broader acceptance by industry is dependent on significant changes to its infrastructure, including the simulation model, numerical representation, integration with vrml, and dependence on department of defense initiatives.another complementary area of interest is multiuser vrml spaces.these applications are the next step in online humantohuman communication and are enabled by the internet and vrml. several companieshave products that let individuals directly interact with others. in theseonline worlds each person views a fully interactive 3d vrml world,including moving graphical avatars that are the virtual representationsof their human counterparts. some of these applications also includerealtime voice that is syncopated with movements of the avatarõs eyesand mouth. it is very compelling to communicate with someone andonly be able to see their virtual representation.several companies and organizations are now starting to collaborateon a standard for vrmlbased avatars. these groups are now in theformative stages and are being published by fairly small companies. thefirst avatar standard will roll out later in 1996.future directionsvrml technology and content development in 19961997 will focuson several areas. on the standards front, the vrml consortium and isowill continue to broaden acceptance of vrml. the vrml consortiumwill have its first official meetings in late 1996. creating the organizationand filling it with technical, creative, processoriented people will be agoal. the vag will continue to serve as the focus for standardsbasedvrml work until the consortium is selfsustaining. also during 1997,iso will officially adopt vrml as the only international 3d metafile format for the internet. once the vrml consortium is operational, thefocus of activities will be on continued development of the vrml specification and the creation of working groups.on the software and hardware development fronts many advanceswill be made. vrml 2.0 browsers will emerge and will integrate directlyinto the popular htmlbased browsers. manufacturers of threedimensional hardware accelerators will add features that directly support basicvrml graphics. tool manufacturers, such as polygonal modelers andscene creation tools, will incorporate vrml readandwrite capabilities.integration of dis and other distributed simulation communications protocols will quickly help content authors build multiuser capabilities intomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d119their worlds. finally, content developers will enjoy the flood of newmodeling and programming tools.given all of these advances there are still three immediate technicalareas that need to be addressed before vrml becomes widely adopted:common scripting language, external api, and binary file format. currently, these areas are quite controversial, but it is clear within the vrmlcommunity that solutions to the problems are within reach.vrml resources on the internethttp://vag.vrml.orgñofficial home of the vrml spec and the vaghttp://sdsc.vrml.orgñvery comprehensive list of vrml resourceshttp://www.intervista.coñpopular vrml browserhttp://www.microsoft.com/ie/ie3/vrml.htmñpopular vrml browserhttp://www.sgi.com/cosmoñpopular vrml browserhttp://home.netscape.com/eng/live3dñpopular vrml browserhttp://www.blacksun.comñmultiuser 3d applicationhttp://www.onlive.comñmultiuser application with realtime voicehttp://www.dimensionx.comñjavabased vrml toolshttp://www.ktx.comñvrml toolsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix dmark bolasintroductionif the national aeronautics and space administrationõs view laboratory marks the beginning of the virtual reality (vr) industry, the industry is just about to pass its 10year mark. there is a rule of thumb statingthat it takes about 20 years for a new technology to find its way into themainstream economy. applied here, this means 10 years before vr is inthe mainstream economy. this prediction seems completely reasonable,or even pessimistic. consumers can currently purchase vr headsets withintegrated tracking for less than $800. a handful of automotive manufacturers and aerospace contractors use vr on an ongoing basis to solvedesign and engineering problems. however, early adopters are incorporating the technology into their work and lives. they face all of thefrustrations and challenges typically associated with being on the cuttingedge. the next 10 years will see the vr industry evolve in a straightforward and boring fashionñearly adopters will have paved the way foreasy use by the mainstream.this evolution will require a fundamental shift in the way vr technology is viewed and used. the technology must cease to stand apart; itneeds to become an invisible part of a userõs lifestyle and work habits.this requires progress on two basic fronts: first, the technology must beintegrated into the userõs physical environment. second, it must be integrated into the userõs software environment.evolutionfor mainstream users to benefit from vr technologies, the technologies must become pervasive. they must extend throughout our industries and lives. they must diligently work for their users and quietlybecome part of their lifestyle. the facsimile machine is an example of atechnology that has accomplished this.walkmen, dishwashers, televisionsñall these have become pervasive by thoroughly changing the way people do things. a person doesnot talk about using a walkman, or a dishwasher, or a television. ifanything, a person discusses the content or end result as opposed to thenote: the industry segment described here is defined as industries that benefit fromimmersive humancomputer interfaces. the term virtual reality is intended to include thisdefinition.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d121actual device. òi heard a good song,óòthe dishes are clean,óòdid yousee that stupid show last night?óthere is little question that threedimensional (3d) graphics and simulation are on the way to becoming pervasive. in industry the designprocess is being transformed to demand 3d models and simulations. thischristmas consumers will be choosing between the sony or nintendoplatforms with 3d graphics capability being assumed.however, the vr industry must evolve to provide such 3d systemswith immersive interfaces that multiply the utility and effect of the 3dgraphics. currently, most 3d graphics are shown on a 2d screen andmanipulated via a 2d mouse. these interfaces effectively remove muchof the value present in the 3d environments. the vr industry mustmaintain the utility and comfort present in a userõs natural ability toperceive and manipulate 3d environments and objects.advancesfor vr to become a pervasive tool, it must become integrated intoboth the userõs physical and software environments. seamless integration with a userõs physical environment is not simple because immersiveinterfaces tend to immerseñthat is, they surround and envelop the user.this can easily intrude on a userõs physical and mental environment.the vr industry needs to minimize this intrusion to the point whereimmersive interfaces are as natural to use as a telephone or mouse. it isinteresting to note that both these examples are not inherently natural,but both have been integrated into usersõ workspaces and lifestyles.to achieve a natural interface, paradigms that transcend the standard gogglesandgloves paradigm need to be pursued. the fact thatpeople collaborate, multitask, and eat while they work are downtoearthaspects that must be considered in the design of immersive tools.equally challenging is the integration of these new interfaces in thesoftware environment. application software packages have typicallybeen written for 2d screens and interfaces. as a result, most immersiveinterfaces are poor retrofits onto existing packages that were never designed to incorporate them. this lack of integration severely cripples theutility of immersive interfaces.this integration is probably best achieved by starting with a òtopdown/bottom upó design approach on a number of key applications.for example, the entertainment industry could use an immersive set design and preview system, while the defense department would benefitfrom a simulationbased design and modeling system that fully utilizes ahumanõs ability to think, design, and manipulate 3d space.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix dpeter bonannithe u.s. armed forces have created the most advanced training systems in the world. some segments of the armed forces, however, arefacing true training shortfalls for the first time in decades. these trainingdeficiencies are being caused by worldwide deployments. u.s. air forceactive duty and reserve squadrons, for example, have experienced a reduction in training sorties of up to 25 percent. this reduction is a directresult of deployments in support of contingency operations over iraq andbosnia. pilots are most proficient and able to fight when they are firstdeployed to these areas. as the deployment wears on, with little or notraining opportunities, pilot proficiency slips. the same problem is occurring in other combat arms as the trend to use u.s. forces in peacekeeping roles accelerates. since conducting realistic training is impossible on most of these missions, simulators provide the only realistictraining alternative. unfortunately, most of the simulators in use todayare very expensive, are limited to singlecrew training, and are not deployable.emerging commercial simulation technology, however, may providea nearterm solution to this military training problem. some fighter pilotskills, for example, cannot be practiced in simulation, regardless of thefidelity. the most important (and perishable) skills, however, can behoned by verylowcost simulators. the computer game falcon 4.0 is anexample of a commercial product that is shattering the fidelity thresholdand providing a model for verylowcost simulation. there are severalkey components to falcon 4.0 that allow this type of breakthrough. falcon4.0 features òsimnetlikeó networking protocols that create a large manintheloop environment. these features of falcon 4.0 provide the basicbuilding blocks for producing a simulator that will be low in cost anddeployable and that will provide pilots with team training opportunities.in the near term this capability will be enhanced with the development ofcommercial headmounted displays and voice recognition systems.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d123defense modeling andsimulation officedod modeling and simulation overview andopportunities for collaboration between thedefense and entertainment industriesthe u.s. department of defense (dod) is building a robust modeling and simulation (m&s) capability to evaluate weapons system requirements and courses of actions; to reduce the time line, risk, and cost ofcomplex weapons system development; to conduct training; and for realistic mission rehearsal. part one of this paper provides a description ofthe current and envisioned application of m&s in the training, analysis,and acquisition support functional areas. it also summarizes the planthat is in place to help achieve dodõs m&s vision. part two is a list oftechnology areas that dod believes have a potential for collaborativedevelopment with the entertainment industry.part one:dod modeling and simulation overviewvision and applicationthe foundation for the above set of dod m&s capabilities will be thedevelopment of a common technical framework to maximize interoperability among simulations and the reuse of simulation components. thecornerstone of the common technical framework (ctf), the highlevelarchitecture (hla), has just been adopted as dodwide policy. together with the other elements of the ctf, data standards, and a commonunderstanding (or conceptual model) of the real world, the hla willenable dod to use and combine simulations in asyet unimagined ways.establishment of a commercial standard will follow as applicationsspread to training for natural disaster response, weather and crop forecasting, and a host of other business and social problems.common services and tools also will be provided to simulation developers to further reduce the cost and time required to build highfidelityrepresentations of realworld systems and processes. realistic simulations,interacting with actual warfighting systems, will enable combatants to rehearse missions and òtrain as we fight.ó virtual prototypes developed in acollaborative design environment using the new integrated product andprocess development concept will be evaluated and perfected with the helpof real war fighters before physical realizations are ever constructed. dodmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix dwill enforce recently approved policies and procedures for the verification,validation, and accreditation of models and simulations to ensure accuracy,thereby enhancing the credibility of simulation results.the advanced m&s capability envisioned by dod will be a rapidlyconfigured mix of computer simulations, actual warfighting systems,and weapons systems simulators geographically distributed and networked and involving tens of thousands of entities to support training,analysis, and acquisition. not only is there a desire to quickly scale thesize and mix of simulations, but dod also is pursuing the capabilitywhereby both groups and individuals can interact equally well with asynthetic environment. the major challenge in providing scalability, aswell as the group and individual experience, is achieving consistencyand coherence of both time and space.other areas of ongoing research in dod that show promising resultsare the accurate representation of human behavior, systems, and the natural environment (air, space, land, sea, weather, and battle effects).dodõs efforts are focused on justintime generation of integrated andconsistent environmental data to support realistic mission rehearsals anywhere in the world, including inaccessible or operationally dangerouslocations. investments in the rapid extraction of land and water surfaces, features existing on those surfaces, and features derived from ocean,air, and space grided fields have begun to yield results. the goal is todevelop a capability to generate featureintegrated surfaces that requireminimal editing and modelbased software for feature extraction.achieving this will, for example, ensure that weather fronts that bringrain or snow change the characteristics of the ground so that transit rateis affected and the associated wind patterns move trees, create waves,and alter dispersal patterns of smoke and dust. the resulting realismwill add significantly to training, analysis, and acquisition. these effects,when coupled with dialup capability to create custom correlated conditions, can provide yearround training.trainingwarriors of every rank will use m&s to challenge their skills at thetactical, operational, or strategic level through the use of realistic synthetic environments for a full range of missions, to include peacekeeping andproviding humanitarian aide. huge exercises, combining forces from allservices in carefully planned combined operations, will engage in realistic training without risking injury, environmental damage, or costlyequipment damage. simulation will enable leaders to train at scales notpossible in any arena short of fullscale combat operations, using weapmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d125ons that would be unsafe on conventional live ranges. simulation will beused to evaluate the readiness of our armed forces as well.the active duty and reserve components of all forces will be able tooperate together in synthetic environments without costly and timeconsuming travel to live training grounds. in computerbased training, boththe friendly and opposition forces, or computergenerated forces (cgfs),are highly aggregated into large command echelons and carry out the orders resulting from staff planning and decision making. cgfs fall into twocategories: (1) semiautomated forces (safs), which require some directhuman involvement to make tactical decisions and control the activities ofthe aggregated force, and (2) automated forces, which are associated withautonomous agent (aa) technology. aas are in early development phasesand will find extensive applications in m&s as the technology matures.there is now a diverse and active interest throughout the dod m&scommunity, academia, and the software industry in the development ofcgfs and aas. the defense advanced research projects agency issponsoring the development of modular semiautomated forces for thesynthetic theater of war program, which includes both intelligent forcesand command forces. this effort also involves development of the command and control simulation interface language. it is designed for communications between and among simulated command entities, smallunits, and virtual platforms. the services, more specifically the armyõsclose combat tactical trainer program, is now developing opposingforces and blue forces to be completed in 1997. the british ministry ofdefence also is developing similar capabilities using command agenttechnology in a program called command agent support for unit movement facility. academic and industrial interest in this technology hasled to the first international conference on autonomous agents, whichwill take place in marina del rey, california, on february 58, 1997.analysism&s will provide dod with a powerful set of tools to systematicallyanalyze alternative force structures. analysts and planners will designvirtual joint forces, fight an imaginary foe, reconfigure the mix of forces,and fight the battle numerous times in order to learn how best to shapefuture task forces. not only will simulation shape future force structure,but it will also be used to evaluate and optimize the course of action inresponse to events that occur worldwide.m&s representations will enable planners to design the most effective logistics pipelines to supply the warriors of the future, whether theyare facing conventional combat missions or operations other than war.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix dacquisitionoperating in the same virtual environments, virtual prototypes willenable acquisition executives to determine the right mix of system capability and affordability prior to entering production. fighting syntheticbattles repeatedly while inserting new systems or different componentswill help determine the right investment and modernization strategy forour future armed forces. models and simulations will reduce the time,resources, and risks of the acquisition process and will increase the quality of the systems produced.m&s will allow testers to create realistic test and evaluation procedures without the expense and danger of live exercises. òdry runsó oflive operational tests will minimize the risks to people, machines, andtesting ranges.m&s will enhance information sharing among designers, manufacturers, logisticians, testers, and end users, shortening the system development cycle and improving the integrated product team developmentprocesses.the dod m&s master planthe dod m&s master plan (msmp) is a corporate plan to achievedodõs vision. its first objective is the establishment of a common technical framework, anchored by the hla. the hla has been defined andadopted as the standard simulation architecture for all dod simulations.development continues on the other elements of the ctf, and dodõsinvestment strategy for m&s is focused on achieving the vision.the second objective of the msmp is to provide timely and authoritative representations of the natural environment. to this end, executiveagents (eas) have been established to coordinate development in theirrespective areas of oceans, aerospace, and terrain. eas have also begunto explore potential commercial marketplaces for their databases.the remaining objectives address representation of systems, humanbehavior, and establishing a robust infrastructure to meet the needs ofsimulation developers and end users. the infrastructure will includeresource repositoriesñvirtual librariesñand a help desk for users.the final objective of the plan is to share the benefits of m&s. dodmust educate potential users about the benefits of employing m&s. to thatend, an extensive study is under way to quantify objective data on the costeffectiveness and efficiency of m&s in training, analysis, and acquisitionapplications throughout dod. extensive anecdotal data exist, but no concerted effort to demonstrate the return on investment has been done.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d127part two:m&s technology areasalthough the vision for m&s described previously is focused onmeeting the needs of the military, implementing the vision requires thedevelopment and exploitation of technologies that also have applicationto the entertainment industry. the following partial list of technologieswas identified by members of the dod m&s community as areas wherecooperative development with the entertainment industry will have thegreatest benefit to both communities.virtual presencevirtual presence is the subjective sense of being physically present inone environment when actually present in another environment (sheridan, 1992). researchers in virtual reality (vr) have hypothesized theimportance of inducing a feeling of presence in individuals experiencingvirtual environments if they are to perform their intended tasks effectively. creating this sense of presence is not well understood at this time, butamong its potential benefits may be (1) providing the specific cues required for task performance, (2) motivation to perform to the best ofoneõs abilities, and (3) providing an overall experience similar enough tothe real world that it effectively allows suspension of disbelief while atthe same time the synthetic environment elicits the conditioned or desired response while in the real world.visual stimulusthis is the primary means to foster presence in most of todayõs simulators. however, because of an insufficient consideration of the impact ofgranularity, texture, and style in graphics rendering, the inherent capability of the available hardware is not utilized to the greatest effect. onepotential area of collaboration could be to investigate the concepts ofvisual stimulus requirements and the various design approaches to improve graphicsrendering devices to satisfy these requirements.hearing and 3d sounddod has initiated numerous efforts to improve the production of 3dsound techniques, but it has not yet been effectively used in militarysimulations. providing more realistic sound to a synthetic environmentcan have two potential benefits for training: (1) providing more realisticmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128appendix dsound cues and (2) providing a more realistic aural environment thatenhances realism.olfactory stimulussmell can contribute to task performance in certain situations andcan contribute to the full sense of presence in the synthetic environment.there are certain distinctive smells that serve as cues for task initiation.a smoldering electrical fire can be used to trigger certain concerns byindividuals participating in a training simulator. in addition, smells suchas hydraulic fluid can enhance the synthetic environment to the extent ofcreating a sense of enhanced danger.vibrotactile and electrotactile displaysanother sense that can be involved to create an enhanced synthetic environment is touch and feel. current simulator design hasconcentrated on moving the entire training platform while often ignoring the importance of surface temperature and vibration in creating a realistic environment.coherent stimulione area that has not received much research is the required coherentapplication of the abovelisted stimulations to create an enhanced syntheticenvironment. although each stimulation may be valid in isolation, the realchallenge is the correct level and intensity of combined stimulations.virtual environment representationthis area includes technologies that emphasize the representation ofindividuals and the interactions among virtual and live participants in anindividual or group experience.representation of human figureswhile methods are evolving for creating computergenerated representations of human figures that are anthropometrically valid, in generalthese methods are computationally complex while at the same time stylishly rigid. approaches for automated modeling of human figures that resultin more natural representations that are more computationally efficient is atopic of great interest in a number of disciplines, including medicine. theneed is to determine the minimum essential information required to promodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d129vide a representation of human actions that are sufficiently realistic for bothcommunities. animation of human figures, including speech, running, andfacial expressions, still requires significant development.human body trackingresearch has begun on methods for tracking and capturing the motion of humans that support realtime interaction with both virtual andconstructive simulations.virtual backgroundscreation of a full virtual environment requires generating the naturaland/or cultural features of the background in which the interaction takesplace. specific areas of research include automating the production of background environments and efficient representations in scalable databases.group/team interactionsmost of the research in virtual presence has been single person oriented (e.g., headmounted displays and tracking systems, hand and footcontrols). dod has a direct interest and experience in developing thegroup or team training experience, which is also of interest to the entertainment industry. dod would like to enhance its capability for an entiregroup to interact with a virtual environment and each other without theneed for unique individual hardware devices.summarythe dod vision is to apply m&s to the full range of military applications, including training, analysis, and acquisition. the vision can onlybe met if the technology defined above is readily available, of low cost,and operationally valid. it is the desire of dod to explore technologieswith the entertainment industry that are relevant to modeling and simulation. these technologies may include animation, graphical imaging,data communication and storage, architectures, and human immersion.dod believes research in collaboration with the entertainment industrywill provide mutual benefit to both communities.referencesheridan, t.b. 1992. telerobotics, automation, and human supervisory control. mit press,cambridge, mass.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130appendix djames forannintendo 64, the first truly interactive threedimensional video gamemachine, provides a level of experiences that has not generally been available outside the traditional simulation and training community. it doesso at a price point that allows virtually every household to own one. theimplications of the technology embedded in the machine for all types oftraining and simulation are tremendous. not only does it provide a lowcost ubiquitous platform, but it also portends a future where even morepowerful and realistic machines will be pervasive.silicon graphics, relying on 15 years of experience, was able to utilize stateoftheart semiconductor technology to achieve a lowcost, highperformance, highvolume product for nintendo. the chips utilized wereamong the first logic chips to be produced using 0.35micron technology.this represents a fundamental change in the way technology is driven.in the past, advanced technologies were first used to produce lowvolume, highcost systems principally for military use. these seed applications provided the opportunity to make the technology viable economically. over time the technology moved down in product price pointuntil eventually it appeared in consumer devices.all of this has now changed. today, with fabrication facilities costing over $1 billion, largescale markets must exist to justify the expense ofconstruction. although dram [dynamic random access memory] haslong been the primary justification for new fabrications, the cyclical nature of demand requires that other applications need to exist to balancecapacity utilization. video games are the largest market for consumptionof advanced semiconductor technologies; their public acceptance is orders of magnitude higher than that of traditional computer products. inits first six months, 2.7 million units are expected to be sold, increasing toa total of 5 million within the first nine months.in the video game market it is possible to get an advanced productlike this out at a price point that is acceptable to the consumer only because it is possible to subsidize hardware with software. the hardware isbrought to market with a very low margin throughout the chain frommanufacture to distribution. much like a cd player, the box has nointrinsic value to the consumer; it is simply a necessary expense in orderto enjoy the game. over the product life it is typical for each platform toaverage 10 games. this provides the return on investment to the manufacturer as well as a living for the content providers.this is a great development for kids who want to play games, butwhat implications does it have for other markets? it is instructive to lookat some of the similarities to the requirements that are traditionally assomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d131ciated with the military market. typical military programs have stressedadvanced technology. after all, competitiveness is the cornerstone ofany military development. the video game business is a war for theconsumer pocketbook. because of the requirement for competitive advantage, both applications are upfront and capital intensive. longtermproduct stability also is important for both markets. in this respect, video games are unusual for a consumer product. each hardware unit in thefield must play every game cartridge the same as every other machine.maintenance of the design for a 10year period is accepted.so we can see that there are many characteristics of video game hardware that match up with typical military requirements. how could thistype of hardware be put to use? in the field of training and simulationthe military has long led the way. with increasing sophistication of weaponry and the political sensitivities associated with the type of actionsencountered in todayõs world, military preparedness is more necessarythan ever. simulation also provides the costeffectiveness required bytodayõs budget realities. nevertheless, practical training equipment, although decreasing in price, has not yet become ubiquitous. this type ofvideo game platform now makes that possible.the question before this group is, how can the military take advantageof this commercially developed technology? one immediate answer is thattraining cartridges can be developed for the actual home game platform.this requires the setting up of some sort of development rights with thegame platform manufacturer. this is actually a very practical method fortraining applications where the home game hardware is sufficient to achievethe training objective. in the case where input devices must be similar toactual operational hardware or where systems must be embedded into operational equipment, one must go beyond the box available at the toy store.some of these requirements can be met by physically reconfiguringthe hardware and developing the appropriate accessories. in other cases,where requirements may exceed the capabilities of the home game box,more powerful systems can be built utilizing the same components.generally, a semiconductor process yields a speed range of parts thatcan vary in horsepower by 50 percent or more. in the case of a productlike nintendo64, because of the requirement for high volume and lowcost, all devices must work in the target system. this means that throughspeed grading much more powerful components can be obtained. byusing these components and more robust system configurations it is possible to satisfy more demanding requirements. since the semiconductorprocess used to manufacture these stateoftheart devices is itself quitenew, it is a natural that as the process matures a shift of yield to higherspeed parts will result. this is a quite common phenomenon in thedram business.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix dso what is the issue that prevents this type of technology from beingutilized by the military? the military can accomplish tremendousprojects during times of war or national emergency, but during peacetime the design and procurement cycle moves at a snailõs pace. i recentlytalked to a customerña military system integratorñabout designing agraphic function for use in a new vehicle. he was concerned that hemight prototype with something that would not be costeffective in implementation. i asked him: òwell, how far out is production?ó theanswer was that production would start in six to seven years. i told himthere wasnõt anything on earth with regard to electronics that would notbe costeffective in six years if it exists today.how can the military deal with this situation?1. it can think long term. we have to have a vision of what kind oftechnology we will want to be using 5 to 10 years from now. we have tobe practical. there are far too many òfuturistsó on the speaking circuitwhose ideas are either too far out in time or lack any understanding ofthe infrastructure required to provide a whole solution. nevertheless, alongterm vision is a necessity.2. it can focus. focus on specific objectives of large scale. this provides volume, which is necessary to entice companies to commit resources. however, donõt get trapped into trying to define a universal devicethat meets all needs for everyone. the desired product must be simple todescribe and easily understood by everyone involved.3. it can make commitments. no company with shareholders is goingto make a major investment of its resources for something that mighthappen. the military must realize that despite everyoneõs good intentions some of these commitments will result in failure. monitoring ofprogress and conditions is required, but this needs to be at armõs length.4. it can cut the red tape. companies need to be able to do what isbusiness as usual to them. requirements need to be clearly communicated and feasibility agreed. after that, get out of the way and focus onresults rather than procedures.5. it can put the infrastructure in place. no solution will succeed unlessthe proper infrastructure is put in place on the customer side. there needsto be honesty in the assessment of how fast infrastructure changes can beaccomplished, and these must mesh with the time scale of the project.in closing, there is no limit to where technology can go. the limits lie inour ability to apply technology. the reason that entertainment markets areable to apply technology successfully is that major commitments are madefor specific focused objectives of large magnitude. this provides lucrativeopportunities for technology companies to provide new solutions.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d133john geddescollaborative challenges:understanding cultural differencesthere is a broad cultural chasm between the u.s. department of defense (dod) and the entertainment/computer industry. this chasm canpresent a serious obstacle to successful collaboration. processes and attitudes will have to be created or modified if collaboration is going tosucceed between the two groups.in the context of modeling and simulation, dod can be characterizedby varied and often competing interests, funding that is renewed annually, and extremely hierarchical and timeconsuming approval and reviewprocesses.¥varied and competing interests. three domains of simulation competing for funding (acr, rda, temo); uncertainty and competition between darpa, rdecs, stricom, and major commands like ssdc forprimacy in development and program management of new simulationactivities.¥funding uncertainty. annual budget processes, effects of changingmilitary and civilian leadership on priorities; for example, army modeling and simulation organizations (misma, amso, dusa/or, m&sgowg) and national rotorcraft technology center funding profile.¥need for coordination across commands and agencies to get approvaland requirements for periodic reviews at multiple levels; examples inactd processes, soldier system development. long duration ofprojectsñone year to get consensus, two years until funding; examples inlouisiana maneuvers, battlefield visualization.in comparison, the commercial entertainment/computer industry canbe characterized by short project horizons, more stable funding, relatively flat heirarchies for approval, and more informal and spontaneous review processes.¥product horizons are one to three years from concept to producton the shelf; an example is the nintendo 64.¥once a company approves a project for development and production, funding is programmed and maintained generally for the durationof the effort and is not subject to the whims of elected representatives.¥flatter hierarchies and more informal reviews, resulting from totalquality management or reengineering and closer scrutiny of valueaddedfunctions; less internal regulation.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix drecommendations for successful collaboration:1. create an advisory board with power to sponsor and recommendcollaborative and cooperative efforts. publish annual report with positive results and with opportunities that were neglected. include lessonslearned about positive and negative collaborative results.2. exchange liaisons. create positions that are geographically proximate for providing effective coordination and for seeking opportunitiesña few that work for advisory board, more that work for specific participants, both dod and nondod.3. allow decisions at the lowest levels. minimize hierarchical reviews. nonproductive time for most participants. use advisory boardliaisons.4. understand and use existing cooperative mechanismsñcooperative research and development agreements, cooperative agreements, andother transactions. involve a congressional staff in advisory panel tohelp shape future mechanisms.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d135martin gundersenadvanced modeling and simulations for games, entertainment, manufacturing, education, the u.s. department of defense, finance, and otherapplications will grow with the development of integrated media systemsincorporating software and hardware development at many levels. integrated media systems will powerfully impact all fields of inquiry and technology. integrated media systems of the future will seamlessly combinedigital video, digital audio, computer animation, text, and graphics intocommon displays in such a way as to allow for mixed media creation, dissemination, and interactive access in real time. prodigious national andinternational resources are currently being marshaled for integrated mediatechnologiesõ research, development, infrastructure installation, product creation and commercialization, public performance, and training. accordingto a recent projection, multimedia and creative technologies will represent anew total market of $40 billion by the year 2000 and $65 billion by the year2010.the beckoning opportunity is to accelerate progress in this new discipline by revolutionizing our access to information sources, easing theeffort required to author original works, and transforming our capacityto augment and enhance the productivity of human creative endeavors.the corresponding challenge is to first recognize the impact of these dramatic changes on the very nature of our teaching tools, manufacturingmethods, defense systems, health care systems, and entertainment/artforms and to then exert sufficient positive leadership to assure maximumbenefit. at the university of southern california we are pursuing a largescale program that is relevant to the goals of utilizing entertainmentoriented technology. we have established a center for integrated mediasystems, which is directed by max nikias, for research, development,and teaching in advanced systems for multimedia applications, including entertainment. this research has recently received one of four engineering research center awards this year from the national sciencefoundation, the proposal ranking first out of 117 proposals.there are three major areas of importance with opportunities for research and development: interfaces, communications, and databases.these are discussed below. the next generation of integrated media systems in the augmented reality, interactive multimedia, heterogeneouscomputing, distributed database, wireless communication, and highspeed network environments will impact every facet of our lives. accessto a wealth of diverse and distributed information resources will be possible from within an individualized òinformation framework.ó interactive media will enable new paradigms for education, training, manufacmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix dturing, and entertainment that provide worldsñreal, augmented, andfantasyñfor people to experience, learn through, and interact with. designbased industries will develop products through virtual design systems that integrate software applications and manage both the designprocess and the design data, as well as incorporate input from intendedconsumers, designers, production engineers, quality assurance and quality control specialists, cost analysts, and manufacturing engineers.creatorcomputerconsumer interfacescomputer interfaces are unidirectional and inefficient. a significantbottleneck has emerged at the creatorcomputer and computerconsumerinterfaces owing to an increasing mismatch between computational anddisplay power, on the one hand, and humancomputer input/output (i/o) on the other. simply put, highly visually and aurally oriented humanbeings are constrained to interact with an assistant that cannot see, hear,or speak. the humancomputer interface has evolved over four decadesfrom plug boards, lights, punch cards, and text printers to postscript laser printers, mousebased window systems, and primitive headmounted displays. the trend has clearly been toward interaction modes thatare more intuitive, enabling people to communicate more effectively toand through computer systems. today, enhanced video and audio capabilities fuel the explosive success of both multimediaequipped studiograde workstations (the creatorcomputer interface) and personal computers (the computerconsumer interface), as particularly evidenced bythe trend toward truly interactive media applications.technological advances in the area of humancomputer interfacesare necessary to achieve a new level of even richer and more perceptive interfaces that are characterized by the immersion of the user/participant in highly communicative multisensory interactions. theseadvances must span both visual and aural interface technologies. input to the computer can be enhanced by means of smart cameras forenvironmental awareness and expression recognition and with robustspeech recognition for extended natural language interactions. immersivision methods for panoramic scene reprojection and novel approaches to threedimensional (3d) displays enrich the presentation ofgraphic output. the computerõs sense of the environment is enhancedthrough smartcamerabased tracking technology, which in turn is pivotal for both augmented reality applications and the synthesis of an accurate 3d aural environment through immersive sound reproduction.furthermore, the coupling of these technologies with advances inwireless networks and distributed databases will allow the integration of mobile workstations (personal data assistants) with trackedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d137headup displays for application in augmented office, classroom, factory, and cockpit environments.media interconnection and delivery fabricsrealtime distribution and storage of multimedia information is expensive. even with compression, which can only be employed in certain applications, digital video and audio can consume large portions of databasestorage and network bandwidth. access to even currently available network bandwidth is limited by workstation i/o design bottlenecks. a needtherefore exists for both highbandwidth interconnections and interfacesand realtime artifactfree compression and decompression algorithms.over the past decade, user demands on networks and databases haveescalated from the bandwidth and storage requirements characteristic oftext to those characteristic of both images and realtime productionquality video and audio. as integrated media systems evolve to incorporatethe advanced interfaces described above, they will impose even greaterdemands on highspeed wired and wireless communications networks.these enhanced visual and aural interfaces, as well as realtime digitalvideo servers, integrated media databases, and distributed processingsystems will require the effective and efficient image and data compression methods, multigigabitpersecond (gbps) fiberoptic networks, andhighbandwidth wireless networks developed in this thrust. two casesillustrate how the need for such delivery fabrics arises depending on thenumber of connected users. in todayõs manufacturing environments withhundreds of untethered workers, or in videoondemand networks withthousands of consumers, each person requires on the order of 20 mbps ofbandwidth over wireless or wired networks to receive compressed videoand graphics. on the other hand, in todayõs video production environment with dozens of users, each requires about 270 mbps for d1 digitalvideo. a shared network is an efficient means for distributing data inboth of these cases. one challenge for such a system with multigbps (2to 50 gbps) aggregate throughput is to seamlessly support multiple datatypes such as d1, mpeg, text, and graphics. in addition, the interconnection and delivery fabric must be capable of satisfying future standards,such as video quality that is significantly superior to that of d1 or highdefinition television. the research challenge in this area is focused on thedevelopment of technologies for shared integrated media networks.distributed multimedia information managementan effective methodology for managing large integrated media databases does not exist. integrated media databases of the future will conmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendix dtain terabytes of information. information relevant to a given need willlikely reside in a collection of interconnected heterogeneous and distributed knowledge bases. techniques for locally organizing, browsing, discovering, and querying such integrated media repositories are needed.furthermore, many applications demand seamless synchronous access tomultiple audio and video threads from distributed digital databases, acapability that does not currently exist.advanced humancomputer interfaces and enhanced wired and wireless media interconnection and delivery networks cannot function effectively without access to dramatically scaledup databases that can seamlessly manage multiple media types. hence, the central integratedmediasystemsrelated issue that must be addressed during the next decade is the storage, indexing, structuring, manipulating, and òdiscoveryóof integrated multimedia information units (mius) that include structured data values (strings and numbers), text, images, audio, and video.the key research focus in this area centers on managing multimedia information units in the context of a highly distributed and interconnectednetwork of information collections and repositories. current data andknowledge management technology that addresses collections of formatted data and text is inadequate to meet the needs of video and audioinformation, as well as the mixture of modalities in mius. furthermore,the highly distributed and interconnected nature of the emerging information superhighway accentuates the need for techniques that enablemultimedia information sharing. the research challenge in this area involves the development of mechanisms that address four critical aspectsof distributed multimedia information management: (1) multimedia information content representation and extraction; (2) multimedia databasenetworking: discovery, filtering, query, sharing; (3) storage of and accessto continuous media data types; and (4) visual presentation of information across cultures.we are developing collaborations with other efforts, including related research activity at howard university and the university of southcarolina. the south carolina program has initiated development of aòvirtual testbed,ó which is a topdown, missionoriented approach emphasizing simulation of complete electrical systems on u.s. navy shipsusing advanced visualization techniques. this program is under the direction of professor roger dougal.at the university of southern california we have developed anindustrial partnership with over 50 companies that are literally acrosssection of industry working to develop and apply the new technology. in entertainment we have formed a panel of entertainmentprofessionals who will foster collaboration with the hollywood industry that will be strongly impacted by multimedia simulations andmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d139modeling. the professionals are a crosssection of the industry, including actors, directors, film editors, audio engineers, computer network experts, writers, and others, including investors. over the nextfew years we will be working to provide an academic venue for thistechnology to be researched, viewed, and understood, with emphasison entertainment applications. the panel on entertainment applications will be meeting with industrial partners of the center at usc ina review that will occur in november of 1996.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix dwill harveythe future of internet gameslatency is a major barrier to fastaction internet games. game developers can either hope the problem goes away or adopt new game architectures that work around it. there is compelling evidence that the problem will never go away and that the hardware will never improve to thepoint that developers can afford to treat the internet like a local areanetwork (lan). sandcastle offers an alternative, a software solution thatenables fastaction internet games.high latency is incompatible with the client/server and lockstep designs that current lan games use. a response time of 33 milliseconds(ms) has been the industry standard for over 20 years, and even withpremium online services, internet performance is nowhere near that level. in fact, it cannot reach that level. in fiber, light takes 54 ms to travelroundtrip between new york and san francisco. networking expertsagree that the internetõs latency will plateau between 100 and 130 mscross country (figure d.1).fastaction client/server and lockstep games are no fun at this speed.a player trying to dodge a bullet will feel either frustrated, because theresponse time is too slow for him to dodge, or cheated, because the program displays his character such that it appears he has dodged when hehas not. punches a player could land will miss; opponents a player couldtackle will evade. without responsiveness, fastaction games are not fun.the shift to distributed processingthe solution is to move to a distributed architecture. in a distributedgame, each player controls a character on his local machine, so it responds to his actions instantly, with no latency. the new challenge isthen to synchronize the game state on all the machines and to coordinateinteractions among objects that different players control.in figure d.2 the big circle is a server or multicast router in a building. the small circles are machines in peopleõs homes. x, y, and zrepresent objects controlled by users from their own homes. proxies notshown in these figures display the objects on every machine. the x, y,and z letters represent the point of control of each object.in the lockstep architecture, each machine broadcasts its user inputto the other machines and advances one simulation cycle when it hasreceived a complete set of user input from all participating machines.since advancing a cycle requires complete exchange of user input, theresponsiveness is limited by the speed of the worst communications lamodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d141tency of any machine. in the client/server architecture, each machineindependently sends its user input or action request to the server in orderto perform an action in the simulation. controlling an object from aclient machine still entails a roundtrip delay, but the responsiveness ofany individual client machine is not affected by the communicationsspeed of the other machines. in a distributed architecture, machines control objects locally and broadcast the results of actions to other machines,which receive the information with some time delay. each machine hasimmediate responsiveness controlling its own objects but must synchronize interactions between its own objects and objects controlled by remote machines.in both the lockstep and client/server architectures, responsivenessis limited by the roundtrip communication latency to the server, whichwill always be too long for fastaction games. controlling objects locallyand synchronizing interactions between them is the only solution. theshift from a central architecture to a distributed architecture transformsthe latency problem into a synchronization problem.figure d.2figure d.1modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix dsolving the synchronization problemmethods of solving the latency and synchronization problems fallinto three categories, represented in table d.1.at the lowest level, the first approach attempts to improve the speedof the network to reduce the latency problem by brute force, instead ofadopting a distributed architecture. this approach will always have slowreactions because of the speed of light and network overhead, so it willbe limited to domains like quake, where players donõt have a true opportunity to dodge bullets.the second approach follows a software technology called distributed interactive simulation developed for military simulations. this approach accommodates the delay in which information is received fromother participants by òdeadreckoningó or predicting the actions of theother participants to bring all objects displayed on a machine into thesame time frame. because predicting only works for predictable andcontinuously moving objects, such as planes and tanks, it does not applyto domains of rich human interaction like playing nintendoõs mario 64or playing catch with a ball over the internet.the third approach, synchronization, leverages off of the other twotechnologies, but more importantly it picks up where the other technologies reach their fundamental limitations. information from remote machines will always be received with a time delay, and many actions cannotbe predicted. thus, remote objects must be shown in time delay. if a userhas no interactions with remote objects, he cannot tell that he is seeingthose objects òin the pastó; but if he does interact with them, those intertable d.1enablesgunsplanes, tankspicking upan object,catching aballlimitationsslowreactionslimited topredictabledomainslatency150 ms0 msperceived0 msperceivedtechnologypremiumservicedis andderivativessandcastledescriptionimprove networkñtoreduce discrepancybetween time framesdeadreckonñtopretend objects are inthe same time frame bypredicting theirpositionssynchronizeñinteractions betweenobjects in different timeframesmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d143actions must accommodate the time difference. synchronization technologies are a set of software networking components that enable interactions between objects in different time frames.sandcastleõs directionsandcastle is developing synchronization technologies that give users the impression that the network has zero latency, or immediate responsiveness. specifically, the technologies address the problems of interacting with shared objects, like throwing a football between users, andinteracting directly with objects controlled by remote machines, as in afighting game or a race.our view is that the latency problems of central processing are fundamental. over time, the demands for high responsiveness will drive aninevitable shift in programming paradigms from central processing todistributed processing. as this shift occurs, the technologies and toolsthat address the critical problems of realtime distributed applicationswill become increasingly important. we believe that these contributionsare the beginnings of a foundation not just for games and chat environments but for all of twentyfirst century interactive entertainment.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144appendix drobert jacobsas the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) ofthe national research council assesses research priorities for defenseand entertainment simulation, it must be mindful of the significant differences in objectives, risk and reward environment, and business traditions and customs, especially with respect to proprietary intellectualproperty, that characterize these two simulation industries.defense simulation programs focus on the solution of problems, theproduction of operational skills through training, the support of combatdevelopment test and evaluation, or the resolution of complex engineeringoptimization questions as a part of design and development. how well adefense simulation achieves its mission is usually determined by how itsdesigners tailor the technology to address the problem of interest. entertainment simulations, on the other hand, are a medium for the delivery ofrecreational experiences; the measure of success is not a matter of problemsolution or production of information or skill but rather is determined largely by how exciting and enjoyable the experience is for the paying customer.the òfun quotientó of an entertainment simulation is predominantly a matter of art rather than technology; the technical side of the system must becapable of presenting the òstory,ó but the perceived value of the experiencehinges largely on the quality of the creative element.defense simulations are developed to a specification that defines thenature of the virtual world and the expectations of the customer for behaviors to be executed within it. as long as the product meets the specification, the development is deemed a success. developers are compensated on the basis of their development cost plus a modest margin whosemagnitude is negotiated in accordance with guidelines reflecting whether the customer or the developer takes on the development risk. there isno enduser specification to be met for an entertainment simulation. thedeveloper must identify a market need, formulate a creative concept thataddresses that need, and then back his intuition by investing his ownmoney to field the concept. maybe the marketplace will accept the concept; maybe it will reject it. for the most part, the market has been disappointed to date. if the simulation sells, it is priced in accordance withwhat the market will bear in view of competition, useful economic life,perceived value, return on investment, and so forth. what the marketwill bear may or may not be enough to recover development costs and torealize an attractive margin.when the government contracts for research and development, boththe client and the contractor generally acknowledge that the product ofthe effort belongs at least in part to the client. in the best case (from themodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d145contractorõs point of view), the developer may share in the right to futureexploitation of what is produced; however, the government belongs to allof us, and the governmentõs equity in the ideas and technology is part ofthe public domain. in the entertainment world, proprietary intellectualproperty is the principal stock in trade, and ownership of the right tofuture exploitation is the primary asset resulting from the investment in aproject. the customer buys the right to exhibit the product but never theright to the underlying proprietary intellectual property. technologicaland creative innovations are important contributors to the asset value ofthe enterprise. to the extent that they can be protected, they will not bewillingly given away.where is it all going?these contrasts, particularly the last point, create an interestingchallenge for the cstb in its quest to encourage open collaborationbetween defense and entertainment simulation developers. there issuch a difference in the operational norms between these two industry segments that the resulting cultural barrier has been successfullybreeched in only very few instances. one might expect that therealso is a divergence of views as to how the industry and its technology will evolve in the coming decade.on the defense side, the next few years will see continuing efforts todevelop and disseminate technologies for more effective application ofsimulations to military and civil problems. these will include:¥increased emphasis on largescale simulations of military activityat the joint and coalition levels.¥increased dependence on simulation technology to offset cuts inoptempo, to conduct distributed planning and rehearsal, and to providevisualization for distributed command and control.¥increased ubiquity of simulation, so that players will be able tojoin distributed virtual activities from any place and at any time.¥increased capability for scalabilityñfrom combat theater to foxholeñwith appropriate level of detail to support activity at either extreme.¥improved ability to represent the behaviors of forces by computerdriven virtual entities to include complex concept formulation, planning,and reasoning activities in addition to simple drills.¥increased availability of communication bandwidth to accommodate more simultaneous players, accommodate demand for more tightlycoupled and reactive simulation processes, to realistically stress players,and to realistically simulate òfastó processes.¥increased availability of tools for economical òrapid prototyping.ómodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146appendix din the entertainment simulation world, return on investment is a keyconsideration. research and development will focus on achieving valuein the perception of the end customer. the need to impress end customers whose experience base is grounded in television and the real worldwill focus the competition at the highest levels of fidelity consistent witheconomic pricing. pressure will continue to increase the performanceand reduce the cost of leadingedge technologies so that each new generation of a product stimulates new demand and creates a competitive edgeover its predecessor.a conflict can be expected to develop between advocates of open standards and guardians of proprietary intellectual property. the substantialbarrier to entry represented by development investment and the reductionof same that common standards promote will be cited by both groups asjustification for promoting or avoiding the adoption of technologies common to competitive development teams. ultimately, competition will refocus on the creative aspects of entertainment simulations, as developers realize that economy and speed in bringing an idea to market are greater factorsin economic success than proprietary technology.entertainment developers suffer an approachavoidance conflict overthe accelerating pace of technological innovations, both because of thediminishing economic halflife of a development investment and the chaos in the competitive environment that the continuing avalanche of newcapabilities will create. even savvy buyers will become dizzy and indecisive as great products are eclipsed by pending spectacular ones.enabling technologieswhat are some of the research priorities that will fuel the evolutionsuggested here? (1) continuing geometric advancement in computingpower, especially in the specialpurpose hardware that creates imagery,with an accompanying dramatic reduction in price per performance. wecan look ahead to the availability of photorealistic interactive systems ata price affordable by every householdñe.g., the cost of a television set.(2) dramatic improvements in the capability to display virtual environments to human senses: veryhighresolution visual displays; true spatial sound; and tactile displays that communicate surface qualities (friction), resilience, and thermal characteristics (heat capacity).modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d147traci a. jonesthere has recently been an increased focus on simulating and modeling the individual soldier within the synthetic, or virtual, battlefield. theu.s. department of defense (dod) has approved a defense technologyobjective (dto) for individual combatant simulation (ics). the icsdto is currently supported by an army science and technology objective (sto) for ics. this is a joint sto between the simulation, trainingand instrumentation command (stricom) and the army research laboratory, coordinated with the natick research and engineering directorate. the program intends to procure and demonstrate technologies forcreating realtime simulations to immerse the individual soldier and allow for interaction in a synthetic environment. the costeffectiveness ofnetworked virtual reality devices will be determined using a multisitedistributed laboratory consistent with dodõs highlevel architecture.the stricom engineering directorate is working closely with theproject manager for distributed interactive simulation (dis) on the dismounted warrior network project, which will take advantage of severaltechnologybased efforts to provide an engineering proof of principle forimmersing an individual into a synthetic environment.the products that will evolve within dod include the definition of asystems architecture to support the requirements for ics as well as platforms and simulations that will support lowcost capabilities for missionrehearsal, materiel development, and training of individual soldiers andmarines. there also is potential application of these technologies to training and rehearsal for the federal bureau of investigation and the lawenforcement industry.the technological advances required and the technological challenges include lowcost solutions for:¥visualization of human articulation in realtime networked environments,¥highfidelity fully immersive systems,¥interoperability between different fidelity simulators,¥expansion of computergenerated forces for intelligent individualsoldier interaction and decision making,¥integration of highresolution terrain databases with immersivesimulations instrumentation of the individual for highprecision engagement data collection capability within buildings,¥rapidly generated terrain databases to support mission planningand rehearsal while en route to a conflict, and¥accurate simulation of weapons systems in realtime computergenerated environments.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148appendix dregarding complementary efforts in the entertainment or defense sectors that might be applicable to my own interests, i am aware of the motioncapture techniques used by the entertainment industry, primarily for gamedevelopment and motion picture special effects. one such product is beingused for the stricom dismounted soldier simulation (dss) system, under contract to veda inc. dss uses a wireless optical tracking system developed by the biomechanics corporation for acclaim entertainment. thetechnology has been integrated into a realtime dis environment. the untethered soldier, outfitted with a set of optical markers and wireless helmetmounted display, moves about freely in a realworld motioncapture area,while position and orientation data are gathered and sent to a dis networkvia tracking cameras and imageprocessing computers. fully articulatedhuman motion rotations and translations are sent out to the dis networkusing entity state and data protocol data units. issues such as networkbandwidth limitation and system latency have been analyzed.other potential products being developed by stricom have application to the entertainment industry. the omnidirectional treadmill isan example of a locomotion simulator that allows an individual to walkand run in a virtual world. as the user moves on the treadmill, his viewof the computergenerated world changes, immersing him into the virtual environment. the army may use this technology, for example, torehearse for a mission by walking through a hostile environment beforehand. it is anticipated that additional technologies developed by theentertainment industry can be leveraged to support dod requirementsfor individual combatant simulation.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d149eugenia m. kolasinskipredicted evolution of virtual realityas this report indicates, virtual reality (vr) technology has manypromising applications in both the simulation and entertainment arenas.vr technology is already being used for simulation, and, as the cost decreases, its many potential applications will likely lead to widespread useof vr, especially in the home for entertainment.necessary technological advances andprimary research challengesunfortunately, a phenomenon exists that may pose a threat to theultimate usability of this new technology. that phenomenon is referredto as òsimulator sicknessó and it is a welldocumented effect of simulatorexposure (reason and brand, 1975; kennedy and frank, 1983; kennedyet al., 1989; casali, 1986). simulator sickness is similar to motion sicknessbut can occur without actual physical motion. the cardinal signs resemble those of motion sickness: vomiting, nausea, pallor, and cold sweating.other symptoms include drowsiness, confusion, difficulty concentrating,fullness of head, blurred vision, and eye strain. along with the potentialdiscomfort to the individual, there are several operational consequencesof simulator sickness: decreased simulator use, compromised training,and ground and flight safety (crowley, 1987). there are additional effects of simulator exposure: delayed flashbacks and aftereffects (a sudden onset of symptoms) (baltzley et al., 1989); shifts in dark focus (thephysiological resting position of accommodation) (fowlkes et al., 1993);eye strain (monwilliams et al., 1993); and performance changes(kennedy et al., 1993).one potentially critical effect of simulator exposure is postural disequilibrium, referred to as ataxia. baltzley et al. (1989) suggested thatunsteadiness and ataxia are the greatest threats to safety because therehave been reports of such posteffects lasting longer than 6 hours and, insome cases, longer than 12 hours. clearly, occurrence of ataxia has thepotential for disastrous consequences.recent research (kolasinski, 1996; knerr et al., 1993; regan, 1993) hasdocumented that simulator sickness can also occur in conjunction withvr exposure. the potential consequences of such sicknessñparticularlywith widespread use of vr technologyñraise important safety and legalissues for both manufacturers and users alike. thus, simulator sickness(including effects such as ataxia) as it occurs with vr exposure must beunderstood if the technology is to make its predicted progress over themodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150appendix dnext decade. to meet this goal, the primary research challenges will beto thoroughly investigate the phenomenon.fortunately, simulator sickness in a virtual environment (ve)ñoròcybersickness,ó as it is calledñneed not be regarded as an entirely newphenomenon. as already noted, simulator sickness is related to motionsickness, a phenomenon for which a body of literature exists (reason andbrand, 1975). in addition, a body of literature exists for simulator sickness occurring in military flight simulators and, to a lesser degree, othersimulators such as driving simulators (crampton, 1990). thus, vr researchers need not entirely reinvent the wheel but can and should drawon the existing literature, at least in the initial stages of investigation.much of the sickness literature that may be applicable to ves is reviewed by kolasinski (1995). in this report, three major categories offactors that may be related to simulator sickness as it occurs in a ve wereidentified: factors related to the individual using the system, factors related to the task performed in the ve, and factors related to the vr system itself. although simulator sickness is not a new phenomenon, a vemay differ in several important respects from the typical simulator. forexample, depending on how a ve is defined, such a system is likely toinvolve some form of direct sensory input, probably through a headmounted display (hmd), at least. such devices may pose unique concerns, and current research efforts (monwilliams et al., 1993) are examining the effects of hmd use on the visual system. thus, althoughresearch into sickness occurring in ves can draw on previous simulatorsickness research, new research must be conducted specifically in ves inorder to address sickness issues unique to the vr setting. very littleresearch exists on sickness as it occurs in conjunction with vr exposure.furthermore, with few exceptions (regan and price, 1994), the majorityof vr studies currently reported in the literature were not designed tospecifically investigate sickness. instead, most studies investigated theuse of vr systems, with sickness examined only as an aside.kolasinski (1996) represents one of the first experimental investigations of simulator sickness as it occurs in ves. the primary focus was toinvestigate the prediction of sickness based on characteristics associatedwith an individual using a vr system, but the occurrence of ataxia following exposure also was investigated. this research established thatsickness did, in fact, occur. in some cases it was severeñone participantvomitedñand/or involved lingering or delayed effects. ataxia, however, was not found.this latter findingñthat ataxia did not occur even though sicknessdidñsupports findings presented by kennedy et al. (1995), who foundthat, with repeated exposure to a simulator, sickness decreases over timebut ataxia increases. although their finding has implications for repeatmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d151ed use of vr technology, the finding of kolasinski (1996) raises somespecific issues of importance to the future application of vr technology.ataxia is a welldocumented effect of simulator exposure (kellogg andgillingham, 1986; kennedy et al., 1993), and previous research has suggested that ataxia may also occur in conjunction with vr exposure.rolland et al. (1995) found degradation in handeye coordination anderrors in pointing accuracy following the wearing of a seethroughhmdñresults that demonstrate that negative aftereffects are indeed possible. there have also been anecdotal observations of individuals demonstrating significant ataxia following a 30minute vr exposure (k.m.stanney, personal communication, april 9, 1996). finally, recent research(kennedy et al., 1996) has concretely established the occurrence of ataxiafollowing vr exposure.the ve used in conjunction with the anecdotal observations referredto above was a maze, the traversal of which involved both forward andleft/rightrepresented movements. on the other hand, the task employedin kolasinski (1996)ñthe computer game ascentñinvolved representedmovements primarily in the forward direction only. this suggests thatthe kinematics of the task performed in the ve may have an importanteffect on the occurrence of ataxia. for example, vr applications involving limited represented movementñsuch as teleoperation or simplegamesñmay pose limited risks of ataxia, whereas applications involvinga high degree of represented movementñsuch as highly dynamicgamesñmay pose greater risks of ataxia. clearly, this unresolved issueis a critical one that must be investigated further.research on simulator sickness in ves should also look at one areathat has been neglected in the military simulator environment. althoughstudies indicate that sickness can occur, littleñif anyñresearch has investigated whether such sickness has an impact on training effectiveness.given the great emphasis often afforded to the use of vr technology fortraining and education, investigation of the effects of sickness on trainingeffectiveness is an important research issue whose time has come.applicable complementary effortsas is clear from the above discussion and the references therein, aplethora of complementary effortsñboth past and present researchñexist in the area of simulator sickness. most of these efforts are directedtoward military simulators. leaders in such research include the systems effectiveness division of essex corporation and the spatial orientation systems department at the naval aeromedical research laboratory(http://www.accel.namrl.navy.mil).however, as noted, research specific to ves also must be conductedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152appendix dto address the phenomenon specifically as it occurs in vr systems. vrresearch is being conducted in many laboratories around the globe, several of which are also interested in the investigation of simulator sickness. such laboratories include the human interface technology laboratory at the university of washington (http://www.hitl.washington.edu)and the ashton graybiel spatial orientation laboratory at brandeis university (http://www.bio.brandeis.edu/pages/faculty/dizio.html). thereare also many laboratories in the united kingdom conducting vr research. the major vr researchers there have established a group knownas the uk virtual reality special interest group (http://www.crg.cs.nott.ac.uk/ukvrsig/), made up of representatives from both industry andacademia, which aims to provide a communications network for all vrresearchers and users in the united kingdom. some of the member laboratories, such as the virtual environment laboratory at the university ofedinburgh (http://hagg.psy.ed.ac.uk/), also are interested in investigation of the effects of vr exposure.a final major contributor to the investigation of simulator sickness inves is the simulator systems research unit (ssru) of the u.s. armyresearch institute (http://www.ari.fed.us/ssru.htm). ssru is investigating the use of ves for the training of dismounted infantry (lampton etal., 1994a) for the ultimate goal of integrating the dismounted soldier intolargescale networked simulations. as part of its research effort, ssrualso is dedicated to investigation of the occurrence of sickness in ves(lampton et al., 1994b).referencesbaltzley, d.r., r.s. kennedy, k.s. berbaum, m.g. lilienthal, and d.w. gower. 1989. òthetime course of postflight simulator sickness symptoms,ó aviation, space, and environmental medicine 60(11):10431048.casali, j.g. 1986. vehicular simulationinduced sickness, volume 1: an overview. ieortechnical report no. 8501, ntsc tr 86010. naval training systems center, orlando, fla.crampton, g. (ed.). 1990. motion and space sickness. crc press, boca raton, fla.crowley, j.s. 1987. òsimulator sickness: a problem for army aviation,ó aviation, space,and environmental medicine 58(4):355357.fowlkes, j.e., r.s. kennedy, l.j. hettinger, and d.l. harm. 1993. òchanges in the darkfocus of accommodation associated with simulator sickness,ó aviation, space, andenvironmental medicine 64(7):612618.kellogg, r.s., and k.k. gillingham. 1986. òunited states air force experience with simulator sickness, research and training,ó in proceedings of the 30th annual meeting of thehuman factors society 1:427429.kennedy, r.s., and l.h. frank. 1983. òa review of motion sickness with special referenceto simulator sickness,ó paper presented at the national research council committeeon human factors workshop on simulator sickness, september 2628, naval postgraduate school, monterey, calif.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d153kennedy, r.s., j.e. fowlkes, and m.g. lilienthal. 1993. òpostural and performance changes following exposures to flight simulators,ó aviation, space, and environmental medicine 64(10):912920.kennedy, r.s., m.b. jones, k.m. stanney, a.d. ritter, and j.m. drexler. 1996. òhumanfactors safety testing for virtual environment missionoperation training,ó contractno. nas919482.kennedy, r.s., d.s. lanham, j.m. drexler, and m.g. lilienthal. 1995. òa method for certification that aftereffects of virtual reality exposures have dissipated: preliminaryfindings,ó pp. 263270 in a.c. bittner and p.c. champney (eds.), advances in industrialergonomics safety vii. taylor and francis, london.kennedy, r.s., m.g. lilienthal, k.s. berbaum, d.r. baltzley, and m.e. mccauley. 1989.òsimulator sickness in u.s. navy flight simulators,ó aviation, space, and environmental medicine 60(1):1016.knerr, b.w., d.r. lampton, j.p. bliss, j.m. moshell, and b.s. blau. 1993. òhuman performance in virtual environments: initial experiments,ó proceedings of the 29th international applied military psychology symposium. wolfson college, cambridge, u.k.kolasinski, e.m. 1995. òsimulator sickness in virtual environments,ó ari technical report 1027. u.s. army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences, alexandria, va.; available online at www.ari.fed.us/ssru.htm. also available by anonymous ftp at ftp.hitl.washington.edu/pub/scivw/publications/simsick.rtf.kolasinski, e.m. 1996. òprediction of simulator sickness in a virtual environment,ó dissertation abstracts international, 5703. university microfilms no. 9621485. available online at http://www.hitl.washington.edu/projects/vestibular/kolasinski/.lampton, d.r., b.w. knerr, s.l. goldberg, j.p. bliss, j.m. moshell, and b.s. blau. 1994a.òthe virtual environment performance assessment battery (vepab): developmentand evaluation,ó presence 3(2):145157.lampton, d.r., e.m. kolasinski, b.w. knerr, j.p. bliss, j.h. bailey, and b.g. witmer. 1994b.òside effects and aftereffects of immersion in virtual environments,ó proceedings ofthe 38st annual meeting of the human factors and ergonomics society, vol. 2, pp. 11541157.monwilliams, m.a., j.p. wann, s.k. rushton, and r. ackerley. 1993. òreal problems withvirtual worlds,ó ophthalmic and physiological optics 13:435436.reason, j.t., and j.j. brand. 1975. motion sickness. academic press, london.regan, e.c. 1993. òsideeffects of immersion virtual reality,ó paper presented at theinternational applied military psychology symposium, july 2629.regan, e.c., and k.r. price. 1994. òthe frequency of occurrence and severity of sideeffects of immersion virtual reality,ó aviation, space, and environmental medicine65(6):527530.rolland, j.p., f.a. biocca, t. barlow, and a. kancherla. 1995. òquantification of adaptation to virtualeye location in seethru headmounted displays,ó proceedings of thevirtual reality annual international symposium 1995. ieee computer society press, losalamitos, calif., pp. 5666.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154appendix djohn n. lattaflights of fantasy: an oxymoronñdefense and entertainmentthe lure is engrossingñincredible defense technology being converted to the best entertainment this side of watching war on cnn. visionsof long lines of wanttobe war fighters can be seen making entertainment operators salivate at the thought of bulging bank accounts based onskyrocketing cash flow per square foot. fantasy or a potential winner?just a dream. entertainment is a business, and war fighting is aboutexecution in combat. there is no congruence in commercial businessmodels and military mission statements. outofhome entertainment is asocial experience, while winning on the battlefield is about doctrine, planning, leadership, and team effectiveness. defense is also about leveraging technology to superior advantage in war. yet in entertainment, technology is a lever to increase play rates and draw in the context of socialenvironment. the oftenheard chorus is that defense technology has applications in many sectors and the entertainment industry may be one.yet, for example, in threedimensional technology the conversion haslargely taken place and the fuel of innovation is not department of defense (dod) reuse but entrepreneurs seeking to get rich as they spendventure capitalistsõ money in new startups. dod can help the entertainment industry by having more movie theaters on military bases.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d155william k. mcquayadvances in software and computer technology are making possiblecomplex simulations based on affordable and reusable modeling components. businesses will soon be able to realize increases in productivitythrough the widespread employment of simulations as aids for decisionmaking and training. as a result, the commercial marketplace will increase for generic simulation techniques, simulation infrastructure, andofftheshelf components for applications in financial industries, manufacturing, industrial process control, biotechnology, health care, communication and information systems, and entertainment.dod technology for industrythe entertainment industry has brought simulation technology andsynthetic environments into the media mainstream. however, development of the software to enable such simulations is a manpowerintensiveendeavor and thus is costly. industry has the opportunity to exploit current u.s. department of defense (dod) research and simulation technologies to bring products to market faster and at lower cost. industry canleverage dod joint standards and modeling and simulation (m&s) initiatives such as the dod highlevel architecture, distributed interactivesimulation (dis), joint simulation system (jsims), the joint warfare simulation (jwars), and the joint modeling and simulation system (jmass).the joint m&s standards provide execution frameworks and emphasizemodels based on interoperability, reuse, portability, distributed operation, scalability, broad applicability, technological evolvability, and maximum feasible use of commercial offtheshelf software. a potential highpayoff defense simulation technology is desktop m&sñsimulationbrought to the personal computer on the desktop of the engineer, analyst, and decision maker. desktop m&s technology could be the basis forfuture video games, internet games, or locationbased attractions.as entertainment simulations become increasing complex, the industry will face some of the same challenges faced by dod in military simulations. as a result, dod and industry could benefit from technologysharing in such areas as:¥extensible architectural frameworks for tools and models that support a òplugandplayó concept;¥the ability to geographically distribute simulations across a heterogeneous computer network;modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156appendix d¥simulation development tools to support creation of model components that comply with architectural standards;¥multiple language support: a user can specify the target sourcelanguage (c, c++, objective c, ada, java, etc.) to ease the transition tointernetbased entertainment; and¥objectbased technologies to allow component reuse in differentproducts and on different platforms.commercial technology for dodit is current dod policy to use commercial offtheshelf softwarewhenever it meets dod requirements. the dod joint standards aredesigned as open systems architectures that support commercial offtheshelf software and tools. the commercial sector has been very successfulin developing two and threedimensional visualization software and increating virtual reality applications. such tools are more affordably andefficiently created by industry and can be maintained at low cost by abroad customer base.under a collaborative m&s marketplace concept, industry couldbuild commercial and entertainment simulations based on dod frameworks and reusable components and supplement them with advancedvisualization technology and animation. dod could employ these commercial products as needed to meet individual organizational requirements. broad dod and military service requirements could be satisfiedby core joint m&s and supplemented by multiple commercial tools andcapabilities from the collaborative m&s marketplace. dod has insufficient resources to purchase dodwide licenses for the multiplicity ofunique and individual products required for all dod and service organizations. instead, the collaborative m&s marketplace becomes a new outlet for commercial application developers where the dod field organizations buy the exact product they need. companies will have a new arenafor sales of commercial products (tools and eventually even model parts)compatible with dod joint standards. the best of dod and commercialtechnology would be available to both sectors.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d157jacquelyn ford moriethe military and entertainment:historical approaches and common groundthe military and the entertainment industries have come to their respective uses of technology from very different directions and motivations. the military has typically started with an existing need: for training people how to fly an airplane, for example, or for bettercommunications. the military has then been extremely successful in creating the technology that will meet those needsñthus producing the bettertrained, or betterinformed, individual. the creation of a technologyis driven by need. the entertainment industry, on the other hand, hastypically started with existing technology but has been very good at creating a need within the audience that will bring the people inñto thearcade, the theme park, or other venue. the need, be it for an experiencethat continues the story of a popular film or a way to move people arounda park, comes after the technology that supports it.it is immediately apparent that there is a great deal of commonground in these two approaches. the military and entertainment industries have been complementary for longer than one might realize. thereis a sign on an airplane simulator invented by edwin link in 1930 at theu.s. air force armament museum in pensacola, florida, that states thatit was originally designed as an entertainment device. this òblue boxówas sold to amusement parks until 1934, when link, a pilot himself, metwith the army air corp to sell the corp on the concept of pilot trainingwith his device. the rest is history. the key here is that people enjoyinteresting and satisfying experiences, whether for job enhancement orpersonal enrichment. for the military, the experiences provided by thetechnology were directly applicable to better performance in the missionof the job. they worked because they were interesting and pleasurable,as well as realistic, ways of learning the task at hand. for entertainmentaudiences, the motivation is more selfcentered and aimed at enhancingoneõs personal time. these òcivilianó experiences are motivated by several desires: thrill seeking, escape from oneõs everyday world, socialinteraction, or selfbetterment (physical or mental).what the military did in accepting edwin linkõs idea to use his entertainment device as a trainer has been echoed in more recent times bythe appropriation of military technology by the entertainment industry.the common ground is an invention or an idea that lends itself to multiple uses. where do these ideas comes from? many of them come from afertile environment for thinking and creating. for years the military hasmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158appendix dutilized just this kind of environment within the academic walls of university research labs to help develop some of its more cuttingedge ideas.by investing in these groups, the military has allowed ideas to ferment indiverse locations with heterogeneous teams of people. over the decades,it has received a very nice return on its investments. until recently, however, very few entertainment companies had taken advantage of the potential of these same research settings.in 1991 i proposed to my research laboratory, the institute for simulation and training (ist) at the university of central florida, a new initiative designed to bring together entertainment companies with what isaw as the related research we were doing for the government in virtualreality technology. working with a theme park design professional, chrisstapleton, as my partner to determine areas of common interest, we setabout to bring the entertainment industry to a working familiarity withthe latest in digital research, in a project we dubbed òoperation entertainment.ó dozens of entertainment professionals came to ist over thenext three years; we brought them in for endless demonstrations of whatwe were doing and intense discussions of how the work could apply totheir profession. while we were never able to convince them to investmoney in our laboratory, there were many seeds planted and severalsuccesses. one was when we advised doug trumbull on computer technology and connected him with an orlando business from which he purchased the equipment to start up his company to produce the luxorproject. the second was in the creation of òtoy scouts,ó which are discussed in the following paragraph. many of the ideas developed throughthe history of operation entertainment have pointed the way to wherethe entertainment industry might go if it were to invest in the researchlabs that are already out there. japanese companies have been doing sowith the largest labs and the entertainment giants are starting to followsuit. there are many more labs out there as well that could prove extremely useful as the technology develops, and since many of them arealready involved in military research as well, there is a great potential tomaximize this research so that it benefits both groups. this is truly thebest and most promising common ground. but exactly how can this typeof collaboration be accomplished? entertainment companies certainlydonõt have the dollars to invest in research the way the government does.this is, for the most part, true, but there are new ways we can thinkabout collaboration and mutual discoveries.one example is embodied in my work with a group at the institutefor simulation and trainingõs visual research laboratory that we calledthe òtoy scouts.ó this was a group of undergraduate computer scienceand art students who met on friday nights to see what they could dowith the treasure chest of military òtoysó that existed in our researchmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d159laboratory. guided by volunteer researchers in the lab, and with theoutside advice of some local entertainment experts who would periodically visit, the students developed truly innovative fullbody immersivegames using virtual reality technology. one of the games was calledònose ball.ó in nose ball you used your nose as the paddle that controlled the ball in a threedimensional breakout game. because it was inthe center of your stereoscopic vision, it was a perfect aiming device.nose ball was also a fullbody physical workout. in the four years of thescout activity, approximately a dozen new fullbody immersive gameswere developed, with many clever and innovative ways to interface withthe technology. these students, with their raw energy and fresh approaches, came up with ideas that might not have occurred to the moreseasoned professional. the students benefited educationally from theexpertise of the researchers they worked next to, and the researchers wereoften able to look at things with fresh eyes because of their close proximity to the scouts. the entertainment industry was able to get new ideasfrom this work, and it became a wonderfully synergistic approach andexperience to all involved.the military has long partnered with the academic research community as an integral part of the discovery and implementation process forbringing new technology and techniques to a state of usefulness. theabove example of the toy scouts is only one suggestion of how the military and entertainment industries can find common ground in academicresearch laboratories. the entertainment industry could sponsor suchgroups around the country at military research laboratories, and bothgroups could reap the rewards. no doubt there are many more ways thatcan be imagined; if only a fraction of them are implemented, the benefitsmight amaze us all.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160appendix djacquelyn ford moriethe evolution of entertainment: whoõs in charge?in the entertainment realm the audience is starting to become moreand more sophisticated. reversing a decadesold decline that has continually devolved an audience into evermorepassive beings, todayõs audiences are eager and hungry for more direct participation. fueled partlyby home video games, and partly by the internet, participants want moreand more control over the experiences they are being offered. videogames appeal because the player is in control; one achieves a sense ofsatisfaction by reaching ever higher levels at oneõs own pace. the internet is engaging in large part because it empowers the user to be a producer as well as a consumer. the entertainment industry, by contrast,driven as it is by economics of throughput and ticket prices, wants neither producers or controllers as its perfect audience. a passive audienceallows for the most control over the numbers and timing of the attractions. however, the result of this is boredom: while the attractions growevermore grandiose and able to accommodate everlarger crowds, theaudience tires quickly and does not come back for repeated plays. thepeople do not feel themselves an active part of the experience. the audience has the ultimate controlñit speaks with its time and its wallet. theentertainment industry will find it more difficult to continue in the oldproven formulas of canned events that an audience is driven, flown,walked, or bumped through.the next decade will see a trend toward what audiences demandñmore control and empowerment. this will happen in several ways. thefirst is through more individual and unique play experiences, the secondthrough more team play experiences, and the third through more spectator experiences. a few words on each are in order.individual play experiencesindividual play experiences appeal to our need for a selfdirectedexperience, even if done in a social setting. they need to progress beyond individual home or arcade video games and extend the level ofinteractivity far beyond simple repetitious button punching.this area was one i worked in for several years at the institute forsimulation and trainingõs visual research laboratory with a group wecalled the òtoy scouts.ó this was a group of undergraduate computerscience and art students who met on friday nights to see what they coulddo with the treasure chest of military òtoysó that existed in our researchlaboratory. guided by volunteer researchers at the lab and with the outsidemodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d161advice of some local entertainment experts, these students developed trulyinnovative fullbody immersive games using virtual reality technology. oneexample was a game called ònose ball.ó in nose ball you used your noseas the paddle that controlled the ball in a threedimensional breakout game.because it was in the center of your stereoscopic vision, it was a perfectaiming device. nose ball was also a fullbody physical workout. in thefour years of the scout activity, approximately a dozen new fullbody immersive games were developed. it was far cry from the couch potato mentality we might have expected from the video game and tv generation. infact, this is an innovative way to combine sports and simulated experiencesña wonderful athletic hybrid. think of going to some future digital gymfor a nose ball workout!while immensely popular with the audiences who experienced them,the drawback to these games for the entertainment industry is economics. the games were so enjoyable that the typical experience was 10 to 15minutes long. add to that the suiting up time and leadin of how to play,and there just couldnõt be enough return on an investment to make aprofit. for this to evolve, the technology needs to be cheaper and easierto use, but it also requires a new way of thinking about technology assomething active, vibrant, and participatory, with innovative interfacesthat extend interactivity far beyond simple button pushing.team play experiencesa second big challenge for entertainment companies today is how tomake computer interactivity play to a group larger than just a few peopleat a time. the military solved this problem years ago with simnet. asthe grandfather of this area, simnet provided not so much prescribedscenarios but a common ground for participants to work together towarda goal. we have seen only a handful of successes in the entertainmentcommunity so far, and these involve fairly smallsized audiencesñtypically 12 to perhaps 100 people.there is definite need to continue to develop experiences in thisrealm. these types of activities fulfill our need as social beings to worktogether and communicate with one another in a group situation. this isone of the reasons why internet chat groups are so popular. the best andmost successful group experience to date, especially in terms of the largeraudience, is loren carpenterõs 1991 interactive piece shown at siggraph in las vegas (and again at siggraph 1994 in orlando).lorenõs ògameó not only allowed for 3,000 to 5,000 simultaneousplayers to control a òpongó game or a flight simulator, but it did so whilebuilding a level of group excitement and involvement that has rarelybeen seen in our current digital entertainments. a surprising outcome ofmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162appendix dthis game was that the audience as a whole did not perform at an average level, as might be expected, but at a much higher collective performance level. what heightened the level of the collective fervor was thatthe individual audience members could immediately sense their influence on the outcome. more work needs to be done at this level of teamplay.spectator experiencesan obvious extension to the realm of team play is that of spectatorplay. not everyone involved with digital entertainment will want to be adirect participant. sometimes people enjoy themselves when they areengaged as a spectator. being a spectator is not necessarily about beingpassive; it is about being a participant with anonymity within a crowd.this provides some people a less threatening forum in which to expressthemselves. look at football or other team sports as the best example:only a small percentage of the participants actually play. the bulk of theindustry (as well as the money to pay the players) is built around thefans. there is a potentially huge market to be developed for providing asubstantial and rewarding spectator experience in the digital entertainment realm. so far no one is exploring this avenue.these types of experiences require a new collaboration of entertainment with its audience. the military, in this respect, has been most responsive to its audienceñnot only the individual player but also thegroup dynamics that it served to train or connect. the thing to rememberis that technology itself will not sell anything beyond a momentary novelty. it is the larger experience that will spell success or failure, and it isin giving the audience what it desires that the most successes will befound. it is up to us to find the ways to do this.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d163jeffrey potterour segment of the computer graphics market extends from the plugin card for the home personal computer all the way up to the highpowered workstation graphics accelerator for engineering industrial use. weexpect to see the natural increase in renderer horsepower and onlinestorage capabilities that the computer industry has become accustomedto. every 12 to 18 months, the processing sees about a twofold increasein performance, with storage capacities moving at nearly the same pace.simultaneously, we expect to see features once reserved only for the expensive workstation market to gradually filter down and become available to the home computer user. these features include highqualityantialiasing, acceleration of both geometry and display processing, andadvanced texturing capabilities. simultaneously, we expect to see newexotic ways in which threedimensional (3d) computer graphics can beapplied to the common tasks done in a 2d world today. remember, nottoo long ago we were using 24line, 80character, alphanumericonly displays to do our word processing and spreadsheets. with the advent ofinexpensive 3d graphics, ordinary 2d graphics might seem quaint andbackwards in just a few more years.like any product that undergoes evolutionary change, computergraphics products will react to developersõ needs. operations that become the most commonly used routines performed by the host centralprocessing unit (cpu) in software will eventually migrate to hardware.the host cpu is then able to control rendering at a higher level, anddevelopers can start thinking up the next big processorintensive algorithm. we do not see a fixed set of features being used to separate thepersonal computer (pc) market from the workstation market. the linebetween personal computer graphics and workstation graphics will bemore rooted in price points, not capabilities. that is to say, what weconsider to be workstationquality graphics today will be on every pcownerõs desktop in a couple of years. of course, what will be on theworkstation at that time will be limited only by our imagination today.the enabling technological advances are primarily what has driventhe computing industry so far:¥semiconductor process and geometryñthe push to fit ever moregates onto reasonably priced pieces of silicon while keeping thermal andmechanical problems under control. this matters to both the ònumbercrunchingó hardware and the random access memory.¥memory bandwidthñdeveloping newer higherbandwidth memory architectures that adapt readily to the 3d graphics paradigm.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164appendix d¥interface standardsñsuch as the advanced graphics port, allowing the processors and customrendering hardware the capability to takeadvantage of new higherbandwidth memory.¥new algorithm developmentñespecially in areas such as imagecompression to further enhance the apparent processing speed of a system.the research challenges are to invent the next òbig thingó in computer graphics. our compuscene iv product practically stole the market inhighend military flight simulation and training in 1984 when we introduced photographicquality texturing to realtime graphics. researchand development must strike a happy medium between finding the nextgeewhiz feature that engineering can dream up and the marketable improvements that translate into increased sales.in our experience, one market drives the other, and occasionally developments and feature sets come full circle. u.s. department of defense(dod) applications concentrate on realworld accuracy and training effectiveness. entertainment applications want the òlook and feeló of the highpowered military simulations but at consumer price points. so the products for the entertainment market are designed with carefully chosencompromises based on engineering/marketing research and user feedback.these commercial products then sometimes catch the interest of militarycustomers, who realize that some lowerfidelity systems (such as parttasktrainers) can deliver effective training with these compromises.the drive to create interactive entertainment over the internet is aprime example of complementary efforts. the lessons learned by thedefense industry suppliers involved in the distributed interactive simulation standard can be put to good use by the entertainment community.we have had a close working relationship with sega enterprises, ltd.,developing the graphics hardware systems for the model 2 and model 3arcade systems. this drove us to miniaturize our image generator architecture and to develop new algorithms for such features as antialiasing.we have used this crosspollination of ideas to enhance our product line,most notably the r3d/100 chop set and r3d/pro1000 system. ther3d/pro1000 system is then able to serve markets that previously required expensive workstationbased systems at lower cost.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d165david r. prattmilitary entertainment?the joint simulation system (jsims) is the flagship program of thenext generation of constructive models. jsims is a single, seamlesslyintegrated simulation environment that includes a core infrastructure andmission space objects, both maintained in a common repository. thesecan be composed to create a simulation capability to support joint orservice training, rehearsal, or education objectives. jsims must facilitatejoint service training, significantly reduce exercise support resources, andallow user interactions via realworld command, control, communication, computing, and intelligence (c4i) systems. the final system willsupport the ability to resolve down to the platform level the development of doctrine and tactics, mission rehearsal, linkages with other models (e.g., analytical, live, virtual), and a wide range of military operations.as outlined above, the modeling and simulation (m&s) goalsof jsims are undoubtedly bold and ambitious. early on, service andagencyspecific programs were identified to be part of the overall jsimsprogram. based on the three pillars of the defense modeling and simulation officeõs common technical framework (conceptual model of themission space (cmms), highlevel architecture (hla), and data standards) along with technology infusion provided by defense advancedresearch projects agency programs (such as the synthetic theater of warand advanced simulation technology thrust), jsims represents the firsttrue u.s. department of defense (dod) communitywide m&s developmental effort. the question is whether jsims can possibly leverage off ofm&s efforts from outside dod, in particular those from the entertainment industry. foremost, the goals for a successful military simulationand an entertainment simulation are markedly different. in entertainment the driving factors are excitement and fun. users must want tospend their money to use it again and again (either at home or at anentertainment center) and hopefully be willing to tell others about it.unrealistically dangerous situations, exaggerated hazardous environments, and multiple lives and heroics are acceptable, even desirable, toincrease the thrill factor. on the other hand, defense simulations overwhelmingly stress realistic environments and engagement situations.the interactions are quite serious in nature, can crucially depend on terrain features or other environmental phenomena, and generally rely onthe ability to coordinate jointly with other players. the value of thesedefense simulations is measured in terms of training and insights revealed. a successful military simulator could be deemed boring andtherefore useless in terms of entertainment. similarly, a successful entermodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166appendix dtainment simulator could be deemed unrealistic and therefore useless interms of military training. however, i believe there exists a potential fordod and the entertainment industry to leverage off each otherõs m&sefforts provided there is an understanding of how the two fundamentally differ and what each strives to do best.from an operational point of view, there are three hard technologicalchallenges facing jsims: synthetic environment (se), computergenerated forces (cgfs), and resource reduction. to gain a level of confidence inthe outcome of defense models, the models must realistically and consistently represent all of the battlespace in the se. tactically significantinteractions with the se, such as rain affecting mobility and line of sight,crossenvironment interactions so that objects from the air domain canengage objects from the land domain seamlessly, must be simulated realistically across multiple types of platforms with different underlying terrain representations. cgf behaviors of entities in the simulation need tobe flexible and rapidly configurable by end users, and the generated behaviors must continue to evolve through the experience gained as part ofthe exercises much like humans do in battle. resources (in terms of time,equipment, and personnel) that currently drive training schedules mustbe reduced from their current levels. it simply takes too much to set up asimulation exercise. the goal is 96 hours versus the current six months.the largescale joint service nature and complexity of jsims generally preclude it from taking advantage of using much of the se frameworkdeveloped by the entertainment industry so far. however, efforts in thedevelopment of user interfaces, use of avatars, and artificial intelligenceare of potential interest. user interface development is largely driven bythe entertainment industry already as it is the primary means by whichits customers experience the desired thrills. the defense training community could benefit from immersive user interfaces that permit morerealistic interactions with the se. also of interest are more natural interfaces to effectively manipulate large numbers of cgfs or some aspect ofthe se, as are the use of avatars to convey information. m&sdrivencomputer technology advancements that result in the availability ofcheaper hardware to do complex computations efficiently, increased personnel expertise, and improved user interfaces could contribute to a significant reduction of resources required to conduct a simulation exercise.artificial intelligence in cgfs used to populate environments of bothdefense and entertainment simulations can likely be leveraged providedthat they can be flexibly programmed to carry out a variety of tasks andcan exhibit advanced behaviors such as the capability to learn. this is thecurrent challenge facing the cgf community within dod today, and ipose it to the entertainment industry as well in hopes that we may beable to work together on this difficult problem. i have not been able tomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d167find a technical reason why the defense and the entertainment m&s communities cannot leverage off each otherõs efforts. a crosspollination ofideas between the two appears fruitful provided that their differing m&sgoals are not adversely compromised. in general, negative military training, which could result from lack of simulation fidelity or ambiguity in auser interface, is considered to be worse than no training at all.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168appendix dalex seidenelectronic storytelling and human immersionthe past halfdecade has seen a renaissance in digital effects in motion pictures. correspondingly, the use of certain òtraditionaló effectstechnologies, such as compositing with optical printers, has diminishedgreatly. writers and directors have been given a new and powerful setof tools to realize their visions. new techniques have made the impossible possible and the prohibitively expensive more affordable. additionally, a tremendous amount of effects work is in the òinvisibleó category:wire and rig removals, sky and background enhancements, and so on.box office success fuels much in the world of filmmaking. (i am notso cynical as to say it is the only force in operation.) the tremendousreturns on terminator 2: judgment day and jurassic park exploded studiointerest in visual effects and the facilities that create them. many studioshave made substantial investments in their own effects units. currently,films such as twister and independence day reinforce this trend. the demand for visual effects has never been as high as it is today, and it willcontinue to grow for the next few years. after leveling off, there willdoubtless be a shakeout in the number of facilities providing these services; in some ways this may have already begun.visual effects and simulation computer graphics in the visual effectsworld have very little to do with òsimulation,ó as the term is commonlyused in the computing community. the broadest definition of a simulation is any synthetic or counterfeit creation. however, most in this audience would consider a simulation as being a mathematical or algorithmic model, combined with a set of initial conditions, that allowsprediction and visualization as time unfolds. this generalized modelallows easy manipulation of the initial conditions and parameters, suchthat many possibilities can be explored.computer graphics in visual effects has more to do with what iseuphemistically called òhybridó or òempiricaló techniques, and more candidly called ògrotesque hacks.ó the dinosaurs of jurassic park were notòsimulatedó any more than preworld war ii los angeles was òsimulatedó for chinatown.  certainly, any shot in the latter film has a rich senseof place and time: the office of private investigator jake gittes is powerfully evoked, and the audience imagines the rest of that world. but turnthe camera 30 degrees and youõll see a bunch of cstands and some grips.changing views requires substantial timeñthough the illusion of a complete and continuous world still exists. similarly, changing the action ofa synthetic creature, such as a dinosaur, requires extensive rework. nosingle generalized conceptual model exists for those dinosaurs and theirmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d169important visual properties, such as their gait cycles, the movement offlesh over bones, or the texture of their saurian hides. often, a precisesimulation would not only be more complicated but would also be aesthetically undesirable; for example, the scale of dinosaurs in jurassic parkchanges dramatically from shot to shot and sequence to sequence.technological advances and research challengesturnkey animation systems have advanced greatly in the past several years. such advancements include flexible inverse kinematics thatmake creature animation practical, particle system front ends that allowcomplicated dynamic effects, and the big strides in software on macintoshand personal computercompatible systems. nevertheless, software isthe single largest area where attention should be focused. animatorsand technical directors face daunting challenges as shots become moreand more complicated. techniques must be developed that allow morefacile management of this increasing complexity. visual programming,to name just one possible solution, has been proposed as a method ofallowing people to work at higher levels of abstraction without sacrificing precise control; other ideas will hopefully emerge as well. ask theproduction manager of any effects studio and he or she will tell you thebiggest problem is the shortage of skilled animators and technical directors. as such, training and education will be a huge issue for the nextseveral years.current renderers lack good simulation of area light sources and diffusediffuse interactions. this is critical for matching liveaction photography, especially for daylight exteriors. current solutions rely on difficult,poorlooking substitutes. i expect to see radiositybased techniques becomemore common. motion blur and programmable shading are necessary.some researchers and industry luminaries have talked with great excitement about the potential for photorealistic artificial actors. this will certainly see some application, but the interest in a revived marilyn monroe orelvis is perhaps overrated. hardware will continue its inevitable increasein performance and will be matched step for step by growing computingdemands. in the long run, framerendering times never fall: my averageframe time in 1985 was 20 minutes per tvres frame; now itõs around 30minutes. the vast amounts of data contained in filmres images place greatstrain on networks; increasing speed and reliability will help speed production. the continuing development of lossless compression techniques alsohelps. hopefully, display technologies will develop that can achieve thequality of film, especially more dynamic range and wider color gamuts.affordable highresolution realtime playback devices, such as highdefinition television, may be part of the solution.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170appendix dlinear and nonlinear storytellingit is important not to lose sight of the goal of movies or any entertainment: to expand and enrich our lives, to extend our experiences beyondthose we have lived through ourselves, to illuminate and explain theexperiences that we have lived, and to do all of this in a way that isengaging and compelling. any art, particularly film, succeeds when theaudience forgets itself and is transported into another world. visual effects must always serve the story. i say this even though i am fully awarethat recent effectsladen box office extravaganzas have been disturbinglylacking in this area. nevertheless, i donõt think many people outside theindustry would pay $7.50 to sit through the effects reels (an effects reel isan edited piece of film showing only the shots that have visual effectsand omitting the rest of the film) of any of these movies, stunning technical and creative achievements though they might be. in any event, manyeffectsoriented movies fail both commercially and aesthetically.the web, cdrom, virtual reality, and other multimedia techniqueshave been touted as ways to transcend the limits of linear storytelling, togive the audience a richer participation in an imaginary world. i will riskalienating many at this workshop by staking out what i expect to besome unpopular ground: iõve never seen a cdrom that moved me theway a powerful film has. iõve never visited a web page with great emotional impact. i contend that linear narrative is the fundamental art formof humankind: the novel, the play, the film, even the orally told joke orstoryñthese are the forms that define our cultural experience. althoughòinteractiveó and ònonlinearó forms exist, they have never been paramount in our consciousness. remember when, around the campfire during summer camp, one person would begin a story, tell it for a few minutes, and then another person would take over, developing the story intheir own direction? similar forms exist in improvisational theater games.and although these techniques can be amusing in small doses, i wouldargue that they are the exception that proves the rule: nonlinear storytelling forms can exist, but they will never supplant the complete controlof the linear storyteller. now, any new mediumñfilm, radio, and television are good examplesñhas its curmudgeonly detractors. the infantfilm industry received similar criticism from those who argued that theater would always be the dominant medium. the critics lacked the vision of what film could and would become, as the language of film developed. perhaps i, too, lack such vision and in 10 or 20 years will be eatingmy words. will the world of interactive nonlinear entertainment grow?yes, certainly it will. will exciting and emotionally powerful images becreated in these formats? yes, there are too many talented people andtoo much money being sent in that direction for nothing to happen. andmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d171certainly the web will become the preeminent forum for the exchange ofcommercial and scientific information; its significance will exceed that ofthe cellular phone, the automated teller machine, the fax machine, andthe home shopping network combined. this is not a trivial development. whether storytelling itself will be fundamentally changed depends on a paradigm shift that i would contend is much larger than forother emerging media. to fully evaluate the likelihood and meaning ofsuch as shift requires a careful distinction between what we think of nowas a òstoryó and what we consider a ògameó or òenvironment.ó a fullappraisal of the differences between the cognitive processes involved isbeyond the scope of this paper and is an excellent subject for furtherresearch.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172appendix dsteven seidenstickerdistributed simulation: a view from the futurethe battle date is august 17, 1943. i am the ball turret gunner ofluscious lady, a brand new b17f of the 427th squadron, 303rd bombardment group, of the eighth air force. our takeoff from molesworthwas without incident, but as soon as we were off the ground the pilotasked me to check the wheels. he had an indication that the left maingear had not retracted fully. i hopped into the ball and spun it until i hada good view of the wheel. it looked ok. we chalked it up to a badindicator in the cockpit. although the ball with its twin 50s is primarilyintended to protect a b17 from enemy fighters approaching from below,the view from beneath the aircraft comes in handy for other chores. weclimb out and begin a long lazy circle. i keep tabs on and report othersquadron aircraft as they join our formation.we are on our second mission and our first over germany. our firstmission was to bomb a luftwaffe airfield near paris. the target waspartly obscured by weather. opposition was light. a few me109s cameup to meet us. they were not particularly aggressive or well coordinated. nevertheless, we lost one of our squadron. i saw old ironsides getmost of her rudder shot off. the pilot was obviously losing control andchose to abandon his ship. i saw 10 good chutes. the debriefing teamcalled the mission a òmilk run.ó the missions would become muchtougher as we gained more experience. we were happy to get this far.my pilot and copilot are in milwaukee. the navigator/bombardier isin montreal. other crew members are in seattle, san jose, denver, and greenbay. we cannot see or touch each other, but we communicate via whatappears to be a b17õs standard intercom. in fact, we are part of a wideareahighspeed data network that connects all crew stations of all aircraft, bothfriendly and hostile. i donõt know the total number of nodes on this network, but it must be in the thousands. the number of spectators who cantap into the net is in the millions. in addition to our voices, this networkcarries all the data that our individual crew station simulators need to showother aircraft the terrain over which we fly, the weather, and other elementsof our environment. to participate in these missions each of us simply dialsinto the network at the time scheduled for the mission, gets the standardcrew briefing on our screens, and waits for our turn to take off. the pilots,bombardiers, and navigators get a detailed briefing on the target and expected weather. the rest of the crew gets briefed on expected opposition.the briefings are, of course, the same as (or as close as possible to) theoriginal briefings given to the original crews. like in the original briefings,we can ask questions and get answers.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d173not all the crew stations on luscious lady are manned by humans.the waist gunners and the radio operator are computergenerated entities. they do their jobs reasonably well. they even respond to us whenwe talk to them over the intercom. however, if the conversation straysfrom simple orders or reports they quickly become confused and startspouting gibberish. some of the other friendly aircraft on the missionand some of the opposing luftwaffe fighters have no human crews at all.but itõs getting harder to tell who is human and who is computergenerated, because the programmers keep tweaking their behavior algorithms.but my personal feeling is that they will never get to the point wherethese simulations are totally indistinguishable from real people. i hopethey donõt.over the channel the pilot gives us the order to test our guns. this isa ritual that ensures that the guns are working and marks the real beginning of the mission for us gunners. from here we are in harmõs way. icock both guns, point to a clear area, and let loose with a short burst. thetracers arc away gracefully. i have managed not to hit anyone else in theformation. to do so is considered very bad form. it also requires thehapless shooter to buy dinner for the shooteeõs crew at our next annualconvention. of course, the computers that run this whole operation keeptrack of everything, so there is no arguing or hiding. the target today isthe me109 plant in regensburg. we know that the luftwaffe was out inforce that day. the eighth air force lost 24 b17s out of a force of 147.shortly after we cross the french coast the nose gunner shouts òfour 109sat 12 oõclock low.ó the control yoke feels comfortable in my hands as ispin the turret forward. they are coming at our formation four abreastfrom dead ahead. the winking lights on the leading edge of their wingsshow that they are firing. i mash the right pedal hard to tell the leadcomputing gun sight to use maximum range. the left pedal goes to thethird notch to input the wing span of an me109. i line the sightõs pipperon the number two plane and fire short bursts, trying to adjust the rangeas they close. my shots appear low. just about everyone in our formation is firing. a puff of smoke bursts from the number three fighter. itcontinues to smoke as their formation passes right through ours.this line abreast headon attack was developed by the luftwaffe inearly 1943. it took a lot of courage and discipline on the part of thegerman pilots, but it was very effective. the idea was not only to get thebest shots possible but also to intimidate the bomber pilots and break upthe formation. it was probably the greatest game of chicken ever and itfrequently ended in collision. the right waist gunner reports anotherformation at the four oõclock level. but they are out of our range andovertaking us on a parallel course, no doubt moving up for another headon pass through the bomber stream. i can see their yellow cowlings andmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174appendix dknow that they belong to jg 26, the òabbeville kids,ó one of the bestluftwaffe fighter wings.the attacks continue sporadically until we are about 30 miles fromthe target. at that point we start seeing the dreaded flak. the smallblack clouds bloom innocently in the distance, but we know that as theground gunners adjust the aim of their 88s, the bursts will be right aroundus. there is little evasive action that a formation of b17s can take. weare near the ip (initial point) that the pilot must fly over if we are to getour bombs anywhere near the target. at that point, the bombardier takesover and actually flies the plane to the bomb release point, using autopilot controls on the famous norden bomb sight, probably one of the mostfamous but overrated technical developments of world war ii. the flakrounds get closer.the concussion from one of them is louder than the fifties going offnext to my ears. the pilot reports that number four engine is starting tovibrate and that the manifold pressure is dropping. bad news. if it failswe will have to drop out of the formation. like the weak separated fromthe herd, we will be on our own. we may have to fight packs of fightersas we try for the coast and the protection of friendly spitfires. most whohave been through this say that it can be the most exciting part of anafternoon of simulation, but the b17 seldom survives. those that do getan award at the next convention and, of course, their battle with thefighters is replayed on the large screen.we finally reach the target, the bombardier hits the pickle switch,and i watch the bombs fall away. i loose sight of them after a few seconds, but shortly thereafter see a string of explosions on the ground. thebombs land in a rail yard just east of the target complex. but thatõs closerthan the original crew came in 1943.the flight back was challenging. for two hours we endured moreflak and almost constant fighter harassment. our pilot managed to coaxenough power out of the number four engine to maintain our position inthe formation. the rest of the formation was not so lucky. stric ninetook an 88mm round in the right wing root and the whole wing cameoff. there were no chutes. wallaroo lost an engine and had to drop back,but we were close to the coast and a flight of p47s escorted her back.once we got over the channel i turned over my role to an automatic ballturret simulation and had a quick dinner in the kitchen with my wife. idoubt that the rest of my crew even noticed i was gone. i rejoined thesimulation for the debriefing. the colonel told us that we had done reasonably well for a second mission crew.my ball turret is a mediumpriced model from realsim inc., one ofthe rising companies in this field. it provides a lot of fidelity for the priceand has a lot of update options. iõm very happy with it. the ball spinsmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d175and rotates vertically much the way the original did and takes up lessthan half of my garage. the visual scenes are presented on panels builtright into the ball. sound and vibration are provided by some large butordinary speakers. realsim sells the basic turret dirt cheap but knowshow simheads get hooked on fidelity, and so they offer a large range ofaddons that can become real expensive. some of my colleagues havemounted their units on electrically driven motion platforms. i donõt knowif that is worth the extra cost. maybe next year. many other simulatedcrew stations are built around virtual reality goggles. those are a lot lessexpensive but work quite well. one enthusiastic crew has built a wholeb17 fuselage in a warehouse.as in most simulations, visual scenes provide the dominant cues.the simulation industry long ago reached its holy grail of creating visualimages that are indistinguishable from the real thing. the processingpower needed to create them is so cheap that the image generators are nolonger a cost factor in most simulators. databases that represent theterrain of any portion of the earth are readily available at any resolutiondesired. specialty òperiodó databases (dunkirk or waterloo for instance)for groundpounders are becoming available but are very expensive.the key factor that made this kind of group simulation possible wasthe development of the dis (distributed interactive simulation) standardsabout 25 years ago. once these standards were in place, the designersand builders of simulator components didnõt have to spend any moretime thinking about linking them together than does the designer of arailroad car need to worry about how to couple his car to a train. the disstandards allowed the simulation industry to concentrate on functionality, performance, and cost reduction.my wife used to ask me why i spend so much time and money onthis. there are a number of reasons. i, like most middleaged guys, haveoften fantasized about going into battle to test my wits and skill with acomparably equipped enemy. in this fantasy i support my comrades andin turn depend on their support. i yearn to experience the heat of battle,victory over my adversary, or a narrow escape from the reach of hisweapons. however, i have no desire to shed any of my blood.i also love history, great battles in particular. i know of no greaterbattle than that between the u.s. eighth air force and the german luftwaffe in 1943 and 1944. the leaders of the american forces felt that theycould win the war with heavy bombing of german military and industrial targets. to be accurate this had to be done in daylight. escort fightersof the day did not have sufficient range to cover the bombers. the bombers had to depend on their own defensive weapons.participation in these recreated battles is available at a number oflevels. i started as a spectator. the magic carpet mode of my computermodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176appendix dlet me observe operations from any point in space. it also let me attachmyself to any aircraft in the battle and listen to the radio and intercomtraffic for that aircraft. running commentary is available from experts.previews and schedules of upcoming battles are carried by the majorsports pages. reports of completed battles also are carried. these tendto dwell on the personalities involved and the shootemup aspects. howclose the reenactment came to the original battle seems to be getting lost.after watching several of the major raids, i was hooked and wantedto play an active role. my first desire was to be a luftwaffe pilot, but therequirement for fluency in german eliminated that. rumors are that anenglishspeaking luftwaffe wing is forming. my second choice was tosit in the cockpit of a b17. but, like the original aircrews, i needed training. the training course for all pilot positions is long and demanding. iopted for the less ambitious role of gunner. fortunately, the simulatortechnology that i own trains me more efficiently and quickly than didsimilar training programs in 1943. after a few intense weekends, i passedthe qualification tests and was assigned to my present crew. we are notthe most proficient crew on todayõs raid, but neither were the new crewsin 1943.as i become more serious in this avocation, i wonder where it isgoing. some social commentators are starting to decry the òglorificationof war.ó others counter with statements about òharmless outlets of maleaggression,ó despite the fact that at last yearõs convention the best b17crew award went to an allfemale crew. some critics are worried thatthe superrealistic simulation available today is going to replace drugs asthe national addiction. who knows! the raid on the ballbearing factories in schweinfurt is scheduled for next week. it was the bloodiest forthe eighth air force. i think my crew and i are good enough and luckyenough to survive. i can hardly wait to find out.modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d177jack thorperesearch needs for synthetic environmentspurposethis paper introduces one approach for thinking about the technicalchallenges of constructing synthetic environments and some of the related research issues. the paper is designed to stimulate discussion, not tobe a comprehensive treatise on the topic.discussionsimulation, virtual reality, gaming, and film share the common objective of creating a believable artificial world for participants. in thiscontext, believability is less about the specific content of the environmentand more about the perception that there exists a world that participantscan port themselves into and be active inñthat is, exert behavior of somesort.in film, this is vicarious. in simulation, virtual reality, and gaming ittends to be active, even allowing participants to choose the form for porting into the environment: either as an occupant of a vehicle movingthrough the environment, as a puppet (proxy) of him or herself that he orshe controls from an observation station, or as a fully immersed human.the iconic representation or avatar can assume whatever form is appropriate for the environment.when the participant is an audience member in a single venue and isneither required to interact overtly with other audience members in thesame venue or other connected venues, the issues of largescale interactivity and distributed locations are minimal. on the other hand, whentens or hundreds of remotely located participants are ported into thesame world and begin to interact freely (and unpredictably), as demonstrated in recent advances in distributed interactive simulation, not onlyare the environments more interesting but the technical challenges arealso more difficult. it is likely that these will also be the nextgenerationcommercial application for this technology, and so addressing technicalissues is timely.to design and build these more complex worlds, the following majortasks have been found to be useful classifications of the work needed tobe done and the tools required to perform this work, thus leading to theresearch and development needed to construct the tools. for each ofthese tasks a few of the research issues are identified, but this is far froma comprehensive treatment:modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178appendix d¥efficient fabrication of the synthetic environment;¥design and manufacture of affordable porting devices that allowhumans to enter and/or interface with these environments;¥design and management of a worldwide simulation internet toconnect these porting devices in real time;¥development of computational proxies (algorithms) that accurately mimic the behavior of humans unable to be present;¥staffing, organization, and management of realistic, validated sentient opponents (or other agents), networked based, for augmenting theworld; and¥development of innovative applications and methodologies forexploiting this unique capability.efficient fabrication of the synthetic environmentartificial worlds are usually threedimensional spaces whose featuresare sensed by the participants in multiple modes, almost always visualbut possibly auditory, tactile, wholebody motion, infrared, radar, or viaa full range of notional sensor or information cues. for each of thesemodes of interaction, the attributes can be specified in a prebuilt database ahead of time, or calculated in real time, or both.the challenge is to construct interesting threedimensional environments efficiently. cost rises as a function of the size of the space (in somemilitary simulations it can be thousands of square miles of topography),resolution, detail (precision cues needed for interaction), dynamic features (objects that can interact with participants, like doors that can openor buildings that can be razed), and several other factors. as a generalobservation, the tools needed to efficiently construct large complex environments are lacking, a particularly serious shortfall when finetuningenvironments for specific goals of a simulation or game. toolsets arequirky and primitive, require substantial training to master, and oftenprohibit the environment architect from including all of the attributesdesired. this is a serious problem, one that seems to get relatively littleattention. it is an area that needs continual research and developmentfocus.design and manufacture of affordableporting devices that allow humans to enter and/orinterface with these environmentsthe manner in which the human enters the synthetic environmentcontinues to undergo rapid change. flight simulators are a good example. twenty years ago a sophisticated flight simulator cost $20 million tomodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d179$40 million. ten years ago technology allowed costs to drop by a factorof 100. today there has been another one or two orders of magnitudedecrease. further, each new generation is more capable than its morecostly predecessor. this drop in cost, with an increase in the richness ofthe participantõs ability to interact with the environment and other people and agents similarly ported there, is especially important as largescale simulations are constructedñthat is, those that might have 50 ormore participants (some military simulations have thousands of participants). the cost per participant (cost per seat) can be a limiting factor nomatter how rich the interface.the research issues include the design methodology that leads togood functional specifications for the simulation or game (the workon selective fidelity by bob jacobs at illusion inc. is relevant), thedesign and fabrication approaches for fullenclosure simulators (vehicles) and caves (individuals), the porting facade at the desktopworkstation (partly manifested by the graphical user interface), andother means of entering the environment, such as while mobile via awireless personal digital assistant.design and management of a worldwide simulationinternet to connect these porting devices in real timesmallscale as well as largescale distributed interactive environmentshave baseline requirements for latency, which is compounded when arequirement to worldwide entry into environments is added. latency isinfluenced by the type of interaction a participant is involved with in thespecific synthetic environment. the requirement is that the perception ofòreal timenessó is not violated, that is, that participants do not perceive arift in the time domain (a stutter, momentary freeze, or unnatural delayin consequence of some action that should be a seamless interaction).because this is a perceptual issue, it is dependent on the nature of theinteraction and the participantõs expectations.this becomes a technology issue as the number of independentlybehaving participants grows, the number of remote sites increases, andthe diversity of the types of interactions coming from these sites andparticipants grows. it has been demonstrated that unfiltered broadcasting of interaction messages (òi am here doing this to youó) quickly saturates the ability of every participant to sort through all the incomingmessages, the majority of which are irrelevant to a specific participant.the functionality needed in this type of large interactive network is akinto dynamically reconfigurable multicasting, as yet unavailable as a network service.it could turn out that as the internet expands it will provide the dedmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180appendix dicated protected speed and addressing for these types of interactions, butthis is not the case to date, and dedicated networks have had to be installed to support large exercises. further, it is conceivable that the appetite of the simulation or game designer for more complex and interactiveenvironments will outpace the nearterm flexibility and capacity of network providers. networks are going to have to be smarter, a continuingresearch issue.development of computational proxies(algorithms) that accurately mimic the behavior ofhumans unable to be presentlate 1980s experimentation with distributed interactive simulationsresulted in the constant pressure to grow the environments in the numbers of participants, but there were never enough porting devices or people to man them to satisfy this growth. since these environments beganas behaviorally rich humanonhuman/forceonforce experiences, players demanded that any additional agents brought on via computer algorithm have all the characteristic behaviors of intelligent beings, that is,that they passed the turing test and would be indistinguishable fromreal humansña tall order.this resulted in a series of developments of semiautomated and fullyautomated forces capable of behaving as humans and interacting alongside or against other humans ported into the simulation. these developments have met with mixed success. in some cases computer algorithmshave been constructed that are excellent mimics of actual individuals andteams, particularly in vehicles, but in other cases the problem is moredifficult, especially in areas of mimicking cognition as in decision making. nonetheless, the commercial application as well as the defense application of largescale interactive environments will require largescalesynthetic forces behaving correctly. given that understanding, predicting, and ògeneratingó human behavior transcends simulation and gaming, this will continue to be a major research area.staffing, organization, and management of realistic,validated sentient opponents (or other agents),networked based, for augmenting the worldwhere environments require teams of people acting in concert toaugment the synthetic environment for participants, for example, teamsof welltrained and commanded competitors, the opportunity presentsitself for the establishment of networkbased teams. these could be widely remoted themselves, even though they would be perceived as beingmodeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defensecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d181ported into the synthetic environment at a single location. the challengeof establishing these teams is less technical and more organizational, typical of military operations, except in the case where these teams are required to faithfully portray forces of different backgrounds, languages,and value systems. technology can assist with realtime language generation and translation. behaving as someone from a different culture ismore difficult.development of innovative applications andmethodologies for exploiting this unique capabilitythe capabilities created through the design and instantiation of asynthetic environment can be unprecedented, making conventional applications and methodologies obsolete. this task recognizes that researchis needed on how to characterize these new capabilities and systematically exploit them.