detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5904electronic commerce for the procurement of construction andarchitectengineer services: implementing the federalacquisition streamlining act60 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309059329 | doi 10.17226/5904federal facilities council, standing committee on procurement and contracting,national research councilelectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commercefor the procurement ofconstruction andarchitectengineerservicesimplementing the federal acquisition streamliningact conference summaryfederal facilities council standing committee on procurement andcontractingtechnical report #134national academy presswashington, dc 1997ielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.noticethe federal facilities council (ffc) (formerly the federal constructioncouncil) is a continuing activity of the board on infrastructure and theconstructed environment (bice) of the national research council (nrc). thepurpose of the ffc is to promote continuing cooperation among the sponsoringfederal agencies, and between the agencies and others in the buildingcommunity, to advance building science and technology, especially for thedesign, construction, acquisition, evaluation, and operation of federal facilities.the following agencies currently sponsor the ffc:department of the air force, air national guarddepartment of the air force, office of the civil engineerdepartment of the army, corps of engineersdepartment of energy, office of associate deputy secretary of fieldmanagementdepartment of the navy, naval facilities engineering commanddepartment of state, office of foreign buildings operationsdepartment of veterans affairs, office of facilities managementfood and drug administrationgeneral services administration, public buildings serviceindian health servicenational aeronautics and space administration, facilities engineering divisionnational institutes of healthnational institute of standards and technology, building and fire researchlaboratorynational endowment for the arts, design arts programnational science foundationsmithsonian institution, office of facilities servicesu.s. information agency, international broadcasting bureauu.s. postal service, facilities departmentu.s. public health service, office of managementas part of its activities, the ffc periodically publishes reports that have beenprepared by committees of government employees. since these committees arenot appointed by the nrc, they do not make recommendations, and their reportsare considered ffc publications rather than nrc publications.for further information on the ffc program or ffc reports, please write to:director, federal facilities council, board on infrastructure and the constructedenvironment, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., washington, d.c. 20418, orvisit us on the internet at http://www2.nas.edu/ffc.iielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal facilities council standingcommittee on procurement and contractingchairjoyce runyan, acquisition policy division, naval facilities engineeringcommandmembersronald adam, office of facilities management, department of veterans affairswade belcher, public buildings service, general services administrationlewis butt, maintenance and repair division, international broadcasting bureaudonald w. dormstetter, office of design and construction, smithsonianinstitutionjon erikson, network engineering, international broadcasting bureaudonald evick, engineering management branch, u.s. army corps of engineerscatherine fairlie, installation restoration program branch, air national guardrobert fraga, major facilities purchasing, u.s. postal servicechris guevin, military construction, department of the air forcegary heidle, acquisition policy division, air national guardbob henry, division of engineering services, national institutes of healthtom kasper, acquisition policy division, air national guarddeanna bentz murphy, environmental management division, nationalaeronautics and space administrationwalt norko, construction policy branch, u.s. army corps of engineersbrent peavler, acquisition division, international broadcasting bureautim ruckle, management information division, u.s. army corps of engineersiiielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.donna smigel, engineering management branch, u.s. army corps of engineersfrank sullivan, office of facilities management, department of veteransaffairsjoyce sweasy, office of procurement management, national institutes of healthwilliam timperley, contracts policy division, naval facilities engineeringcommanddan troyan, office of the principal assistant for contracting, u.s. army corpsof engineersleroy wallin, acquisitions department, u.s. department of stategerald zaffos, public buildings service, general services administrationprogram committee liaison memberroger bell, facilities division, air national guardnonfederal liaison membersjeffrey beard, designbuild institute of americastuart binstock, american institute of architectsnick kolesnikoff, the associated general contractors of americafelix martinez, american consulting engineers councilchristopher monek, the associated general contractors of americahoward noel, council on federal procurement of architectengineer servicesbrian pallasch, american subcontractors association, inc.bruce vogelsinger, national institute of building sciencesmichael wilson, associated builders and contractorsstafflynda stanley, director, federal facilities councillena grayson, program assistant, federal facilities councilivelectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceelectronic commerce is a strategic element in achieving cost, time, andresource savings in the federal procurement of goods and services. to promoteefficiencies in procurement, the federal acquisition streamlining act (fasa)requires that federal government transform its acquisition system from apaperwork process to a computerbased system that is readily accessible togovernment and private sector users. fasa encourages the purchase ofcommercial goods and services, establishes the federal acquisition computernetwork (facnet), and over time, transforms the procurement system to anelectronic online system.this oneday conference of the federal facilities council focused on theprocurement of construction and architectengineer services, providing a forum toexchange information on related recent developments:ł fasa's provisions for electronic commerce, the architecture ofelectronic commerce and facnet, government approaches toimplementation, and the outlook for the future federal agency experiences with electronic commerce and facnet,barriers to implementation, alternative computer/electronic systems, andinitiatives underway private sector contractors' perspectives on the advantages anddisadvantages of electronic commerce, barriers to implementation,methods of overcoming barriers, and future prospects the purposes and services of the electronic commerce resourcecenters for small and mediumsized businesses.joyce runyan, chaircommittee on procurement and contractingprefacevelectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacevielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 1 electronic commerce: implementing fasadelores (dee) smith, department of defense electronic commerceoffice 8 electronic commerce: perspectives of four federal agenciesron grover, naval facilities engineering commandg. doyle dodge, general services administrationfrank d. (dan) troyan, james justin taylor, and ronson kung,army corps of engineersken stepka, national aeronautics and space administration 16 electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networksbosquet (biscuit) n. wev, jr., fairfax electronic commerceresource center 36 speaker biographies 46contentsviielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsviiielectronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summaryelectronic commerce (ec) and electronic data interchange (edi) representone of today's fastest growing areas of business technology.1 government hasrecognized the potential of such technologies in recent major legislative andexecutive actions to reform procurement. the object of these efforts is to convertfederal processes, beginning with acquisition, from laborand paperintensiveprocesses to streamlined electronic exchanges. however, ec/edi has not beenemployed often in the government procurement of construction and architectengineer (ae) services. to explore these new applications, the federal facilitiescouncil (ffc), of the national research council's board on infrastructure andthe constructed environment, hosted a oneday symposium in may 1996. thisreport presents symposium papers and summarizes some of the principal themesand issues of the presentations and of the exchange among participants in themeeting's final open discussion.backgroundthe federal acquisition streamlining act (fasa) of 1994 was enacted tomake government procurement processes simpler and more costeffective. longagreed to be cumbersome, traditional procurement processes are both expensiveand slow. fasa realized the farreaching recommendations of two majorstudies, which themselves built on many othersša department of defense1 "electronic commerce (ec)" refers to a paperless process, including electronic mail,electronic bulletin boards, electronic funds transfer, electronic data interchange, andsimilar techniques, for accomplishing business transactions. "electronic data interchange(edi)" refers to any technique for electronically transferring and storing formattedinformation between computers, using established and published formats and codes, asauthorized by the applicable federal information processing standards.executive summary1electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(dod) study of procurement reform, issued by the socalled section 800 panel,2and vice president gore's much broader effort to streamline government, thenational performance review (npr).among other changes, fasa instituted new simplified acquisitionprocedures for smaller government purchases, trying the new procedures partly tothe use of ec/edi. fasa, together with subsequent changes in the federalacquisition regulations (far), established the federal acquisition computernetwork (facnet), which is managed by the defense information systemsagency (disa) and is specifically designed to carry out government businessusing ec/edi.while, according to fasa, the new simplified procedures could be used forany procurement of up to $50,000, they could also be used for procurements offrom $50,000 to $100,000 as wellšif a government purchasing office wasfacnetcertified by october 1996. the federal acquisition reform act(fara) of 1996 extended this date to december 1999, permitting the use of thesimplified procedures in the meantime for procurements of up to $100,000,regardless of the office's certification status. fara also permitted agencies toexperiment with forms of electronic communication other than facnet inconducting business.symposium scopethe use of ec/edi, particularly as envisioned by fasa and fara, posesspecial challenges for both contractors and government in ae and constructioncontracting. problem areas include the time it takes to transmit drawingselectronically; the ways drawings can be secured from unauthorized changes; theways to procure ae contracts electronically, given that these contracts have theirown procedures and forms; the difficulties of involving in the facnet systemthe many small contractors who do construction work of under $100,000; as wellas the general difficulties that have been reported in implementing ec/edithrough facnet.the ffc symposium was thus designed to exchange information on severalrelated basic topics:2 the 1991 authorizing legislation for the department of defense stipulated that agovernmentindustry study be conducted on streamlining the department's acquisitionprocess; the section 800 panel authored this study.executive summary2electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. fasa's provisions for electronic commerce, the architecture ofelectronic commerce and facnet, government approaches toimplementation, and possible future developments federal agency experiences with electronic commerce, the availability offacnet, barriers to implementation, alternative computer/electronicsystems in use, and related initiatives private sector contractors' perspectives on the advantages anddisadvantages of electronic commerce, barriers to implementation, waysto circumvent barriers, and future developments the services of the electronic commerce resource centers, which aresponsored by the advanced research projects agency and funded by thedepartment of defense, and whose mission is to help small to mediumsized businesses and government offices establish electronic commerce.facnetfollowing on fasa and highlevel executive orders, disa assumedresponsibility for putting the facnet infrastructure in place. facnet is basedon the concept of presenting a single government face to industry. whileelectronic commerce had already long been used between government andindustry in particular cases, these efforts represented an array of machines,languages, and practices. to provide a more comprehensive, userfriendlysystem, ansi x12 and un edifact were established as standards for thestructure, format, and content of facnet's edi transactions.3 related initiativesto standardize business practices across federal agenciesšwhich is the moredifficult problemšare ongoing. disa was also challenged to use commercial,offtheshelf systems in developing new infrastructure, to reduce costs andleverage resources.within four months of its charge, disa implemented an electroniccommerce infrastructure using existing dod and civilian federal gateways toeffect translation from other languages to ansi x12. various capabilities havesince been added, including an encore massively parallel processor, to improve3 ansišthe american national standards institutešis the coordinator andclearinghouse for national standards in the united states. un edifact refers to theunited nations rules for electronic data interchange for administration, commerce, andtransport.executive summary3electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.production capability, and improved communications systems. a variety ofadditional developments are envisioned, and special activities are underway insuch areas as developing digital signature hash and encryption.transactions over this disa network with commercial valueaddednetworks (vans, the commercial equivalents of federal gateways) have doubledin the last year, to well over one million transactions per month. while the newinfrastructure has greatly shortened transaction times (delivering 80 percent oftransactions in less than two hours), it has yet to meet the growing demand.the new infrastructure is scalablešmore processors can be added at will.but even today, it is capable of handling larger engineering files, such as thoserequired for ae and construction procurements. the questions in this area may beeconomic rather than technical. for example, it may not be costeffective,particular for contractors, to transmit a public request for quote along with all itsengineering drawings to all potential trading partners.both dod and the army have pursued the implementation of facnet. indod alone, approximately 280 acquisition sites have been established in the lasttwo years. this fasttrack implementation approach has yielded both benefits andproblems. buyers have a broader means of advertising for goods and services,which encourages more competition, and procurement lead times have beensharply reduced. among the problems of the new system, the volume oftransactions overall remains low. additionally, while selected contractingfunctions have been shifted to electronic commercešrequests for quotes andpurchase and delivery ordersšmany other paperwork processes have not beenadapted or simplified. extensive outreach efforts to assist contracting offices andtheir vendors, for example, in choosing commercial vans, are being carried outwith the help of the electronic commerce resource centers (ecrcs).beyond these dod activities focused on contracting, the department isdeveloping transaction types in many other functional areas; logistics and financearea transactions will shortly be online. dod plans to proceed with establishingec/edi in areas in keeping with the order of the actual procurement process. achallenge for the use of electronic commerce in these multiple areas is to ensurefunctional business areas are well integrated.in spite of the challenges, electronic commerce offers great opportunities forsavings in dod alone. one study found that billions of dollars could be saved byshifting the department's paperwork procurement processes to the new technology(90 percent of dod actions represent less than $100,000). in some cases, ec/edimay allow the bypassing of transactions completelyšdie defense commissaryagency has already eliminated invoicing. however, manyexecutive summary4electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.obstacles to implementation remain, including the difficulty of making any majorchange in any organization in an era of constrained resources and downsizing.the u.s. army corps of engineers has also pursued facnet extensively.of its 50 automated contracting offices, 45 have interim facnet certification.together with the triservice cadd/gis technology center, the corps has alsodeveloped its own corpswide approach to delivering documents for constructioncontracts in an electronic format. these electronic bid sets, which are distributedboth via the internet and on cdrom, include the contract forms, clauses andconditions of the contract, and related drawings and technical specifications. fivepilot projects using these bid sets are now in progress. use of the bid sets shouldeliminate some paper processes (including expensive mailing and filing costs),and enable greater lead times, justintime delivery, and efficient use of projectdata throughout the project life cycle.central contractor registration. central contractor registration (ccr) isan ec/edi initiative inspired by the recommendations of dod contractingofficers. previously, contractors were required to register separately with anyindividual dod site to do business at that site. additionally, they had to updatetheir registration annually at all the individual sites where they did business. thisregistration system was clearly very laborand paperintensive on all sides.the new ccr, which is now operational, is designed to allow a contractor toregister only once annually to do business at any federal site. the development ofthe ccr database was supported by interagency cooperation, particularly in thesharing of software. major outreach efforts, carried out by the electroniccommerce resource centers, are now underway to increase ccr registration,which is still low. while the ccr is closely associated with facnet, vendorsare encouraged to register with the ccr whether they choose to do business byfacnet or not.the ccr is potentially a much more efficient way for vendors to dobusiness with government. the ability to register through the world wide web isexpected soon. state governments are already seeking to use the ccr for theirown procurements and other functions. the repository may be useful in otherenvironments as well, such as for nonprofit organizations.alternative agency approachesthe naval facilities engineering command (navfac) encounteredseveral large barriers in its recent initiation of electronic commerce. whileattempting to implement edi at its contracting offices within the period of aexecutive summary5electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.year, navfac also faced the department of defense order to avoid buying ordeveloping new software systems until the new dod standard procurementsystem (sps) for contracting processes was emplacedšan expected wait ofroughly seven years.to implement its own electronic commerce, then, navfac had to obtain awaiver from the sps, a step requiring a thorough economic analysis to justify newsoftware costs. another challenge was ensuring that the new software wouldwork well with all relevant navfac processes. the new software finallyacquired is now being installed.additionally, navfac is helping to develop a navy internet site, as analternative approach to facnet in advertising contract jobs. it is alsodeveloping its own contract page. a remarkable demonstration of the newtechnology's potential is the realtime availability on the internet of departmentof labor wage determinations, accessible through such home pages of anymilitary organization.the general services administration (gsa), in its own efforts, has beenconcerned foremost with the general goal of providing the information needed onelectronic contracting as easily and inexpensively as possible to around 500,000people worldwide. immediately after facnet was developed, the internet wascommercialized, followed by the arrival of much improved software, allowingplatformand application softwareindependence. a variety of importantacquisitionrelated material is already available on the internet, including the farand other policies and regulations. gsa's philosophy is that there is a place forall these approaches, which the market can best determine.the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) has developedan innovative internet service, the nasa acquisition internet service (nais),instead of using facnet. nasa's approach was prompted partly by concernover facnet costs, especially for small businesses. nais is based on worldwide web browser technologyš''click and point'' technologyšthat, unlikefacnet, requires very little training. nais now provides immediate access toall nasa acquisitions, synopses, competitive proposals under $25,000, andrequests for proposals (rfps). it is platformindependent, an importantcharacteristic in the view of nasa users. additionally, nasa sites are linked toother internet acquisition sites, and will be linked to facnet shortly. nasacontinually improves nais in light of both customer feedback, which isencouraged via the system's email capability, and commercial marketdevelopments. the air force has used some elements of the nasa approach as amodel, and other agencies are looking at it as well.executive summary6electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.private sector initiatives and requirementsaccording to private sector representatives, any electronic commerce used inarchitectengineer and construction contracting must handle specialrequirements. the type of information that facnet is designed to handle differsfrom architecture and engineering contracts, in that the latter are typically notrepeat transactions, but rather projectunique. facnet also presents barriers tomany small construction businesses, which would have difficulty supporting thecosts of facnet training. many ae and construction procurements are alsolargešoften for more than $300,000. these procurements are obviouslyinappropriate for facnet. moreover, these large projects raise their ownproblems for electronic commerce, such as the costs, reliability, and ease oftransmitting very large documents. the electronic commerce systems for largeand small projects may therefore need to be considered separately. additionally,the transmission of ae and construction documents entails special issues oflogistics, copyright, and liability. proposal submission would also require a highlevel of security.private ae and construction firms already use electronic commerce in theform of email systems and the internet. some have their own welldevelopedelectronic initiatives, for example, in project planning, project management, andfinancial systems. teleconferencing is also commonly used in these industries.however, while commercial electronic commerce is already integrated in industrypractices, the professional societies, such as the american institute of architectsand the associated general contractors of america, have not been muchinvolved to date.like many agency representatives, symposium participants from the privatesector emphasized the importance of following and capitalizing on the fastpaceddevelopments in the commercial world of electronic commerce. laws andregulations should be flexible enough to allow this to happen.followon activitiessymposium discussion identified several further activities towardimplementing electronic commerce in ae and construction contracting. industryleaders, including professional society representatives, might meet, to clarifytheir requirements for electronic commerce. in addition to technical questions,this group might address process issues, such as legal and security concerns.agencies with experience in implementing electronic commerce might also meetto exchange more detailed information about their progress and the barriers theyface in developing systems specifically for ae and construction contracting.executive summary7electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commerce: implementing thefederal acquisition streamlining actms. delores (dee) smithdepartment of defense electronic commerce programthe electronic commerce program has had an eventful beginning in thedepartment of defense (dod) during the last two years. the experience has beenquite a challengešin engineering, contracting, and business areasšfor both thedepartment and industry.this new electronic commerce infrastructure grew out of a process actionteam (pat) that started in june 1993. dod has a twoyear program parallelingthe federal acquisition streamlining act (fasa) of 1994. the dod programgoal has been to implement simplified purchases during this time, at 244 sitesthat carry out 98 percent of simplified procurements. initially, these purchaseswere defined as up to $25,000. however, during implementation, the deputyunder secretary of defense for acquisition reform worked with the office offederal procurement policy to have legislation raise the threshold, up to$100,000, for simplified purchases by electronic commerce. this is a rare event:legislation being written in cooperation with a department division, and executedat the same time.cooperation among the program's direct participants was also high.together they established not only the interim electronic commerce capabilitycalled for by fasašthe federal acquisition computer network (facnet)šbut also had the infrastructure in place with sites beginning to deploy. within thedepartment alone today, 286 sites are up and operating.while there have been many program initiatives, however, the currentvolume of ansi x12 transactions is still low. the delay has been attributedespecially to infrastructure problems. however, there have been many otherproblems as well, which are currently being resolved just as the infrastructureissues have been. this next year is likely to be a very aggressive program yearfor the department, as well as for the 37 participating federal agencies' sites.the other problems in implementing electronic commerce derive from thegeneral paradigm shift, the move from paperwork to electronic commerce. todate, the new system offers little new from the operational viewpoint of dodcontracting officers. they do not have an advantageous method of executionelectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act8electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.yet; the principal difference for them so far is simply the nature of theirconnection with industry in requests for quotes, purchase orders, and deliveryorders.the problem for the buy in itself, and for the acceptance of the newapproach, is that additional accompanying processes have not been improved orelectronically adapted to date. in other words, when contracting officers executean ec/edi award, they must also send papers to the defense finance accountingservice (dfas), contract administration, and still other offices. currently, then,contracting officers simply have a broader means to advertise information forgoods and services.however, they also have the opportunity to reduce procurement lead timessignificantly. in simplified purchases, we are seeing reduction of 15 to 20 days inthe procurement process. more and more, we are generating an award within 24hours of closing a solicitation. so we are supporting our business goal, andsupporting the warfighter.even under a peacetime or peacekeeping scenario, it is very important thatwe respond to our customers quicklyšprocurement is at the end of the process.the requisite user of goods and services does not see the tremendous lead time infront of the procurement officer.in the last two and onehalf years, we have embarked on outreach efforts of$2.5 million with the small business administration (sba), training over 1,000small business centers, 106 procurement technical assistance centers, and 11electronic commerce resource centers (ecrcs). all these people have alsojoined with us in vigorous educational outreach to industry, and additionally, forthat matter, in helping me personally to understand the technical issues andinternal workings of the relevant activities.in 1993, the electronic commerce infrastructure that dod secretary perryspecified was one supporting all business areas. the first area addressed wascontracting, because this business area was the first to reduce personnel instreamlining. a defense management review directive in 1990 eliminatednumerous positions and salaries. to accomplish the old paper pushing processwas impossible, and some type of streamlining had to be done.unfortunately, we could not carry out a true business process reengineeringin the streamlining. i would simply say we paved the cow path in this first effort.today, most of dod sends out engineering technical data whether therecipient wants them or not. in fact, many of the technical data and aperture cardsubmissions end up in trash cans.4 most of those who receive this4 aperture cards are 3" × 3" microfilm incorporating technical engineering data.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act9electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information already maintain it in some way. they may need only certain parts ofit for the purposes of the bid. so we will need to determine policies about howsuch information is provided in the future.the ansi x12 (841) is the transaction set for engineering technical data; itsreview by the standards management council (smc), as well as the federalstandards management council, is complete.for the last two years, my office has sponsored funding of the prototype forengineering technical data that crosses dod. we just released a $1.6 millionprototype demonstration that will deploy this capacity in the next 9 months to ourdla sites, which are four large inventory control points (icp).some of that information on those types of documents is coming out verysoon. we will be able to force the envelope again, to determine the costeffectiveness, the speed, the service, and the medium through which we willtransfer engineering data in the future.another big issue affecting the buyer at the moment is our downsizing andrightsizing. many are afraid for their jobs. bases will be closing, in keeping withthe base closure and realignment act. this kind of environment in many wayssubverts an aggressive approach to putting electronic commerce in place.to be sure that buyers' requirements are satisfied, i have visited most of the286 sites for feedback on the quality of the information they received both intheir inhouse administered training and through all the outreach activities. thisfeedback, now arriving, indicates that a good number of people were not able toattend; and many want further information. in short, while electronic commerce/electronic data interchange (ec/edi) may not sound that difficult, it has beenquite hard to execute and demonstrate adequately.for these reasons, we have numerous outreach efforts underway, includingthrough all the educational capabilities that we havešuniversities, defenseacquisition university, defense system management college (dsmc), otherinstitutionalized training and materials, and even an 800 number, forprocurement people and others. educational outreach is certainly very important,including activities like this conference. we try to support as many as we can.i currently spend all day answering the telephone, sending out anything frombits of information in response to specific requests, to an overall general view.we have fact sheets and we have full handbooks available to the public, eitherthrough our 1800edi3414 hotline or world wide web site.if you ask industry about the new system today, you hear a wide variety ofopinions. it is surprising that not more of them are negative, given the thousandsof transactions and processes that have been involved, and the pressure toestablish the system. we are hearing many success stories. lastelectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act10electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.week, we heard about 25 from the burlington area of washington state alone,from small businesses of 1 to 500 people, who through working with theprocurement technical assistance center (ptac) and electronic commerceresource centers (ecrc) have recouped their investment, documenting up to500 percent savings in basic business areas.most businesses today are computerequipped and ready to participate. infact, even six or more years ago, small businesses serving the air force hadstartlingly high computing power. these organizations are not bureaucraticallyencumbered in changing their legacy systems. they can move relatively swiftly.our valueadded networks facilitate the industry side of that ec/edi as well.we also work with the computer aided logistic system (cals) industrysteering group (isg), for prime contractors. we are very interested in theseorganizations' requirements for ec/edi, and in their requirements for theirsubcontractors and subtiers. a meeting today in los angeles is addressing thisissue, so that we can all work better as a team. at least within dod, 60 percentof our purchases are actually through large contractors, so this type of teamingwith contractors at all levelsšnot just with small businessesšis important.we are very proud of our development of the central contractorregistration (ccr). the pat, in its 60day study, did not specify this capability,but only recommended its use. our top contracting officers came up with ideasthat they felt would be particularly helpful to them in streamlining acquisition.ccr was one of them.dod form 129 is only one part of the transaction set 838. actually, we havealready replaced about three or four other forms with the 838 transaction.nevertheless, if you were doing business with 10 dod sites, you had to fill out10 dod forms 129 separately as well as submit them separately to those sites.moreover, this would have to be done annually, updating 10 separatecertifications and representations. i once worked in an office that collected suchinformation, and buyers were always in and out, trying to find out whether acontractor was registered.i can assure you that this arrangement has not changed today. it is a verypaperintensive process, extremely expensive for contractors to keep updated, anda tremendous problem if you want to do business with much more than one dodsite.ccr gives us the capability of registering once to capture the informationfor all potential dod and federal buyers. annual updating is also done just once.in addition, ccr is not just for those who are doing ec/edi; our intent is tocover all dod registration. it would certainly facilitate our work if contractorsregistered with ccr, even if they are not ec/edi compliant yet.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act11electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the federal acquisition regulations (far) do in fact state that a contractingofficer is not required to provide a solicitation to anyone who is not ccrregistered. however, such refusal is often not made, as i hope it never has to be.our primary concern is simply to get the ccr fully operational and populated.at least, after numerous challenges, it is now operational. we still do nothave some of the features that we want in online capability. for example, wewant to have world wide web capability to register in october 1996.this software was released just three weeks ago to our ecrcs. also, about18 months ago we began looking at every data repository across all federalagencies. after a year of analysis, we found 208,000 contractors doing businesswith dod and the federal agencies who have been active with us in the last twoyears.i sent letters to these contractors, informing them of the ccr, the outreachefforts, and ways to obtain more information, and asking them to register with theccr. we are now receiving 38,000 faxes and over 750 phone calls per week.some 18,000 have received information brochures and are queued for assistanceto register. the 18,000 who are queued are interested in ec/edi, as well asregistration.there are still other repositories that we are trying to add to the system. wewill be converting one air force system that has remained outside ourinfrastructurešthe government acquisition through electronic commerce(gatec) system at wrightpatterson air force base, which has 4,000 recordfilesšand it will be running on facnet within the next 45 days. again, theecrcs are helping us to populate the ccr with this information.ccr applications are also being considered in areas other than contracting.california and eight other states are very actively seeking to use this repositoryfor state procurements, and for sourcing of documents and other functions. theccr may well be used not only federally, but in other environments where itappears to be useful. the one critical issue is that the ccr's integrity bemaintained.the pat also briefly covered the issue of past performance, but offered norecommendations given its limited timeframe. in july of 1996, the undersecretary of defense for acquisition and technology, dr. kaminski, mandatedthat past performance be used in making acquisition procurements. i believe onsource selections of procurements it is in excess of $1 million. there is currentlyno one past performance system in dod. in the last two years, we have beenanalyzing the current seven contract writing systems to see what capabilities dodand the federal agencies have to assess past performance. the arthur d. littlecompany will be issuing a related business case study, to be delivered to us at theend of may 1996. we have a $1.6 million contract requirement toelectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act12electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prototype and demonstrate this report's recommended actions for the secretary ofdefense within the next 12 months. the area of contractor performance, then,represents potentially additional data elements for the ccr, or at least a datapool of some sort, so that we can better analyze and manage this parameter.another activity is pass, supported by the sba. pass was originally slatedto lose all of its funding last month, though it was subsequently funded for sometime. because of concerns about the disappearance of this process, the office offederal procurement policy asked our office to see if we could manage the passdata as well as the ccršand not only the pass data points, which representperhaps less than 10 percent of the quantity of information already in the ccr,but other pass functionality. we therefore have an ongoing analysis of this area.additionally, we have over 15 other ongoing projects and prototypes in allbusiness areas, such as contracting, logistics and transportation, that have beenactive for anywhere from 4 to 6 months. we will be adapting all types ofinstruments, including 18 different contractual instruments. we need a lot ofbusiness process reengineering.ultimately, our goal is to eliminate the paper process for our buyers,facilitating their development of smarter contracting instruments. the new systemshould allow them to process administrative details efficiently, permittingindustry and the contracting officer both to develop more innovative contractualinstruments, streamlining the current high volume of procurement. electroniccataloguing of goods and services, for example, is one new idea.my threeyear assignment is up in june 1997. by then we should have thesites operational, but we may not have the volume of transactions hoped forbecause of the difficulties. however, we continue to promote ec/ediaggressively, at least on the dod side, with the services and agencies. theelectronic commerce processing nodes that other speakers will report on todaymay in fact help allow us a success story.at the same time, we have the challenge of getting much greater registrationin the ccrš3,500 registrants is not very many. still, there is significant action inthese areas, and we may well accomplish much in the next 12 months incontracting alone.project results in the other functional areas are also exciting, particularlybecause, when different business areas begin sharing information, the synergyhas tremendous value. there are activities in financial transfer capability andengineering technical data. we just funded what we call "edi afloat." all navyships will have translators (a total of 330 translators, one for each ship), whichwill transmit requirements back and forth via satellite in the next 18 months,primarily for the procurement of goods and services. thiselectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act13electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should greatly reduce administrative lead time, and speed up the process for boththe navy and the industries involved.another area that is already online is within the defense commissaryagency. they have been up and online with ansi x12 for the last 12 monthsand have done some business process reengineering in eliminating the invoicingprocess. there are real opportunities to bypass transactions completely. aninteresting sideline to this case is that, while there was concern originally aboutindustry partners who did not use ansi x12, most were found to be moving tothis standardšin fact, today they are moving aggressively to the moreinternationally oriented un edifact standard.another large return on our investment for us within dod will be thematerial safety data sheets. a variety of information is available in this area.ongoing projects are looking at three different phases of material safety datasheets, in what is essentially a proofofconcept, prototype demonstration withinthe business areas of our interest. once these projects have been completelydemonstrated and briefed, through all services and agencies and the office of thesecretary of defense, requirements will be provided to the slidell ec node for aproofofconcept test on the infrastructure itself.5 if all goes well, the informationwill then be provided to appropriate sites for deployment. material data sheets donot relate to ec in any way. this document is just another business form beingtransmitted by ec/edi in a transaction set eliminating the paper document andproviding an opportunity to import data once in any system via ec/edi and useit multiple times without rekeying.in all these major activities underway, we work very closely with the d7section of the defense information systems agency, our counterpart within thedisa infrastructure who helps define functional users' requirements with thefunctional user and my office. i am an constituent of the office of the secretaryof defense, with the role of facilitating oversight and review of all functionalareas. i do have dollars for prototyping demonstration, as well as deployment, andcan obtain outyear funding for the requirements of the services and agenciesonce a package is put together for preparation.dr. michael mestrovich is the deputy director of d7 and his office worksvery actively with us in those areas, with the goal of providing a full package to asystems engineer, to be sized not only for today, but for the future requirementsof the capability.5 slidell, louisiana, is our third electronic commerce procuring node and will supportprototypes. the other two nodes are in columbus, ohio, and ogden, utah.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act14electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in short, this is where dod is going. we seem to have a good and forcefulplan. we now have, for the first time, a dod draft strategic plan on electroniccommerce, which is currently circulating within the department. a dod directivealso institutionalizes roles and responsibilities by office; there have been someproblems in this area over the last three years. those federal agencies who workwith us are certainly aware of the problems in trying to figure out who isresponsible and accountable for what. these issues are best defined amongourselves. in general, i do believe we are well on the road to success.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act15electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the electronic commerce experience in thenaval facilities engineering commandcommander ron grovernaval facilities engineering commandthe naval facilities engineering command (navfac) performs manyservices for the navy, including contracts for construction, environmentalservices, and public works services. when i arrived at navfac almost a yearago, my first job was to see that electronic commerce (ec) was implemented atall our contracting offices within one year. today, i will relate some of thebarriers we faced in implementing electronic commerce, in the hope that thisexperience is useful to others. i will also describe some new initiatives underway.barriers to implementationthe first barrier to implementation was the standard procurement system(sps). the goal of the sps is to standardize all the contract business practicesthroughout the department of defense (dod). all dod agencies are to use thesame procurement software, which is now in development. we were directed toavoid reinventing the wheelšwe were not to buy, develop, or expand ourautomation systems or the contracting process. at the time this freeze on buyingand development occurred, many of our offices were not adequately automated.however, it is impossible to implement ec when an office is not automated.the sps is now at the proposal review stage, and another amendmentrequiring the contractors to change and resubmit their proposals will be sent outsoon. if this amendment has a fast turnaround, the best result is likely to be a''flyoff'' award in august or september 1996. in such a flyoff, the software of twocompeting contractors will be tested at several locations, and then just one willfinally be selected. the chosen software will then be installed at all dodcontracting offices, over a fiveyear period. again, over the roughly sevenyearprocess, we are not to buy, expand, or develop any software. since most of ouroffices did not have any procurement software, this freeze forestalled our ecimplementation.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act16electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a second barrier to implementation was a navyinitiated moratorium on anynew certifications for the federal acquisition computer network, known asfacnet. only one of navfac's sites had achieved interim certification beforethe moratorium was enacted at the end of august 1995. four other sites did buyand demonstrate automation capabilities. they are ready to operate as soon as thenavy moratorium is lifted.the navy established the moratorium because some problems were observedin this electronic commerce infrastructure that the defense information systemsagency (disa) was establishing. in particular, information was lost in thesystem; for example, some solicitations did not reach potential trading partners.navfac itself has not experienced many problems with its one facnet site,but some of our navy counterparts want disa to continue to improve, and theywanted to send a message to higher levels indicating that. another problem withfacnet brings to mind one of the dilbert cartoon strips. in it, dilbert defines"total quality management" as "a complex process whereby you transfer yourfunds to consultants." agencies and contractors are really fearful about theultimate costs of facnet. many feel they will simply be transferring theirmoney to valueadded networks (vans) or disa. currently, there is no charge togovernment agencies for the facnet infrastructure, but they are concerned thatdisa will have to recoup its costs in the future through fees. many agencies aretherefore reluctant to commit themselves to facnet. moreover, since fewagencies or contracting activities are now using facnet, contractors obtainlittle benefit by paying a van to use the facnet.overcoming barriers to implementationto proceed with implementation of electronic commerce, the first step wasobtaining a waiver from the sps. the waiver was approved because we were ableto provide an economic analysis which showed that all of the costs of a particularsoftware would be recouped well before the sps arrives. we evaluated relevantofftheshelf software and found that, while no one software package would beperfect for a government agency, some of the available software is adequate forthe job.another major step was ensuring that all the needed interfaces would beestablished among our navfac automation systems, such as our financialsystem. it is not easy to get our different commands and departments to agree onhow they will communicate, or to establish standard business practices. yet thisis one of the critical considerations in identifying an automation system: makingsure it will work with the different processes involved.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act17electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.navfac initiativescurrently, navfac is installing some of the chosen offtheshelf softwareat a few sites. first, this effort will automate our contract processes, improvingthe quality of our products and increasing our productivity. second, it will enableus to implement ec when the facnet moratorium is lifted.we are also helping the navy design an internet site, as an alternativeapproach to advertising contract jobs. the navy is developing a home page wherecontract jobs will be listed, along with brief descriptions. hyperlinks will allowreaders to click on the name of a job to get a complete job synopsis. the site willalso have builtin search features.dod is linking all its acquisition home pages into one system, theacquisition reform net. once developed, it will be accessible via searchfunctions. our navfac contract home page should be ready by november1996.another dod success in electronic commerce also illustrates the incrediblepotential of computers. the labor specialists in the military services convincedthe department of labor (dol) to provide current wage determinations via theinternet. the service contract act and davisbacon act require every serviceand construction contract to have a dol wage determination. these wagedeterminations establish the minimum wage a contractor can pay in every countyof the united states, for every type of work, such as carpenter, electrician, andjanitor. previously, all wage determination requests had to be mailed into dol.dol would then process them and send the paperwork back, which generallytook one to three months. now dol maintains a database that can be accessedvia the internet on wages for all areas and types of work. the army is developing ahome page with search features that accesses this database. any militaryorganization will be able to go through this army home page and immediatelydownload the needed wage determination for their area and by type of service.this system has not been fully implemented. some personnel training andrefining of the home pages are still required. once in operation, it will be atremendous boost to the government contracting business. essentially, acontracting officer will be able to get a wage determination in ten minutes or lessusing the internet, as opposed to the current one to three months.there are other possibilities for using the internet for acquisition that we arejust beginning to explore. recently someone suggested that the internet might beused to give notice of likely future work that is not yet advertised.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act18electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.obviously, such notice would be of great help to the contracting community in itsplanning, although there are still legal issues and other factors to consider.navfac is also working with the army corps of engineers on theelectronic bid set project. two of the first three contracts to be advertised on anarmy home page will be navfac projects. a contractor will be able todownload all or part of the plans and specifications for these solicitations via theinternet, instead of ordering a set of specifications through the mail.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act19electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commerce at the general servicesadministrationg. doyle dodgegeneral services administrationin the electronic commerce (ec) program at the general servicesadministration (gsa), we continually look across and coordinate with the majorfederal agencies, including interagency activities, seeking a consensus forprocessing and disseminating all the information needed for electronic commerceinitiatives. in federal procurement activities, a great deal of information must bemade available as easily and inexpensively as possible to about 500,000 people ingovernment and industry all over the world. designing an ec system and networkfor the paperless procurement of federal goods and services is a considerablechallenge. we designed the entire concept first, then established interagencygroups and started developing and implementing modules in manageable units.two and onehalf years ago, the interagency federal electronic commerceacquisition program management office was formed. they began working onthe optimal architecture and implementation conventions to route the relevantinformation among the people who use it, from the federal agencies to privatesector vendors and back. they created facnet, and decided to use electronicdata interchange (edi) transaction sets to disseminate information betweendissimilar computer systems.during this same time, the internet became commercialized, making its useeasily and widely available. also arriving on the scene was important,interoperable new technology software, allowing computer operating systemindependence for macintosh computers, personal computers, and unixcomputers, and independent of any specific application software. in other words,when using this new software, the authors and the users of information can be oneither the same or different types of computers, as in macintosh to macintosh,personal computer to macintosh, and unix to personal computer exchanges,using either the same or different application software. after authoring thedesired text and graphics in a computer, the information can be transmittedelectronically, with or without edi transaction sets, and the user can see, store,and print the text and graphics information exactly as it was authored.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act20electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this capability is significant for those using text, forms, and graphics, and inthe architectengineering, construction, and other industries. all the architecturaldrawings, floor plans, and other information produced on computers today can besimply and easily processed by the author through this new technology software.the processed information can then be disseminated electronically on cdrom,floppy disks, email, or the internet. users at the receiving end, applying the freereader software supplied by the software manufacturer, can see, store, and printthe information as an exact copy.with these new technologies and advanced telecommunications methods,and making use of the talent we have in many different agencies, we are able toput together a better program for faster, less expensive, and more accurate federalprocurement using a paperless method. in today's world of diminished budgets,interagency cooperation is easier to establish. many agencies are providingworking group help from the users and the technicians. how do the users want tosee and use the information? how do the contractors want to see and use it? thelawyers? and so forth. the technical support staff from the participating agencieslisten to the opinions, consider the options, and reach a consensus on how onesystem should operate across the government, to present a "single face" to theusers.gsa brings that consensus into being by coordinating interagency activities.gsa and the other major procuring agencies have many conceptual, userunderstanding, technical, and computer equipment resources and operatingmethods that all agencies and vendors need and can share. we believe that theseresources and methods will find their way through the marketplace to the users inthe best manner. the information can be provided either directly through theinternet and cdrom disk, or by downloading the information from theinternet, putting it into edi transaction sets, and sending it via facnet.there is a place for both internet and facnet approaches in providing theinformation to the users. we happen to feel that the internet transmission is muchsimpler, easier to use, and less expensive, but the marketplace should be allowedto determine what approach to use. federal contracting officers will decide whichapproach they want to use and private sector contractors will also. between thesetwo users, the decision should become apparent over a short period of time, andthe parties will soon migrate to it.fortunately, it is not necessary to develop standards for this program. when ausers' consensus is reached, it does not take us long to get it designed, developed,and put in place. when using consensus rather than standards, we are able towork with each other and move quickly to reach the goal of how to provide theinformation.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act21electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a number of the government's procurement documentsšpolicies,regulations, procurement letters, and so forthšare now on the internet, and thefederal acquisition regulation (far) and the federal travel regulation (ftr)are on cdrom as well. internet documents include the far, ftr, the defensefederal acquisition regulation supplement (dfars), the air force federalacquisition regulation supplement (affars), the nasa far supplement, andthe department of energy acquisition regulation (dear).major federal procurement agencies are striving to use the internet toprovide notices of business opportunities, including forecasts of requirements,synopses, solicitations, and contract awards for subcontracting activities. nasa'sapproach of using the internet for displaying business opportunities is beingfollowed by other agencies, and there is some consensus that nasa's approachworks well.wage determinations and the debarred bidders list are very widely used byfederal contracting officers and by prime contractors. gsa wants to be sure thatthis information can be easily accessed through a single face approach, with asimilar format used by all government agencies, one that does not requireformatting or translation changes after transmission. users rely on a variety ofapplication software programs, such as wordperfect 5.1 and 6. 1, microsoft wordin various versions, quark xpress, and pagemaker. some users need to sendgraphics, tables, or forms electronically. all this information needs to reach itsdestination efficiently, accurately, and in a readable format.the interagency shared databases steering committee agreed to leave theregulation formats "as authored," and if the far council wants to change theformat later, that will be their responsibility. the regulations will be available injust two formats: in hyper text markup language (html), which is an asciiformat; and in acrobat pdf (portable document format), which is exactly asauthored, and independent of the operating system and application software. thispdf format is exceptionally good for those who want to transmit graphics orforms electronically, and want to view, store, and print them on varying computerplatforms.gsa's main goal is to have all the required federal procurement informationaccessible on the internet and cdrom, so that it can be obtained quickly andaccurately. it is easy to take the original material, process it through html andpdf software programs, and distribute the resulting files electronically. theprogram concept and plan have been initiated in parts at several agencies, butimplementation is far from complete. the far, archived back to far 90œ34, isavailable on the internet at http://www.gsa.gov/far/, in both html and acrobatpdf formats, and the far forms are being placed on the internet as quickly aspossible in pdf.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act22electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.each agency will migrate to handling their far supplements the same wayas the far and load them on the server of their choice. an agency can use itsown server, or gsa could probably handle it at a cost much lower than theagency purchasing a server and software, and hiring a web master. currently,there are hyperlinks from the far world wide web site to many other websites, including the nasa far supplement, the dfars, affars, dear, andothers. more hyperlinks will be added as soon as additional federal procurementinformation is loaded.these developments and trends in electronic commerce will yieldtremendous benefits for both public and private sectors. information should bedistributed more accurately and expeditiously. some users receive far changesin the printed version up to four months after the changes are published in thefederal register. with the internet, far changes could be available within a fewdays after publication. moreover, users will not have to reach for differentdocuments and manuals, both old and new, to find the information they needšitwill all be available electronically.all government agencies should be able to present a "single face" format toall users, and users, conversely, should be able to access all the agencies'information they need from the internet and cdrom. valueadded networks(vans) will have access to this information, and their customers' jobs will bethat much easier and less expensive. for these and many more reasons, the systemshould improve the return on investment for everyone.one of the most important parts of implementing ec is involvement of thesystem users. this approach incorporates good feedback mechanisms and can bemodified as needed through user experience. gsa and other agencies work withthe private sector, and particularly with the vans and the training people, toanswer their questions and to meet their needs by system refinement.as i mentioned before, gsa works by consensus. we try not to setstandards, nor to initiate longterm projects, or involve dozens of people indecision making because it slows the process. instead, we identify the 6 to 10people from various agencies who are most knowledgeable about an issue andseek their advice and input. then we all work together to make it happen.the agencies have shown increasing willingness to share their information,and their solutions. for example, the software package that gsa chose to convertwordperfect 6.1 to html resulted in the environmental protection agencybeing able to eliminate a lot of time and contractor expense on conversion. thedesign and development of loading procurement synopses on the internet, by thenational aeronautics and space administration, national institutes of health,and other agencies, are refining this important part of federal procurement. thiscooperative approach helps greatly.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act23electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.one of our goals is to eliminate the paper documents sent out. the soonerthe agencies and vendors start retrieving all their information electronically, thesooner we will be able to stop printing. everyone will benefit in this regard fromec.another high priority is developing a good search engine on the farserver, one that will index the far and all databases on other servers with relatedinformation. for example, a phrase could be sought in the far, in the nasafar supplements, and in the dear, all at the same time. today's search enginesare sophisticated, listing instances where a phrase occurs and where relatedmaterial is as well (even where the selected phrase does not appear). any listedinstance can then be immediately accessed as desired in the full document.in summary, i want to state again that the gsa goal of providing all theinformation required for complete electronic federal contracting has beenaccepted by the major procurement agencies, and the initial functions are nowprovided through the internet. the broader implementation, refinement,improvement, and addition of related modules can be put in place over the nextseveral months and the remaining agencies can climb on board for completepaperless contracting. this concept encompasses the following tasks: author the formats of the information packages. convert each authored document into html (for ascii) and intoacrobat pdf (for as authored) formats. convert all graphics, engineering drawings, forms, tables, and so forth toacrobat pdf for electronic transmission. load the html and acrobat pdf files onto an internet server. develop hyperlink pointers between each major federal procurementdocument or file on all the agencies' internet servers. establish interagency steering committees, made up of six to ten of themajor procurement agencies, to establish a consensus direction on eachtopic and to provide a member to each users' working group andtechnical working group. provide the federal procurement information directly via the internet, ordownload it for use via edi transmission over facnet. transmit the information each quarter (or some other established timeframe) to the government printing office to be placed on cdromdisks. make the federal procurement information available, as describedabove, for the 500,000 people in the public and private sectors.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act24electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. eliminate the printing and disseminating of paper copies of all federalprocurement information as soon as reasonably possible. implement a powerful search engine on the far server that will indexeach operative word in each file of federal procurement information onthe dispersed servers throughout the government. with this capability,users will be able to find the location of similar information wherever itis. make available the business opportunities, including forecasts,synopses, and solicitations of government requirements, and the awardof government contracts for subcontracting opportunities.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act25electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. army corps of engineers federal electroniccommerce program and electronic bid set testprojectdan troyan, justin taylor, and ronson kungu.s. army corps of engineersthe federal acquisition streamlining act (fasa) of 1994, with theelectronic commerce it specifiesšincluding the federal acquisition computernetwork (facnet)šbrings changes and new advantages to the acquisitionprocess, in particular for the area of interest here today, engineering andconstruction contracting.the u.s. army corps of engineers is pursuing several new options incontracting. of the corps' 50 automated contracting offices, 90 percent (45) nowhave interim facnet certification, giving them a smallpurchase threshold of$100,000. this is significant because 90 percent of all annual corps' purchasetransactions are for less than $100,000, and the electronic commerce method canreadily accomplish these acquisitions.the $100,000 ceiling, however, does not lend itself specifically toengineering and construction contracts, which usually start at about $300,000 andgo up. the corps of engineers is considering how to fit in small engineering andconstruction procurements, when such acquisitions can provide an advantage toproject management, and enhance customer service and support. prospects forthis kind of electronic commerce include quick procurement of lastminute lowcost items needed for a construction project or for building maintenance andrepairs.in the world of engineering and construction services today, if you fail todeliver within budget and on time, you are not doing a good job. besides savingtime and money directly, electronic commerce also eliminates the business ofstockpiling and ordering for future work needs. electronic commerce makes itpossible to order something that you might need, but that you did not anticipate inthe original project management plan, and still receive it justintime. electroniccommerce thus provides an even greater edge in delivering within budget and ontimešor ahead of time.currently, in the early and developmental phase of facnet use, it isdifficult to communicate on that network. consequently, better electronic successcan be realized if only basic requests for quotes and award traffic iselectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act26electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exchanged. offline from facnet, between the time of the buyer's request andmaking the award to the vendor, related information and specifications may beexchanged for the transaction using facsimile or cdrom. this hybrid electroniccommerce process saves time, money, and effort.in addition to adopting the federal and department of defense electroniccommerce program with its facnet system, the army corps of engineers isconducting a test project of electronic bid sets over the internet for advertising ofconstruction contracts. it is expected that, eventually, this corps project will leadto a totally paperless engineering and construction design process. in themeantime, the electronic bid set process itself shows great promise for electronicadvertising by by saving costs, time, and other resources over current papermethods, and should greatly boost productivity and efficiency. by takingadvantage of today's technology, including use of cdrom, the cost of printingcontract documents can be borne by the location creating the demandšwhetherthe designer, reviewer, contracting office, contractor, or supplier.the electronic bid set projectoriginally, several army corps of engineers groups began their owninitiatives in providing electronic bid packages, that is, in putting their documentsfor construction contracts into an electronic medium to deliver to the contractor.in delivering specifications and contract forms and clauses through an electronicmedium, these corps groups substantially cut their printing and mailing costs.the corps' chief of engineers endorsed those initiatives, and chargedheadquarters staff with developing a corpswide approach for consistency of theelectronic bid packages. while the corps encompasses an extensive network of40 or so districts, and handles all types of information and initiatives, it did notwant 40 different ways of doing business to confront the contractor. theheadquarters office of the army corps of engineers was charged with finding away to do it corporately and smartly.at the same time, the triservice cadd/gis technology center wasworking on a prototype to deliver contract documents or engineering documentsto the contractor. the triservice cadd/gis technology center is a laboratorythat supports joint armynavyair force work on computeraided design anddrafting (cadd) and geographic information systems (gis) initiatives. thecenter is located in vicksburg, mississippi.initially in our corpswide project, we involved all the interested parties in aworking group. the working group met in mobile, alabama, early in 1995electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act27electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and identified the members of this committee, representing a number of corpsprogram areas: military programs directorate; information managementdirectorate; laboratory at waterways experiment station; civil works; andmilitary programs construction. the corps districts involved are fort worth,mobile, omaha, and sacramento. also included, because of the triserviceeffort, are air force and navy representatives.one of the working group's first steps was to define an electronic bid set.the complete development of electronic commerce was not our task. rather, itwas to come up with a deliverable to a contractor to reduce corps effort. wetherefore defined an electronic bid set as the contract forms, the clauses andconditions of that contract, and related drawings and technical specifications.originally, then, the project goal was simply to convert these contract biddocuments from print media to an electronic format.there are a number of good reasons to make this conversion. technologyand electronic imaging can be more fully exploited, because these documents areelectronically prepared right now. cadd programs are already used to createdrawings, and wordprocessing and other text applications are used to prepare themanuscript. currently, however, these electronic documentsšfor solicitations,bids, and construction contractsšare converted to print for delivery to thecontractor. this final timeconsuming step could be eliminated.construction and contracting projects would be more efficient, providingmore lead time, for example, so that better products could be obtained at lowerprice, and mitigating bid and contractual protests because the informationdelivered would be identical to the information we have. this helps to assure afair and competitive environment.additionally, the use of electronic data could be optimized through theproject's life cycle. once data were captured electronically for the solicitationprocess, they could be readily transferred to other documents. one electronic filecould be used to retain both preaward and postaward data. these capabilitieswould make the old manual filing systems unnecessary. if one central locationwere used to index all the documentation for a project, storage and archivingcould be reduced as well. this approach is compliant with our mandatedelectronic commerce initiative.for implementation of the electronic bid sets, we identified five pilot sites.we specified the use of commercial, offtheshelf, conversion/reader software, sothat a contractor can easily view the corps documents, prepare solicitations, andsend that information back. our objective was to develop a system that wassimple and user friendly.the first project, advertised on april 29, 1996, will involve the fort worthand los angeles corps districts, in the construction of a dormitory at edwardselectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act28electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.air force base. the fort worth district is responsible for lifecycle management,design, and official solicitation for the project. the los angeles district iscovering the bid opening, award, and contract administration. bids will be openon may 29.in our current process, solicitations are announced through the commercebusiness daily (cbd). we will continue to use this approach, but will also makeuse of our electronic network. all corps districts are now electronicallyconnected to one another internally and to the internet. they can publish webpages and be accessed through the internet. for this reason, we also have anannouncement on the internet (the same solicitation seen in the cbd).previously, a contractor would visit or phone to request plans andspecifications. this can still be done, but using the internet, the contractor cannow request the plans and specifications without leaving home. we will alsodistribute plans and specifications on cdrom.the electronic bid sets permit transferring many electronic file formats to acommon one. we chose adobe pdf for the text engine, and we are usingcomputer aided logistic system (cals) format, which is a department ofdefense standard for the raster images of drawings.the cdrom distributed in our first project will contain the entire projectšall the plans, specifications, and contract documents, including 250 drawings.instead of costing $16 per set to mail, it will cost 85 percents, which is a hugesavings in mailing costs alone. the technology yields a 75 percent savings inproject printing and advertising costs.the procurement process will not be changed from the current approach.bids will be submitted in paper form. bid openings and awards will be made asbefore. however, we are looking at the engineering aspects of electroniccommerce for these functions as well.the estimated price range for the first joint project is $10 to $25 million. wechose a large project, because a survey of contractors and contracting agents inthe western area found that 80 to 90 percent of them could utilize cdromtechnology.we will evaluate the pilot projects against success factors. procedures willbe modified as required and results will be analyzed to provide guidance andeducation so that subsequent projects reflect what we have learned. the triservice cadd/gis center will provide technical assistance, monitor pilotprojects, and make recommendations about the process and standards.the results of the process will provide implementation guidance for all thecorps districts in implementing electronic bid sets. we will start with a singleproject in every district, probably beginning next year. as districts progress, theywill take on additional projects.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act29electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commerce at nasa: procurement onthe internetken stepkanational aeronautics and space administrationthe national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) is using theinternet for procurement of a wide variety of goods and services, includingarchitect/engineer and construction contracts. i will describe the nasaacquisition internet service, also known as nais (http://procurement.nasa.gov/ )and the federal acquisition jumpstation (http://procure.msfc.nasa.gov/fedproc/home.html ).nasa is changing dramatically in the way we do business. the nasabudget for fiscal year 1997 is roughly $13 billion; approximately 90 percent ofthat budget is spent as procurement dollars. while nasa will likely facechallenging budgets over the next several years, substantial portions of thesebudgets will still be spent for procurement of goods and services. our internetservice allows us to publicize business opportunities to a broad vendor audienceefficiently and economically.one of nasa's challenges is encouraging our centers to communicate as asingle face to industry. this single face concept is a keystone of the federalelectronic commerce (ec) initiative, and includes primary elements: single means of supplier registration standard transaction formats a network for delivering standardized transactions standard government databases allowing agencies to share information.together, these elements allow vendors and agencies to conduct business ina uniform, costeffective manner.i should mention that nasa is not currently promoting an electronic datainterchange (edi) presence. edi and other ec technologies are being looked atunder an agencywide business process reengineering initiative. although thesingle face concept can certainly simplify and standardize the process ofconducting business with the federal government, the facnet approach ischallenging to agencies and businesses. facnet is not inexpensive to use. someof those costs are financial; others take the form of sweat equity, inelectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act30electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.terms of specialized training, hardware/software configuration challenges, valueadded networks, and building new business relationships based on these newbusiness standards. some facnet features require quite a bit of training tooperate effectively.at nasa, we are concerned about the customers at both ends of ourbusiness transaction. in the president's memorandum on electronic commerce, (58federal register 58095, october 28, 1993), a significant goal is to expand theopportunities for businesses, especially small businesses. for a small business touse facnet and become proficient, it has to make an investment of time,resources, and money. if there is not enough payback from that investment, thebusinesses are not going to pursue facnet until the business case to participatebecomes more favorable. that may explain why the initial surge of participationand transactions has not materialized. it may over time.since the federal government's electronic commerce initiative began in thefall of 1993, much has changed in computer technology and capabilities. in thefall of 1993, netscape did not exist. today, netscape is competing head to headwith microsoft for internet browser supremacy. the internet was available, butbrowser technology and the enhanced plugin applications on today's browserswere on the drawing board somewherešcertainly not available for routine,productive use.we see electronic commerce as a tool set. there is such a range ofprocurement types, from micro to small purchases, to major procurements, that noone tool today can handle them all. for example, some procurement initiatives,such as online catalogs, are satisfying the same transactions that edi goes after.many of the procurements that appeared very suitable for edi transactions threeyears ago can now be carried out with significantly less effort by using impaccards, the government's credit card equivalentšthe buyer simply calls upsuppliers, such as compusa or staples, and places an order; and it is deliveredthe next day, with the delivery scanned in at the customer's desktop by thedelivery service, such as united parcel service or federal express. little trainingis required to use the impac card. these quick success initiatives have becomevery popular with federal agencies.if we continue to promote one system for all types of procurements, we willlose valuable time and endanger our credibility with our vendor community. ourjob as procurement officers is to complete the procurements for the user. we aregoing to use the tool that works best at the time. we do not want to invest allresources into one tool or electronic commerce system.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act31electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nasa acquisition internet service (nais)nasa delivers acquisition documents over the internet to slash lead timesand paperwork, and to save money. nasa's internet service, nais, providesimmediate access to all nasa synopses and competitive acquisitions over$25,000. nasa is the first federal agency to use this type of procurement systemagencywide.although nasa has 10 centers, most small companies probably do businessin a certain geographical area. in the past, a business on the west coast wouldprobably focus on the dryden flight research center or the ames researchcenter. nais now allows a business to access any nasa procurements from adesktop computer.why a world wide web service? because it is a commercial marketplace.internet technology is exploding, including the tools to use the internet. the toolsthat have emerged in the last few years are what has brought the internet to theforefront. the browsers were first, and now there are the plugins that work withthe browsers. these tools make the internet more functional and accessible.often when people think of nasa, they think of leading edge technologies.we are not inventing internet tools at nasa, but rather using commercialinternet standards, such as html, to develop our procurement processes. in thenasa office of procurement, our strategy is, ''follow industry's leadštwo stepsbehind.'' we want to try technologies, but we do not want to buy intotechnologies that will change overnight, or perhaps six months from now. thereis no incentive for us to be the first to use a new technology. we listen tocustomer and user feedback on both sides of the procurement transaction. ourservice provides customer feedback forms, where vendors can suggest what theylike and don't likešand they respond. we test what is available, and let themarket lead us. as the market determines the best technology or best standard,then we move in that direction.one of the more important features of our approach is that it is platformindependentšcan work within any computer environment, such as windowsbased personal computers or apple macintosh computers. customers and nasausers are often parochial about their computer hardware. moving to a singleplatform within nasa is not realistic. the fact that world wide web internetaccess is independent of computer hardware at our end, and also independent forthe user at the other end of the business transaction, is beneficial as these newtechnologies emerge in the business environment.our approach also allows a business to access information on nasaprocurements from anywhere in the world, from home or office. if you want toelectronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act32electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.know the latest nasa procurement information, you can logon through aninternet provider, or through any commercial online provider, such as americaonline or prodigy.our strategy also minimizes entry barriers for small businesses. i previouslymentioned the investment in training, the investment in software, and theinvestment in valueadded networks that are all needed to use an edibasedsystem. if a business has highvolume transactions, then an edibased system hasa place. however, in the architectengineer and construction businesses, howmany procurements are available in a given year for all government? nothundreds and thousands, but handfuls. so a highly automated environment maynot be needed to access the required procurement information.benefits of naisnasa is significantly reducing procurement lead times and saving money.in the past, publishing a solicitationšwith all the reproduction and assembly andmailingšcost about $15 per package. after mailing 400 copies of thesolicitations, nasa might only receive three or four responses. today, if avendor wants to search nasa synopses, he can point to the search button, whichleads to a synopsis search page. by scrolling down, the vendor can choose thenasa centers for which a search is desired. after choosing a specific nasacenter to search, the vendor can go to a classification code, which mirrors thecodes in the commerce business daily. these include architect and engineeringservices. the file can be searched by date. a vendor can also add key words forthe search. in a few moments, depending on modem speed, the results appear.the search engine is based on shareware.the search results appear as an abstract of hot links to information on theprocurements of interest at the specific center identified. since the links are hot, avendor can select an item of interest and pull up the synopsis. if it piques herinterest, any available solicitation documents can simply be downloaded to acomputer's hard drive. another nice feature is that, for the user's response to thesolicitation, these documents can be cut and pasted because they are wordprocessed documents. if the vendor's email application is associated with hisbrowser, and the synopsis sparks his interest, he can email the contractingofficer with any questions directly via the synopsis. within a day or so, aresponse should appear. if a vendor is on a deadline to respond to a bid, itcertainly helps to get the right information. and there is an electronic record aswell. the solicitation documents, when issued, can be found by simply scrollingdown the synopsis.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act33electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.other agencies are looking at nais as a business model. eventually, theinteraction of agencies providing this information on the internet should lead to asearch capability that covers not just nasa procurements, but all procurementsof a given type across the agencies. by whatever means greater competitioncomes about, it means better products and services and lower prices forgovernment.what to watch for in the coming months? this arena changes so quickly thatwe no longer talk in terms of years. nasa has an online feedback form thatallows users to key in their opinions about the system. we are using theseopinions as a key to system improvements.nasa will soon roll out automatic email notification, which offers greatpotential. this capability is now working in pilot form, and we hope to have itfully operational during fiscal year 1997. by filling out an online form with anemail address, a user will be able to identify the procurements and nasacenters for which more information is desired. the service then sends an emailnotification when those procurements are posted on the internet. thus, a businesswill not have to come to nasa, nasa will go to the business with procurementopportunities. once again, our goal is to lower the entry barrier and associatedcosts for reaching and responding to our procurements.for proposals, nais currently requires a business to send back a paperdocument. we are working on an electronic proposal pilot that should beavailable in the near future when the interest and technology permits. nasa willestablish a secured server so that we can ensure the security of proposals whenthey are submitted.at the present time, nais does not qualify for facnet certification. weare working with the office of federal procurement policy and with congress toexpand the definition of what types of electronic commerce qualify for facnetcertification.in searching for architect and engineering construction contracts, nasa hasa page that anyone can access from a desktop personal computer via the internet(http://procurement.nasa.gov). this page is a link to all of nasa's businessopportunities by field installation.these new nasa electronic commerce capabilities were developed without aspecific budget, often by staff in their spare time. the staff saw the need and theopportunities presented by the tools available. a tribute is owed to those in thetrenches who worked together to develop the system, standardize it agencywide,and make it available to the business community.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act34electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the federal acquisition jumpstationthe federal acquisition jumpstation, an internet site (http://procure.msfc.nasa.gov/fedproc/home.html ), provides hot links to all federalprocurement information on the internet. from this site, a vendor can link todepartments and agencies throughout government, to retrieve acquisitionforecasts, announcements, solicitations, how to guides, small business assistanceinformation, and federal acquisition regulations. nasa maintains this site, and ithas grown rapidly.the jumpstation is updated frequently. this is an internet address that avendor would certainly want to bookmark and check frequently. through thejumpstation, all the agencies listed can be accessed, including the nasa centers.for example, if you access the air force through the jumpstation, you will findthat their business opportunities search capabilities closely resemble nasa's.one of our goals in working with other agencies is to link these opportunitiesclosely so that when the user searches for architect and engineering orconstruction contracts, for example, the search can be carried out across theparticipating agencies. several interagency working groups are active indevelopment, and we are always looking for more participants with new ideas.from the jumpstation, the user can also access and, in some cases, searchthe far and applicable agency supplements. the jumpstation also links tocommercial resources providing information similar to nasa's. enter those sitesat your own risk. some are very good actually, and most are still free, so if youhave the access, go ahead and take a look at them.please access nasa's sites often. if there are ways to improve them, pleaselet us know.electronic commerce: implementing the federal acquisitionstreamlining act35electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commerce resource centers andvalueadded networksbosquet n. wev, jr.fairfax electronic commerce resource center (ecrc)the main subjects i will address are the electronic commerce resourcecenters (ecrcs) and valueadded networks (vans).the ecrc program is intended to meet the critical need for assisting smallto medium businesses and small government offices in introducing electroniccommerce practices and principles into their business. in short, the mission of theecrc network is simply to help businesses and government offices move intoelectronic commerce. the ecrc network has 11 centers around the country,6sponsored and managed currently by the advanced research projects agency(arpa), and as of october 1996, by the defense logistics agency (dla), andfunded by the department of defense (dod). one of the requirements for theestablishment of an ecrc is to be associated with an institution of higherlearning. our center, the fairfax ecrc, was established in 1993 in associationwith dimensions international (the prime contractor and an 8a firm), georgemason university (gmu), and iris, limited liability company. our ecrcoperates as a seamless (or a "virtual") organization and currently have severaldoctoral students from gmu who work for us fulltime. they operate our lab, anddo most of our enterprise integration and process change work. our contract hasbeen extended to 2002.each ecrc has a contractually defined area of core functions andtechnology expertise. the fairfax ecrc area of expertise is informationtechnology. my company, iris, is the third party in our center, and we are theexperts in cals. cals stands for continuous acquisition and lifecyclesupport. the concept originated in dod in 1985, to take a weapons system andoperate it from birth to deathšfrom design, to manufacture, to implementation,to operation, to repair parts, to phaseoutšusing applied technology. we think ofcals more generically, as a way to do business.6 scranton and johnstown, pennsylvania; cleveland and dayton, ohio; fairfax,virginia; atlanta, georgia; palestine, san antonio, and orange, texas; bremerton,washington; and oakland, california.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks36electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the fairfax ecrc mission is to work with the small to mediumsizedenterprises and government offices in the electronic commerce area, to help themdo business as trading partners through the application of methods andinformation technologies that enable process improvements. we do a lot of workfor dod, but we are starting to work with other federal agencies as well.first, the ecrc provides consultation and training to the enterprises andgovernment offices. second, we develop strategies for business processimprovements; and third, we recommend and help implement enablingtechnologies.that order is very important. we have seen and consulted with companieswho have gone out with great pride, bought 10 personal computers, and installedand networked them all, so that they can very nicely do bad things quicker. wehave to uninstall all of that and look at their business process. it must be changedto do what they want.most of you have heard of the "as is" and the "tobe" ("as is'' being the way abusiness process works today, and "tobe" the way it should work to takeadvantage of today's technology). we apply these concepts all the time, and itworks. we look at a company and determine the "as is,'' and only then do we helpthe company determine the "to be." once the company is reorganized, then weassist in installing the technology to suit.we have an intensive training and education program, and conductnumerous courses both onand offsite. we also provide technical support.our outreach activities include trade shows, expositions, conferences, andseminars. the 25 people of the fairfax center are all involved in outreach. we useoutreach activities to find the companies requiring assistance.consultation and technical support is provided as a followon service. weanswer many questions by phone, and when necessary, go to the offices of acompany or government agency and work with them at no charge for up to 40hours. much work can be accomplished in 40 hours. beyond those hours, theecrcs are permitted to negotiate feeforservice arrangements.subjects we often address are legacy data management and legacymanagement conversion. every time someone writes a check, a piece of legacydata is created. legacy data fill offices, file cabinets, computers, storerooms,boxes, and so on. we teach people how to manage such data in adapting to theworld of electronic commerce.the ecrc network is a cooperative rather than a competitive network. theecrcs regularly call one another for helpšscanning and conversion help,automated design help, help in whatever the problem area happens to be. a teamfrom another ecrc may come in to help find the solution.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks37electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.once we find a company or agency who is interested in our services, wecomplete an initial assessment with them. then there are a number of furthersteps in our strategy to work with a company: initial team agreement with the client "tiger team" formation (such a team is composed of selected personnelfrom the client and the ecrc, with the team leader always from theclient) planning, highlevel and business case analysis final agreement with the client detailed analysis implementation planning implementation.we feel that an 80 percent solution today is better than a 100 percentsolution some day, and much better than no solution at all.many people, including those in government offices, are afraid to setupelectronic commerce for fear they will look foolish. our suggestion is, let's all doit together.even those in remote locations, such as fort ritchie in northern maryland,have now had vendor conferences, and they are excited about getting involved,even though they began with little knowledge about electronic data interchange(edi).what are the three most important things in real estate? location, location,location. the three biggest problems we have today in electronic commerce areculture, culture, culture. the principal reason people fail to become involved isthat they refuse to stop doing what they have been doing for the last 25 years.automating a business is rarely a technology issue, but almost always a culturalissue.some businesses would not, in fact, benefit from our technologicalimprovements, and we help identify these cases as well. if there is not a businesscase that points to automation, we do not recommend it.there has been much discussion about the costs of the defense informationsystems agency (disa) infrastructure and the difficulty of implementation. butthere are no rose gardens in this field. it is hard. the disa infrastructure (thefederal acquisition computer network, facnet) has had vigorous growingpains. however, the system is getting better by the day, because responsiblepeople recognized the problems and are working extremely hard to resolve them.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks38electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what challenges must be overcome for businesses to work with governmentvia edi? again, culture is the biggest problem. companies and governmentagencies must also demonstrate both management and financial commitment.managing legacy data is another major challenge. how many office files must beconverted to digital information?standards, such as ansi [american national standards institute] x12 andun edifact [united nations rules for electronic data interchange foradministration, commerce and transport] are still another issue. when you pickup the telephone, are you surprised by the dial tone? of course not. it is astandard around the world. the standards are in place. ansi x12 is the standardfor edi.the sharing of information is important. today the power is neither in thesword nor the pen, but in information, more specifically, information retrieval andthe sharing of information. business process and organizational structure are veryimportant as well.at the ecrc, we can only achieve our mission if we can demonstratemeasurable success in our client organizations. we work often with smallmanufacturing firms, primarily in southwest virginia and in north carolina, andhelp them change their processes. about 85 percent of those firms will let usanalyze their profits and loss statements. we may review these accountsmonthly, to help the businesses continually improve. whenever possible, we liketo measure our success by more than mere compliments, however genuine. whilea large number of specific benefits may result from a business's use of electroniccommerce, they all derive from reducing costs, improving quality, and decreasingtime to market. if electronic commerce is well implemented, it can certainlyproduce these three results.valueadded networks (vans)valueadded networks (vans) are part of the disa infrastructure forelectronic commerce. a van provides trading partners a common environmentthrough which to transmit, receive, and store edi messages. dod has acertification program that all vans must go through; 26 vans have now beencertified.there are certain qualifications that vans will have to meet. vans need totransmit, receive, and store edi messages, with a twohour maximum forgovernment transmission to supplier mail boxes. the vans must be open 24hours a day, 7 days a week, and they must be able to archive data for at least 30days. they must to be able to protect data and have a backup and recovery planelectronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks39electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the event of a "crash." to be certified, vans must also handle "onetoallinterested parties" transaction sets. this means vans must be able to connectwith all other people in the network, and all other functional areas.a van is little more than an electronic mailbox. the government, on oneside, goes through a socalled gateway, which does nothing more than translatebusiness information into ansi x12, the standard for edi. from the gatewaythis information goes to the network entry point (nep), where it is distributed tothe vans, which in turn distribute it to the vendors.valueadded service (vas) adds significant value to the basic van functionof storing and forwarding edi data. typically, a vas provides communicationsand translation software. choosing a van or a vas is largely a filtering processin which you identify those features that best meet your business needs. there aretwo general approaches. you can sign up with a van that has the software youneed included (socalled bundled software); or, you can choose a van and athird party's software. the software selected must be compatible with your ownsystem, so that you can connect to the dod and commercial vans you want toreach.some commercial entities already do business like this. kmart, walmart,sam's, j.c. penny, searsšthey all have their own vans. if you want to sell yourwidgets to walmart, you have to do it electronically. this is a consideration ifyou are going to do business not only with the government, but also with acommercial entity. your choice should also depend in part on the volume ofbusiness that you expect to do. you should estimate van costs for light,moderate or heavy use, as appropriate.cost. there are several kinds of costs to consider in choosing a van. theinitial setup fee is usually about $200. for electronic mailboxes, there areaccount, access, and storage fees. you might select a per character charge, avolume discount, or a flat rate. and there are interconnect fees. of the 26 vanswe have talked to, we find people are generally moving toward the flat ratebecause it is easier.reporting. everybody wants to look at reports. but you need to considerexactly what it is you want to see, because you will pay for it. ask for a sampleinvoice and a sample monthly report. are they easy to read and understand? lookat report features such as characters transmitted, connection time, failedtransmissions, and failed logon attempts.our ecrc maintains a list of 20 questions to ask a van, as follows.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks40electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.questions to ask a van1.what are the initial fees for establishing an account?2.what are the recurring fees (monthly and annual) for maintaining an account?3.what are the per transaction or per character charges?4.what are the access charges (per transmission or per minute)?5.does the van offer volume discount rates?6.what communications methods are supported by the van?7.what are the rates for using different communication protocols and speeds?8.does the van support your selected transaction sets and standards?9.does the van provide a local access telephone number?10.what levels of archiving does the van support (online and offline)?11.does the van support interconnects with other vans?12.does the van provide translation between different standards and versions?13.does the van provide compliance checking?14.what is the van's record of availability and reliability (amount of downtime)?15.what type of store and forward messaging services are provided?16.what is the geographical coverage of the van (regional, national,international)?17.what is the industry coverage of the van (transportation, government, etc.)?18.what reporting is provided by the van?19.what levels of security are provided by the van (password, automatic callback)?20.what additional features does the van support (broadcasting, bbs, etc.)?other criteria. another important criterion to consider is market coverage.can the van connect with your trading partners, commercial and otherwise? thedefense logistics agency (dla) uses a special system, as does the air force.does the van provide training with its bundled software? areelectronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks41electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there other valueadded services? you should obtain and check references of thevan that are businesses similar to yours.special needs. you should consider whether you have other special needs.faxtoedi is one capability. if you have a very low volume of transactions, andare not edicapable, then for a minimal van fee you can arrange with your vanthat, if it receives an edi transaction from a buyer (either the government or acommercial enterprise) that relates to what you sell, the van can fax thattransaction to you. then you can write up a quote, fax it back to the van, andthe van will send it back to the buyer via edi.vans can also be internet service providers. they can scan bulletin boards.they can translate your business information to other softwares (such as tocommercial vans, such as those of kmart or walmart).activity level. in choosing a van, you need to weigh the costs and benefitsby activity level. what does that mean, activity level? if you have variousdepartments within your companyšsay, accounting, finance, shipping andreceiving, inventory, and manufacturing, and a request for quote, or some otheredi transaction set comes in, you would like to know whether you should routethat information to any or all of your departments. you cannot do this routingunless you have an integrated database. this is the type of issue to be consideredin this context. edi cost/benefit is usually volumebased.translation software. the software you select to go with the van must beable to translate data into and out of standard edi formats. in this case, the ansix12 standard is what is used. there are several dod versions of ansi x12, soyou must be sure that your software, whether it is bundled into a van orprovided by a third party, has the capability to look at all versions. again, youmay want to be able to exchange data not only with dod, but also withcommercial trading partners.the simplest and least expensive way to do business is to use a standalonepersonal computer and edi translation software, either bundled with a van or asthird party software. this software takes business information (either from thebuyer or the seller), and, through the ansi x12 standard, translates it intocomputer language and transmits it to the recipient (either the buyer or seller).once received, the information is translated back into business information thatcan be read. the process is proceeds continually, back and forth. this approach isstraightforward to implement.of the many software vendors out there, roughly half offer dos systems,and half offer windowsbased software. but many are moving toelectronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks42electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.windows, and the dos environment will likely eventually fade away in the ediworld. the drawback of the standalone personal computer approach is the lackof integration with existing software. integrated edi software is similar to standalone software, but can integrate with other applications and allow the integrationof a company's entire database, so that all departments can communicate with oneanother.information goes into the system once, but you use it many, many times.you can route an incoming request for a quote through all the departmentsautomatically. the information goes all the way through, and if you happen towin the bid and get a purchase order, the same thing happens again. theinformation can go directly to manufacturing and to shipping and receiving.i recently took a tour through the local safeway warehouse in landover,maryland. it was an amazing experience. almost their entire process isautomated. they have little buggies running around on the floor with magnetictracks. they have highrise buildings with forklifts that go up five stories andgrab a crate of whatever, bring it down, and put it on a little cart. the cart runsover, dumps the crate on a truck, and the order is gone. no one has touched it.the whole operation has been run from an operations center. that's the kind ofoperation we are headed for. they are saving enormous amounts of money usingthis system.finally, a company can develop its own proprietary software. we highlydiscourage this option. proprietary software is written to fit a specific use in aspecific company or pad of a company. this software usually is poorlydocumented and becomes obsolete very quickly. if and/or when the author leavesthe company, the documentation left behind is rarely adequate for successors tomaintain or troubleshoot the software.people are concerned about the privacy of their information. but informationcan be firewalled, or compartmented. the only information that is available andshared with everyone else is the information that you want them to see. it is nothard to arrange this, simply more expensive.other edi software capabilities. it is also valuable to have builtincommunications software included with the software package, so this softwaredoes not have to be bought separately.you might also want to arrange for unattended batch transmissions. if youare going to be receiving large batch transmissions of transaction sets from thevan during offhours, then you want to be able to say when to do that. youarrange this, by the way, when you register using the trading partner profileelectronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks43electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transaction set (ts 838). you can provide a lengthy list of times when you wantto talk to people.it is important to ensure that the edi communications software you chooseallows multiple van connections in case you wish to do business with bothgovernment and commercial enterprises.in software system utilities, if you want security, you want to arrange for apassword. it is also helpful that your van or third party software have automaticrecovery and restart capability, so that if the van (or third party software)crashes, they can recover, and the crash is transparent to you. installation routinesshould be fairly simple. it also helps if the software package allows manipulationof the screen, so that you like what you see.with regard to system maintenance, the software should provide automaticpurging and archiving. it should be able to save information for an adequateperiod, say, for about 10 days; and the program should be updatable when ansix12 standards are updated. the software should have good phone support, withextended hours and knowledgeable technical support staff. error reports, whichtell you of any errors the software may be experiencing, are important. be sureyou can receive these error reports. there should be inbound/outboundtransaction set reporting. you ought to be able to receive a report at periodicintervals that indicates all the transaction sets you have received and sent over anygiven period.functional acknowledgments. functional acknowledgments can beimportant, but you must sometimes pay for this feature (depending on the van).acknowledgment is something developers have struggled with, though it isnothing more than a notice indicating that someone received what you sent them.the problem is that such messages fail to go endtoend; they only go from thegateway to the van and back. they do not travel the full route from the agencyto the vendor and back. if you want such capability, it will generally cost youextra money. the better vans will pass this feature along as part of their flat rateplan.there is also a transaction set called an 836, which is an awards, orunsuccessful bidders, notice. it tells you who won and for how much, so that ifyou are not the winner, you can learn more about the competition. thiscommunication can be a useful marketing tool.cost considerations. regarding software costs, you should consider theinitial cost, whether maintenance is ongoing (and whether you should get acontract or not), and whether you will be charged for upgrades in the software.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks44electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.when transaction set 841 (technical information) is finally approved, willyou have to pay the van extra to receive it, or will it be received as part of theflat rate package? sooner or later the costs of developing the new transaction setswill have to be passed along. will an ansi x12 standards update be possible,and how much will it cost?the total costs of edi vary greatly, depending on your choices. you can buy apersonal computer today for $1,000, and it will do the job. you can get a 486model with everything you need, and a modem for $100, and have the capacity todo edi. a van, after the initial investment of about $200, should not cost morethan $50 to $100 per month. software can be expensive, particularly the moreadvanced integration software.good assessments of software are available, and the ecrcs can also bereadily accessed through our fairfax center's home page (http://www.ecrc.gmu.edu ). the dayton ecrc is building a valuable matrix with costcomparison charts, to help both vendors and government agencies to select vansand software vendors.electronic commerce resource centers and valueadded networks45electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.speaker biographiesall of the following people participated in the symposium as speakers ormoderators. the federal facilities council is grateful for their contributions.g. doyle dodge, as senior advisor to the assistant commissioner,office of network applications for the u.s. general services administration, isresponsible for governmentwide management direction in a wide range ofadvanced electronic commerce programs. among his current activities, he headsan interagency steering committee in designing, developing, and publishing onthe internet the electronically shared databases necessary for electroniccontracting for the $200 billion of supplies and services required annually by thefederal government. for several years, mr. dodge has been involved in designingand managing the electronic publishing and dissemination of federal acquisitioninformation. mr. dodge earned his b.s degree in business from oregon stateuniversity and his mba in finance from indiana university. he worked inbusiness analysis, development, administration, and management positions in thesteel and aerospace industries for 14 years before moving to the federalgovernment in 1972. he has headed regional professional associations, authoredmany technical papers in his field, and has lectured frequently at regional andnational conventions of related professional organizations.peter g. doyle is a fellow of the american institute of architects and aprincipal in the firm doyle and synan. in a 26 year career with the linbeckcorporation, a texasbased national builder, mr. doyle rose from engineer/estimator and project manager to corporate executive, and was directly involvedin the planning and construction of buildings worth more than $1 billion. theseinclude the biosphere visitor center in arizona, a 16,000 seatspeaker biographies46electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.arena in miami, and a 55 story office tower in houston. in his professionalaffiliations, mr. doyle has held leadership roles in the associated generalcontractors of america, as chair, officer, and board member at local and nationallevels. he has also been a board member and chairman of the national instituteof building sciences. mr. doyle holds a bachelor of architecture degree fromnotre dame university and a master of architecture from rice university, andhas completed the advanced management program at harvard university. peterdoyle is known throughout the united states in both building and architecturalarenas as an industry leader, skilled negotiator, and clientfocused generalmanager.ron grover is deputy commander for contracts at the naval facilitiesengineering command headquarters and a member of the navy electronic datainterchange core group. he was commissioned in the civil engineer corps in1976. in his 20 year career, commander grover has held a number of positions atstations in the united states and abroad. these include assistant public worksofficer and assistant resident officer in charge of construction, in argentia,newfoundland; deputy resident officer and assistant officer in charge ofconstruction, in fallon, nevada; deputy officer in charge of contracts andassistant public works officer at the naval submarine base, in kings bay,georgia; and environmental and public works department head at engineeringfield activity in washington, d.c. commander grover received a bachelor'sdegree in electrical engineering from the university of iowa and a master's degreein civil engineering from texas a&m university. he is a registered professionalengineer in the state of nevada.ronson kung is a 1988 graduate from texas a&m university, wherehe received a b.s. in industrial engineering. mr. kung began his federal civilservice career as an industrial engineer in the naval facilities engineeringcommand's (navfac) threeyear professional development program. in 1991,he joined the relatively new public works support team at southwest division.his primary duties were to assist in establishing the southwest region's publicworks management automation program and serve on facilities evaluationassessment team visits, which provide process improvement recommendations tonavy and marine corps installations throughout the southwest. after providing ayear of technical support to over 60 personnel in computer and network issues,and involvement with implementation of navfac's cad2 program, mr. kungaccepted a position in 1994 with the triservice cadd/gis technology center.speaker biographies47electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he is currently responsible for various triservice projects, development, andimplementation.michael r. mcfarren is currently assigned to the defenseinformation systems agency as the managing engineer for the electroniccommerce/electronic data interchange (ec/edi) project. in this position, lt.colonel mcfarren is responsible for the design, development, construction,installation, and testing of the infrastructure to support electronic commerce forthe entire federal government. additionally, he is chair of the ec/edi standardsmanagement committee and the department of defense representative to thefederal standards management coordinating committee. in his career, lt. colonelmcfarren has also served as a senior scientist for the air combat command atlangley air force base, a research analyst at armstrong laboratories atwrightpatterson air force base, an intercontinental ballistics missile combatcrew commander instructor at grand forks air force base, and an assistantprofessor of aerospace studies at cornell university. he holds a b.s. in chemistryeducation from purdue university, an m.b.a. from the university of northdakota, and an m.s. in operations research from the air force institute oftechnology. lt. colonel mcfarren is currently completing his dissertation for aph.d. in information technology at george mason university.joyce l. runyan is the chair of the federal facilities councilprocurement and contracting committee and has 16 years of experience as acontract specialist with the naval facilities engineering command (navfac).in her current position as assistant for construction, architectengineering, andenvironmental contracts policy in the contracts policy division, ms. runyan isresponsible for recommending navfac construction and architectureengineering policy and reviewing requests for waivers and approvals. she is thenavfac liaison with contractors' professional organizations. she is also thenavy representative on the construction, architectureengineering, and bondscommittee of the defense acquisition regulation system, which recommendsrevisions to the federal acquisition regulation (far) or the defense farsupplement, to implement new policy and law. ms. runyan holds a b.a. frommethodist college and a masters degree in contracting and acquisitionmanagement from the florida institute of technology.speaker biographies48electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.delores (dee) smith is director of the department of defenseelectronic commerce office. she was chair of the dod electronic commerce incontracting process action team, established by the deputy under secretary ofdefense for acquisition reform, a group chartered to develop a comprehensiveimplementation plan for dod. the team included representatives from allrelevant entities, who worked fulltime to analyze existing components of ec/edi contracting initiatives, determine the associated risks and benefits, establishthe educational requirements, and assess the costs associated with the plan. thesuccessful effort of the dod charter laid the groundwork for the formulation andsignature of the president's executive memorandum, signed october 26, 1993,which directed a similar effort to be performed by all federal agencies by march1994. ms. smith previously was assigned to sacramento air logistics center, asthe office of the secretary of defense program manager for defense electronic/continuous acquisition and lifecycle support. additionally, ms. smith wasaircraft contracting division chief in support of the f111, a7, and a10 aircraftfor five years, and served for 23 years in contracting at oklahoma city airlogistics center, oklahoma. she received her bachelor's degree in accountingand master's degree from central state university of oklahoma.ken stepka joined the office of procurement at the nationalaeronautics and space administration headquarters in may 1992. sincedecember 1993, he has led the nasa's acquisition initiative in electroniccommerce. today, nasa's office of procurement pursues electronic commerceas a ''tool set,'' matching the appropriate electronic commerce solution to the widevariety of federal procurements. the goals are to enhance accessibility andtransaction performance across the entire business process, at the lowest practicalcost. prior to joining nasa, stepka served as the contracting officer for thesidewinder and sparrow airtoair missile systems during a 12 year tour at thenaval air systems command, washington, d.c. his procurement career beganas a navy intern in albany, georgia.james justin taylor is a program manager in the engineeringmanagement branch, headquarters, u.s. army corps of engineers. he iscurrently program coordinator for the electronic bid set project and providestechnical advice and management for computeraided engineering programs andapplications. mr. taylor has held various engineering positions within the corps,including project manager for the automated reviewspeaker biographies49electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.management system technical center of expertise at the corps sacramentodistrict. from july 1983 to july 1988, he was assigned to the design branch in theomaha district, where his responsibilities included the structural design forprojects ranging from enlisted and officer housing, and administrative and diningfacilities, to flight simulators and aircraft hangars. in july 1988, he was assignedto the design quality assurance section, engineering division, sacramentodistrict, where he was responsible for project compliance on inhouse andarchitect/engineer designed projects. he earned a b. s. in architecturalengineering in 1983 from tennessee state university.frank d. (dan) troyan is chief of contracting automation andfederal information processing resources acquisition programs division at theu.s. army corps of engineers. he is also program manager for the standardarmy automated contracting system (saacons) and electronic commerce inthe office of the principal assistant responsible for contracting atheadquarters. mr. troyan is responsible for developing, managing, andoverseeing contract automation, contract program policies and proceduresinvolving audit and reporting functions, and information resource procurementactivities accomplished by the corps at 57 worldwide contracting offices. he isalso responsible for implementation of federal, department of defense, anddepartment of the army requirements in corpswide automated informationsystems used for acquisition. in previous positions with the army, mr. troyanengineered and built extensive communications facilities throughout alaska andmanaged one of the army's earliest largescale data reduction centers for digitalcomputer processing of radar, telemetry, film, and oscillographic information. asa department head, he developed and expanded curricula at the department ofdefense computer institute (now the information resources managementcollege of the national defense university). he holds a b.s. from the u.s.military academy at west point, an m.s. in electrical engineering from theuniversity of arizona, and an m.a. in business and personnel management fromcentral michigan university.bosquet (biscuit) n. wev, jr., is senior vice president of iris,limited liability company, and director of outreach at the fairfax electroniccommerce resource center (ecrc) in fairfax, virginia. at the fairfax ecrc,he is responsible for increasing the awareness of the community (md, de, dc,va and nc) of the benefits that small to mediumsized enterprises can derivefrom the services offered by the ecrc in the field ofspeaker biographies50electronic commerce for the procurement of construction and architectengineer services: implementing the ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronic commerce. additionally, mr. wev instructs business owners andgovernment officials about how to do business with the federal government usingelectric commerce. he has been the general tutorials chair for the last threecontinuous acquisition and lifecycle support (cals) expositions and will alsobe in the next. mr. wev is a wellknown speaker on cals/ec/edi in northamerica, europe, and asia. prior to 1992, mr. wev owned a retail business for10 years, worked in the washington, d.c., militaryindustrial complex for 13years, served as a u.s. navy submarine officer for 20 years, and graduated fromthe u.s. naval academy in 1952.speaker biographies51