detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/5968the evolution of untethered communications204 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309059466 | doi 10.17226/5968committee on evolution of untethered communications, national research councilthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceicommittee on evolution of untethered communicationscomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c. 1997the evolution ofuntetheredcommunicationsthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and withregard for appropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance ofscience and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise thefederal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academyof sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy ofengineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policymatters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given tothe national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federalgovernment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõs purposes of furtheringknowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policiesdetermined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to thegovernment, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a.wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the defense advanced research projects agency.any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of theauthors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.library of congress catalog card number 9780464international standard book number 0309059461copyright 1997 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution ave., nwbox 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.eduprinted in the united states of americathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee on evolution of untetheredcommunicationsdavid j. goodman, rutgers university, chairnorman abramson, aloha networks, inc.eugene cacciamani, hughes network systemsjoel engel, ameritechmark epstein, qualcomm, inc.bruce fette, motorola, inc.douglas c. fields, united parcel servicebezalel gavish, vanderbilt universityandrea goldsmith, california institute of technologyrandy h. katz, university of california at berkeleyedwin a. kelley, hughes aircraft companykaveh pahlavan, worcester polytechnic institutecharles e. perkins, sun microsystemstheodore rappaport, virginia polytechnic institutejesse russell, at&t laboratoriesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjames chiddix, time warner cablejeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaraa.g. fraser, at&t corporationsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjames gray, microsoft corporationbarbara j. grosz, harvard universitypatrick m. hanrahan, stanford universityjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscodeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtonmichael lesk, bellcoredavid liddle, interval researchbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, qualcomm, inc.david g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleydonald norman, hewlettpackard companyraymond ozzie, rhythmix corporationdonald simborg, knowmed systemsleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior staff officerjerry r. sheehan, program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officermark e. balkovich, research associatejanet briscoe, administrative associatelisa l. shum, project assistantsynod p. boyd, project assistantthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairpeter m. banks, environmental research institute of michiganwilliam browder, princeton universitylawrence d. brown, university of pennsylvaniaronald g. douglas, texas a&m universityjohn e. estes, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universityl. louis hegedus, elf atochem north america, inc.john e. hopcroft, cornell universitycarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotakenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatorymargaret g. kivelson, university of california at los angelesdaniel kleppner, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin companymarsha i. lester, university of pennsylvanianicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratorychanglin tien, university of california at berkeleynorman metzger, executive directorvthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceviiin 1994, the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa)initiated the global mobile information systems (glomo) program to apply advances in highspeed computation, signal processing, and miniaturization to mobile, wireless, multimedia information systems. theglomo program is intended to develop the technologies that will enablemilitary forces to carry out communication and computing tasks free oftethersñthat is, cables to power sources or telecommunications networks.the concept of òuntetheredó communications unites mobile and wirelessoperations.in response to a request from darpa, the computer science andtelecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council initiated a oneyear study on untethered communications in july 1996. tocarry out the study, the cstb appointed a committee of 15 wirelesstechnology experts, including researchers, program managers, technology developers, and users working in industry and academia. the committeeon the evolution of untethered communications was charged with advising darpa on where to invest in information technology for mobilewireless systems. in particular, darpa posed the following questions:¥what will industry do on its own? when?¥what are the military requirements and needs in mobile wirelessinformation technology?¥to what extent will commercial technology development supportmilitary needs?the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiipreface¥where can darpa have the greatest impact in technology development or acceleration of technology development to support the military?this report presents the results of the cstb study. in addition toanswering darpaõs questions, the report provides a wealth of information of interest to a broader audience, suggesting that this is an era ofunprecedented change, growth, and promise in untethered communications for both civilian and military users. the report explores the evolution of wireless technology, the oftenfruitful synergy between commercial and military research and development efforts, and the technicalchallenges still to be overcome. many examples of past ingenuity andfuture opportunities in wireless systems are noted. although much of theinformation can be obtained piecemeal from other sources, it is rarelycollected and analyzed in the manner found here. this is the cstbõs firstreport on wireless communications.the committee met four times during the oneyear study time frame.the report is based on the committeeõs discussions with representativesof military organizations and commercial developers, background information from the literature, the expertise and judgment of individual committee members, and the deliberations of the committee as a group.the committee appreciates darpaõs sponsorship of this project andin particular acknowledges the participation of four individuals. howardfrank, former director of the information technology office, providedvaluable advice to the cstb prior to the initiation of the study. barryleiner, the original driving force behind the glomo program, had thevision to appreciate how a comprehensive technology assessment couldcomplement the specific research projects already under way. kevinmills, who later assumed leadership of the glomo program, addressedthe committee at the beginning of its study. rob ruth, who succeededmills, shared his insights into operational military needs and encouragedthe committee and cstb staff to support darpaõs needs to advance andrefine glomo planning. all of these individuals provided regular reminders of darpaõs strong interest in this study and helped motivate thecommitteeõs efforts to develop a comprehensive analysis that takes intoaccount the context of military decision making.the committee also benefited enormously from the assistance of anumber of anonymous reviewers. reviewer comments and constructivecriticisms helped the committee transform a voluminous early draft into atighter, wellorganized final report, calibrate the emphasis placed on avariety of topics, and clarify the analysis of specific issues.finally, the committee appreciates the effort and energy devoted tothis project by former cstb staff member paul semenza, who organizedthe study and guided the writing and revision of this report, and formerthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixcstb project assistant gail pritchard, who provided administrative andlogistical support. it also is grateful for the yeoman efforts of laura ost,the writereditor who worked with the committee during the summer of1997 to improve the organization and written presentation of its ideas.david goodman, chaircommittee on evolution ofuntethered communicationsthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiexecutive summary11past, present, and future101.1overview, 111.2historical perspective, 131.2.1communications before the industrial age, 131.2.2telegraphy, 151.2.3early wireless, 151.2.4telephony, 161.2.5communications satellites, 171.2.6mobile radio and the origins of cellulartelephony, 181.2.7the internet and packet radio, 191.3military wireless systems and research, 211.3.1terrestrial systems, 211.3.2satellite systems, 241.3.3research initiatives in untetheredcommunications, 251.3.3.1global mobile information systemsprogram, 261.3.3.2softwaredefined radio research, 281.3.3.3communications systems research, 291.3.3.4radio component research, 291.3.3.5small unit operations, 301.3.3.6modeling and simulation, 30the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontents1.4commercial terrestrial mobile telephone systemsand services, 301.4.1firstgeneration systems, 311.4.2secondgeneration systems, 331.4.3thirdgeneration systems, 381.5commercial satellite systems, 411.6mobile data services, 441.7wireless local area networks, 471.8comparison of international research, development,and deployment strategies, 471.9summary and report organization, 52notes, 542technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges562.1communication link design, 582.1.1characteristics of the wireless channel, 602.1.1.1path loss, 602.1.1.2shadow fading, 612.1.1.3smallscale (multipath) fading, 622.1.1.4interference, 632.1.1.5satellite channels, 642.1.2capacity limits of wireless channels, 642.1.3modulation, 652.1.4channel coding and linklayer retransmission, 652.1.5countermeasures for fading, 672.1.5.1flatfading countermeasures, 672.1.5.2countermeasures for frequencyselective fading, 692.1.6channel access, 722.1.6.1fixedallocation multiple access, 722.1.6.2demandassigned multiple access, 732.1.6.3random access, 742.2network issues, 752.2.1architecture, 752.2.1.1cellular system design, 762.2.1.2packet radio system design, 782.2.2physical resource allocation, 792.2.3interoperability, 802.2.4routing and mobility management, 812.2.4.1multihop routing, 812.2.4.2terminal mobility, 822.2.4.3wireless overlay networks, 84the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiii2.2.5resource discovery, 852.2.6network simulation and modeling tools, 852.3endtoend system design issues, 862.3.1 applicationlevel adaptation, 862.3.2quality of service, 872.3.2.1approaches to quality of service, 872.3.2.2transportlayer issues, 912.3.3security, 922.4hardware issues, 942.4.1antennas, 952.4.2other radio components, 972.4.2.1analogtodigital converters, 982.4.2.2digital signal processors, 992.4.2.3filters, 1002.4.2.4radio frequency amplifiers, 1002.4.3portable terminal design, 1012.4.3.1displays, user interfaces, and input devices, 1012.4.3.2processors, 1022.4.3.3batteries, 1022.4.3.4storage, 1032.5summary, 103notes, 1043commercialdefense synergy in wirelesscommunications1083.1overview, 1093.2motivations for commercialdefense synergy, 1113.2.1design reuse, 1133.2.2production learning curve, 1143.2.3maintenance and logistics support, 1163.2.4training, 1173.2.5cycle time, 1173.3barriers to commercialdefense synergy, 1193.3.1risks of dependence on commercial technologies, 1203.3.2tradeoffs between cost and complexity, 1213.3.2.1performance issues, 1213.3.2.2quality and testing, 1223.3.3infrastructure differences, 1243.4designing wireless systems for military applications, 1253.4.1network architecture, 1253.4.1.1network design issues, 1253.4.1.2bandwidth requirements, 129the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontents3.4.1.3source coding, 1313.4.1.4highly adaptive systems, 1333.4.2security, 1343.4.2.1availability of service, 1353.4.2.2confidentiality and integrity, 1353.4.3multimode, multiband communications, 1373.4.3.1softwaredefined radios, 1383.4.3.2cosite interference, 1393.5defense technology policy issues, 1413.5.1implications of changes in military tactics, 1413.5.2rapid infrastructure deployment, 1423.5.3logistics, 1423.5.4preparing for unsophisticated adversaries, 1433.5.5preparing for sophisticated adversaries, 1443.6summary, 144notes, 1454conclusions and recommendations1494.1history and challenges of wireless communications, 1494.2standards development, 1524.3demonstration and testing rather than development, 1544.4procurement, 1554.5modeling and simulation, 1564.6network architecture, 1584.7network security, 1594.8highdensity communications platforms, 1604.9software radios, 1624.10smart antennas, 1624.11smart waveforms, 1634.12filter technology, 1644.13novel components, 165bibliography167appendixesabiographies of committee members175bbriefers to the committee180cglossary182the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11executive summaryextraordinary growth is evident in capabilities for òuntetheredó communications, the union of wireless and mobile technologies. an exampleis cellular telephones, which were virtually unheard of in 1980 and arenow used by almost 200 million subscribers worldwide. the subscriberbase for wireless communications services is growing 15 times faster thanthe subscriber base for wired services; by 2010 wireless and wired systems are expected to serve equal numbers of users. the vigorous publicdemand for wireless services is fueling intense industrial and government activity, including research and development (r&d) aimed at improving the quality and reducing costs of wireless technology, design ofinnovative systems and services, and implementation of new technicalstandards and policies. this dynamic environment is producing diversewireless technologies and standards, in stark contrast to other areas ofcommunications marked by a convergence toward uniformity. all thisactivity will bring the reality of the next century close to the vision ofòanytime, anywhereó communications.historically, u.s. national defense needs have stimulated many advances in wireless communications technologies, and the department ofdefense (dod) has been among the first users. today, however, somedod systems lag the state of the art. whereas the commercial sector hasgreater incentives than ever before to push the technology envelopeñat acost driven down by a growing mass marketñsome military wirelessequipment is based on 1970s and 1980s technology. the adequacy of thecurrent defense communications infrastructure was called into questionthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2the evolution of untethered communicationsduring the gulf war, when voice and data systems failed to keep up withrapidly moving frontline troops. only 10 percent of soldiers currentlyhave voice communications capabilities, and only satellites, certain aircraft, and òsmartó missiles carry sensors for still imagery or video.changes in military operations are stimulating dod interest in untethered systems. u.s. military personnel now need to be prepared tomove quickly throughout the world to respond to rapidly evolving regional conflicts and carry out a variety of noncombat roles, such as peacekeeping and humanitarian response. just as past hardware advances(e.g., aircraft carriers, longrange jet aircraft) shaped the military conflictsof yesteryear, information technology is now shaping plans for thenationõs future defense. plans are being made for a digitized battlefield inwhich sensors are widely distributed, and rapidly deployable, multimedia wireless systems extend from frontline soldiers all the way to thepentagon and the north atlantic treaty organization (nato). advancedcommand, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (c4i)systems will make it possible to monitor an adversary on a computerscreen, target specific threats, and neutralize them with the press of abutton.the dod is taking a dual approach to meeting its future communications needs by funding selected r&d and demonstration projects, focusing primarily on components, while also relying increasingly on commercial offtheshelf (cots) technologies. in the gulf war, for example, themilitary obtained satellitetransmitted positioning data using commercialreceivers, which were rapidly fielded to meet an urgent military need. onthe other hand, for some military applications, commercial products donot meet stringent requirements for security, interoperability, and othercapabilities. and yet, with defense budgets flat or declining, the dod canno longer rely solely on military suppliers to provide defenseuniquesolutions. the military needs to find a way to ride the wave of commercial technology advances while maintaining technical capabilities that exceed those of any potential adversary.this report, the result of a oneyear study by the computer scienceand telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council,recommends strategies and r&d to help the dod field stateoftheart,costeffective untethered communications systems that meet militaryneeds. the report concentrates on wireless technologies that use the radio frequency (rf) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. the study wasfunded by the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) toaddress the following questions:¥what technologies, products, and services will the commercial industry make available on its own, and when?the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3¥what are the military requirements and needs in mobile wirelessinformation technology?¥to what extent will commercial technology development supportmilitary needs?¥where can darpa have the greatest impact in technology development or acceleration of technology development to support the military?answers to those questions are outlined in this summary, which contains two major sections. the first section presents the reportõs five conclusions and summarizes the supporting facts and analysis contained in chapters 1 through 3 of the report. the conclusions represent the expertjudgments of the 15 members of the cstbõs committee on the evolution ofuntethered communications. the second section presents the committeeõs12 recommendations, which are based on the conclusions and the supporting facts and analysis. the recommendations, which are directed to dodand darpa, are discussed in detail in chapter 4. it should be noted thatalthough the report focuses on military needs, it also contains a wealth ofinformation about commercial technology developments as well as a primeron the many technical challenges involved in designing wireless systems.the report therefore should also interest a wider, civilian audience.conclusionsa large gap remains between public expectations for mobile communications and the available technology. voracious consumer demand isstimulating many advances in wireless communications technology, particularly cellular and cordless telephones. as of 1997 there were morethan 50 million cellular subscribers in the united states. the portfolio ofwireless services now available in the commercial marketplace includes awide range of telephony, paging, and data applications delivered over avariety of service offerings, ranging from landbased mobile radio to cellular and satellite communications. each service offers a unique combination of coverage region, bandwidth (i.e., capacity), subscriber equipment features, and connectivity.in the aggregate, commercial wireless capabilities are considerable. yetmany technical challenges remain. wireless systems, especially those serving mobile users, are extremely complex. a network needs to be capable ofrerouting information seamlessly and efficiently as users move, and sophisticated digital signal processors (dsps) and antennas are needed to minimize interference, distortion, jamming, and interception without unduepower burdens on portable devices. the cost of wireless voice systemsremains high compared to that of wired networks, and transmission quality and security could be improved. specialized wireless data networksthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4the evolution of untethered communicationshave not taken off as yet, perhaps because they are not powerful enoughor because twoway mass market applications have yet to emerge.for a worldwide operator, the management and coordination of diverse systems are complicated by the absence of any trend toward convergence toward a single standard in wireless communications. onedigital wireless technology, global system for mobile communications(gsm), is deployed throughout europe and in more than 100 countriesworldwide, whereas the japanese use their own technology, the personalhandyphone system (phs), and the united states supports three competing technologies: gsm, a timedivision system (is136), and a codedivision system (is95). the diversity of technologies in the united states is aresult of spectrum regulation policies, which require only that systemsnot interfere with one another. these policies leave interoperability andother system properties such as quality and efficiency to be settled in themarketplace.over the next 10 years or so, market forces will fill the gap betweenpublic expectations and the available technology by developing new technologies for commercial wireless communications. fueled by the successof cellular communications and projections of everexpanding marketsfor wireless services, u.s. and foreign industries are performing extensiver&d to overcome remaining technical challenges in wireless systems.for example, efforts are under way to enable portable devices to communicate at the high bit rates needed for advanced information services. inaddition, to foster economies of scale in r&d and manufacturing in aworld of diverse and changing technical standards, considerable effort isdedicated to advancing the technology of software radios. these radios,by downloading different types of operating software, can serve as singleplatforms that transmit signals conforming to a variety of standards.the european union, which supports cooperative research leading todevelopment of precompetitive technologies, has a vision of the futureextending beyond 2002, when universal mobile telecommunication services are scheduled to be deployed. that vision and various industry roadmaps suggest that, by early in the twentyfirst century, commercial wirelesscommunications will achieve the òanytime, anywhereó paradigm.this optimism does not extend to prospects for fully interoperablewireless communications systems anytime soon. in the united states,wireless communications research is performed by individual companiesin the context of their own product plans, and coordination occurs primarily in standardssetting organizations (e.g., telecommunications industry association, internet engineering task force). moreover, in the pastthere was a proliferation of proprietary rather than open network interfaces. the trends toward open systems and digital components will makethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5it easier to build customized systems, but the capabilities of commercialservices will continue to depend on consumer demand as well as tradeoffs between technology availability and costs.the military has much to gain from positioning itself to use cotscommunications equipment to the greatest extent possible.the civilianand military sectors have a long history of interaction in the design anddeployment of wireless technology, such as mobile radios and satellitesystems. commercial wireless technologies are now more attractive thanever in terms of their performance, quality, and cost. by acquiring commercial equipment when it meets military needs, the dod can field stateoftheart equipment while also lowering its costs by benefiting from theeconomies of scale achievable in massmarket manufacturing. for example, software radios for military applications can be built using manycots components, such as analogtodigital converters, dsps, rf amplifiers, displays, batteries, and datastorage devices.the insertion of commercial technologies into military systems is notalways easy. as an example, asynchronous transfer mode (atm) offersmany attractive features, such as highspeed transmission, fast switching,the capability to assign message priority, and queue management. itcould provide the basis for improved situational awareness, enabling thedod to provide realtime imagery, cryptographic security, and lowcostdevices for wide distribution. however, the integration of atm andinternet protocols into wireless battlefield communications will requiresophisticated link protocols. industry is addressing these issues, but thedod can ensure that its needs are met only by participating in standardssetting activities to influence technology directions and by testing emerging cots products in battlefield exercises.some military needs for wireless communications technologies willexceed or differ significantly from anticipated commercial developments.for example, the military has unique concerns with respect to networkdesign, security, interoperability, and multimode/multiband systems.although there is clearly overlap between the capabilities of commercialtechnologies and the dodõs needs, they also differ in a number of respects (see table es1). for example, commercial r&d on integrated (i.e.,multimedia) systems is oriented toward basestationoriented networkarchitectures, an efficient and reliable design in which mobile users communicate with central access nodes. an alternative is the easily reconfigurable peertopeer architecture, in which network elements communicate directly. it is not yet clear which architecture will be the mostappropriate in future military settings. improved modeling and simulation tools, especially for communications traffic and mobility of networkthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6the evolution of untethered communicationselements, would support realistic analyses of complex military networksand the design of appropriate protocols and optimization algorithms.commercial capabilities and military needs also differ with respect tothe security of networks, radio links, and hardware. commercial usersarchitecturemobilitydeploymentstrategymodes/waveformsfrequency range(per system)data ratesystem accessinteroperability ofsystemssecurityantijamlow probability ofdetection/interceptionrobustness ofsystems andequipmentinterferencerejectionbasestation orientedmobile terminals, fixedinfrastructuresitespecific planning andmeasurementssix at mostnarrowband (one bandper system)384 kilobits per second to2 megabits per second(mbps) by 2002anyone who can payincreasingly importantincreasingly importantmay become an issue withwidespread system usenot an issue at this timeyes, under moderateconditionssomewhat importantnot clear at this timemobile terminals, manymobile infrastructure elementsrapid deployment atunpredictable locationscurrently 1 to 20; ideal ismultimode systems usingadaptive waveformsmultiband (e.g., 2 megahertzto 2 gigahertz)longterm goal is at least10 mbpsuniversalrequired for all defensenetworks and foreign alliescriticalcriticalcriticalyes, under extreme conditions(e.g., extreme temperatures,shock, vibrations, submersion)criticaltable es1comparison of commercial wireless technologies andfuture military needsfeaturecommercial systemsfuture military needsxxxxxxxxxthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7are concerned mainly with privacy and the prevention of unauthorizedaccess to their hardware and data. some security breaches are tolerated(in fact, analog cellular telephones typically provide no link security). bycontrast, the military requires endtoend encryption to prevent unauthorized access and monitoring of network activity. the military also requires hardware security to prevent an adversary who is opening a device from discerning the hardware or software secrets. military systemsalso benefit from antennas and other technologies designed to make signals difficult to detect, jam, or intercept.interoperability is another area in which the dodõs needs exceed theinterests of the commercial sector. advanced military wireless systemsneed to be compatible with the 17 legacy communications networks aswell as systems operated by nato and the united nations. one meansof achieving this objective is the software radio. now the focus of severalmilitary r&d programs, the ideal military software radio is a multimode,multiband unit using many different waveforms over a broad frequencyrange, whereas commercial versions are likely to offer less flexibility andoperate in a single frequency band. to make optimal use of this promising technology, the dod needs to support specialized r&d focusing onantennas, filters, and adaptive waveforms.the commercial sector has its own incentives to produce advancedcommunications devices, components, and subsystems as well as complete systems. to use commercial technologies effectively, the dod willhave to take special measures to promote the development and acquisition of cots products that can be integrated into systems that meetspecialized military requirements. current commercial r&d and standards activities seek to enable the transmission of many types of information, including data, video, and images, to and from portable wirelessdevices. although this work is certain to create new technology, thecommercial deployment of the technology is not assured. the availabilityof the technology in the marketplace will depend on business, social, andgovernment policy factors. military planners will need to maintain acontinuing awareness of the differences between what is possible technically and what is available in the market to meet military needs.as part of this process, the dod needs to translate its operationalrequirements into technical specifications that can be used to determinethe suitability of commercial wireless technologies for military applications. new approaches to procurement, as well as technology demonstration and testing rather than development, will help dod obtain the greatest return on its investments. in addition, by fully understanding thebarriers to synergy between the commercial and defense sectors, the dodcan develop processes for accommodating or overcoming these barriers.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8the evolution of untethered communicationsfor example, the commercial sector tends to add functions to equipmentonly if economically justified by customer demand; by participating instandardssetting activities the dod can encourage the design of cotsproducts that can be more easily modified to meet military needs.recommendationsthe committeeõs 12 recommendations are organized from the generalto the specific. the first three recommendations identify organizationalchanges that dod should make to foster an environment conducive tothe absorption of stateoftheart commercial wireless communicationstechnologies. the other nine recommendations identify research thatshould be undertaken by darpa to fill gaps in commercial developmentefforts and ensure that advanced wireless systems meet military needs.the research recommendations are presented in order of priority, reflecting the committeeõs view that toplevel systems issues are paramount.the remaining recommendations deal with subsystems and components.organizational changes1.the dod should participate in standardssetting activities for wireless communications technologies and systems.2.the dod should pursue a vigorous process of technology demonstration and testing prior to extensive development and procurement. inparticular, the focus should be on systems concepts based on commercialtechnologies and specialized military enhancements.3.the dod should plan a new approach to procurement that willidentify how commercial infrastructure systems and subscriber equipment can best be used for military purposes and how to purchase commercial equipment in the most productive way.systems research4.darpa should build on current research in modeling and simulation to incorporate the communications traffic, mobility of network elements, and radio propagation encountered in mobile military information networks.5.darpa should initiate research to produce network architecturesthat incorporate commercial products in a manner that meets militaryrequirements.6.darpa should conduct research aimed at understanding andbridging the differences between security needs in commercial and military networks.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary97.darpa should conduct research aimed at reducing cosite interference.component research8.darpa should carry out research and demonstration projects designed to field software radio technology for military applications.9.darpa should conduct the research needed to adapt smart antennas for mobile military applications.10.darpa should conduct research to produce transmission techniques that adapt to a wide range of operating conditions.11.darpa should conduct research to overcome the limitations ofcurrent filter technology for use in military software radios and highdensity platforms.12.darpa should develop novel components to enhance the flexibility of software radios.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10the evolution of untethered communications101past, present, and futurehumans have long dreamed of possessing the capability to communicate with each other anytime, anywhere. kings, nationstates, militaryforces, and business cartels have sought more and better ways to acquiretimely information of strategic or economic value from across the globe.travelers have often been willing to pay premiums to communicate withfamily and friends back home. as the twentyfirst century approaches,technical capabilities have become so sophisticated that stationary telephones, facsimile (fax) machines, computers, and other communicationsdevicesñconnected by wires to power sources and telecommunicationsnetworksñare almost ubiquitous in many industrialized countries. thedream is close to becoming reality. the last major challenge is to developaffordable, reliable, widespread capabilities for òuntetheredó communications, a term coined by the u.s. military and referring to the union ofwireless and mobile technologies. because òuntetheredó is not a widelyused term, this report concentrates on òwirelessó communications systems that use the radio frequency (rf) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. these systems and their component technologies are widely deployed to serve mobile users.mobile wireless communications is a shared goal of both the u.s.military and civilian sectors, which traditionally have enjoyed a synergistic relationship in the development and deployment of communicationstechnology. the balance of that longstanding interdependence is changing now as a result of trends in the marketplace and defense operationsand budgets. these trends suggest that market forces will propel adthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future11vances in technology to meet rising consumer expectations. however,the military may need to take special measures to field costeffective,stateoftheart untethered communications systems that meet defenserequirements.this chapter lays the foundation for an analysis of military needs inthis area by chronicling the evolution of military and civilian applicationsof communications technology, from ancient times leading up to the horizon of 2010. section 1.1 is an overview of the challenge facing the u.s.military. section 1.2 provides an historical perspective on the development of communications infrastructures. section 1.3 outlines the wirelesssystems currently used by the u.s. military and the related research anddevelopment (r&d) activities. sections 1.4 through 1.7 recount the evolution and current status of commercial wireless systems. section 1.8 compares the development paths for wireless technologies in the unitedstates, europe, and japan.1.1 overviewin the final years of the twentieth century, all aspects of wirelesscommunications are subject to rapid change throughout the world. dimensions of change include the following:¥vigorously expanding public demand for products and services;¥dramatic changes worldwide in government policies regardingindustry structure and spectrum management;¥ rapidly advancing technologies in an atmosphere of uncertaintyabout the relative merits of competing approaches;¥emergence of a wide variety of new systems for delivering communications services to wireless terminals; and¥profound changes in communications industries as evidenced byan array of mergers, alliances, and spinoffs involving some of the worldõslargest corporations.these changes are fueled by opportunities for profit and public benefit as perceived by executives, investors, and governments. althoughthe patterns are global, the details differ significantly from country tocountry. each dimension of change is complex and all of them interact.overall, the dynamic nature of wireless communications creates a mixture of confusion and opportunity for stakeholders throughout the world.a principal attraction of wireless communications is its capability toserve mobile users. because mobility is an important feature of militaryoperations, the u.s. armed forces have always played a leading role in thedevelopment and deployment of wireless communications technology.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12the evolution of untethered communicationsin the coming years, however, it appears that the commercial sector willhave sufficient incentives and momentum to push the technical envelopeon its own. at the same time, flat or declining defense budgets are motivating the military to adopt commercial products and services to an increasing extent. yet there are significant differences between military andcommercial requirements. thus, it is important to examine carefully theopportunities for, and limitations to, military use of commercial wirelesscommunications products and services.in contrast to other areas of information technology, wireless communications has yet to converge toward a single technical standard or even avery small number of them. instead it appears that diversity will endurefor the foreseeable future. in this environment, the management andcoordination of complex, diverse systems will be an ongoing challenge,particularly for the u.s. military, which coincidentally has to adapt tonew threats and responsibilities after more than half a century of following the paradigm set by world war ii and the cold war. information isnow assuming greater strategic importance than ever before in warfareand other military operations, and so the wide deployment of costeffective, stateoftheart wireless communications systems has become particularly critical.the present situation recalls previous epochs in which breakthroughsin hardwareñaircraft carriers, jet aircraft, tactical missiles, nuclear weaponsñhave led to radical revisions of military doctrine. the next greatrevolution in military affairs could be shaped by information technology:global communications, ubiquitous sensors, precision location, and pervasive information processing. advanced command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (c4i) systems could make it possibleto monitor an adversary, target specific threats, and neutralize them withthe best available weapon. admiral william owens, former vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, has called such an integrated capability aòsystem of systems.ó using such a system, a commander could observethe battle from a computer screen, select the most threatening targets, anddestroy them with the press of a button. battles would be won by the sidewith the best information, not necessarily the one with the largest battalions.but unlike the military hardware of the past, information technologyis advancing at a breakneck pace in a worldwide marketplace, driven notby military requirements but by the industrial and consumer sectors. increasingly these technologies are available worldwide, and the best technology is no longer limited to u.s. manufacture and control. highlyaccurate position data transmitted by satellite are now available to anyyachtsman. highresolution satellite photographs are for sale around thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future13world. any nation can purchase the latest communications gadgets fromthe electronics stores of tokyo.therein lies the challenge for the u.s. military: how to exploit theadvances in affordable technology fueled by worldwide consumer demand while also maintaining technical capabilities that significantly exceed those of any potential adversary.1.2 historical perspectivethroughout most of history, the evolution of communications technologies has been intimately intertwined with military needs and applications. some of the earliest governmentsponsored r&d projects focusedon communications technologies that enabled command and control. asynergistic relationship then evolved between the military and commercial sectors that accelerated the technology development process. nowlarge corporations develop the latest communications technologies forinternational industrial and consumer markets shaped by governmentregulation and international agreements. world trade in telecommunications equipment and services was valued at $115 billion in 1996 (theeconomist, 1997).modern wireless communication systems are rooted in telephony andradio technologies dating back to the end of the nineteenth century andthe older telegraphy systems dating back to the eighteenth century. wireless systems are also influenced by and increasingly linked to much newercommunications capabilities, such as the internet, which originated in the1960s. all wireless systems transmit signals over the air using differentfrequency transmission bands designated by government regulation.table 11 provides an overview of wireless rf communications systemsand services and the frequency bands they use.1 each frequency band hasboth advantages and disadvantages. at low frequencies the signal propagates along the ground; attenuation is low but atmospheric noise levelsare high. low frequencies cannot carry enough information for videoservices. at higher frequencies there is less atmospheric noise but moreattenuation, and a clear line of sight is needed between the transmitterand receiver because the signals cannot penetrate objects. these frequencies offer greater bandwidth, or channel capacity.1.2.1 communications before the industrial agethe annals of antiquity offer examples of musclepowered communications: human runners, homing pigeons, and horse relays. perhaps theearliest communications infrastructure was the road network of rome,which carried not only the legions needed to enforce the emperorõs willthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14the evolution of untethered communicationstable 11 overview of wireless radio frequency communications systems and servicesfrequency bandacommunications applicationscharacteristics3ð30 khz (very low, or vlf)longrange navigation, marine radio beaconslow attenuation, high atmospheric noise30ð300 khz (low, or lf)300ð3000 khz (medium, or mf)maritime radio, am radio, telephone, telegraph,attenuation varies, noise drops at 30 mhz3ð30 mhz (high, or hf)facsimile30ð300 mhz (very high, or vhf)vhf television, fm twoway radio, uhfcosmic noise, lineofsight propagation0.3ð3 ghz (ultrahigh, or uhf)television, radar3ð30 ghz (superhigh, or shf)satellite, radar, microwaveatmospheric attenuation30ð300 ghz (extremely high,experimental satellite, radarlineofsight propagationor ehf)afrequencies are in kilohertz (khz), megahertz (mhz), and gigahertz (ghz).source: adapted from couch (1995).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future15but also messengers to direct forces far from the capital. ancient societiesalso developed systems that obviated the need for physical delivery ofinformation. these systems operated within lineofsight distances (laterextended by telescope): smoke signals, torch signaling, flashing mirrors,signal flares, and semaphore flags (holzman and pehrson, 1995). observation stations were established along hilltops or roads to relay messagesacross great distances.1.2.2 telegraphythe first comprehensive infrastructure for transmitting messagesfaster than the fastest form of transportation was the optical telegraph,developed in 1793. napoleon considered this his secret weapon becauseit brought him news in paris and allowed him to control his armies beyond the borders of france. the optical telegraph consisted of a set ofarticulated arms that encoded hundreds of symbols in defined positions.under a military contract, the signaling stations were deployed on strategic hilltops throughout france, linking paris to its frontiers. by the mid1800s, 556 stations enabled transmissions across more than 5,000 kilometers (km).the optical telegraph was superseded by the electrical telegraph in1838, when samuel morse developed his dotanddash code. now information could be transmitted beyond visible distances without significantdelay. in an 1844 demonstration on a governmentfunded researchtestbed, morse sent the message òwhat hath god wrought?ó from baltimore to the u.s. capitol (bray, 1995).the rapid deployment of telegraphic lines around the world wasdriven by the need of nineteenthcentury european powers to communicate with their colonial possessions. highrisk technology investmentswere required. after the use of rubber coating was demonstrated oncables deployed across the rhine river, the first transatlantic cable waslaid in 1858, but it failed within months. a new cable designed by lordkelvin was laid in 1866 and operated successfully on a continuous basis.the result was a rapidly expanding telegraphic network that reachedevery corner of the globe. by 1870, great britain communicated directlywith north america, europe, the middle east, and india. other nationsscrambled to duplicate that systemõs global reach, for no nation could trustits critical command messages to the telegraphic lines of a foreign power.1.2.3 early wirelesswithin a few decades of its widespread deployment, telegraphy began to lose customers to a new technologyñradio. in 1895 guglielmothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16the evolution of untethered communicationsmarconi demonstrated that electromagnetic radiation could be detectedat a distance. great britainõs royal navy was an early and enthusiasticcustomer of the company that marconi created to develop radio communications. in 1901 marconi bridged the atlantic ocean by radio, andregular commercial service was initiated in 1907 (masini, 1996).the importance of this new technology became evident with the onset of world war i. soon after hostilities began, the british cut germanyõsoverseas telegraphic cables and destroyed its radio stations. then germany cut britainõs overland cables to india and those crossing the balticto russia. britain enlisted marconi to put together a string of radio stations quickly to reestablish communications with its overseas possessions.the original marconi radios were soon replaced by more advancedequipment that exploited the vacuum tubeõs capability to amplify signalsand operate at higher frequencies than did older systems. in 1915 the firstwireless voice transmission between new york and san francisco signaled the beginning of the convergence of radio and telephony. the firstcommercial radio broadcast followed in 1920 (lewis, 1993). the use ofhigher frequencies (called shortwaves) exploited the ionosphere as a reflector, greatly increasing the range of communications. by world war ii,shortwave radio had developed to the point where small radio sets couldbe installed in trucks or jeeps or carried by a single soldier. the firstportable twoway radio, the handietalkie, appeared in 1940. twowaymobile communications on a large scale revolutionized warfare, allowingfor mobile operations coordinated over large areas.1.2.4 telephonythe telephone was first demonstrated in 1876. a telephone networkbased on mechanical switches and copper wires then grew rapidly. thehigh cost of the cables limited the number of conversations possible at anyone time; as demand increased, multiplexing techniques, such as timedivision and frequency division, were developed.a mix of independent operators ran telephone services in the earlydays. subscribers to different services could not call each other evenwhen in the same town. in 1913 the u.s. government allowed americantelephone and telegraph (at&t) to assume control of the national telephone network in return for becoming a regulated monopoly deliveringòuniversaló service. yet it was not until the 1950s that unified networksignaling was offered to subscribers, allowing them to make directdiallongdistance telephone calls (calhoun, 1992). since then, the rapid extension of the longdistance telephone network has been made possibleby advances in photonic communications and network control technologies.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future171.2.5 communications satellitesthe concept of using geosynchronous satellites for communicationspurposes was first suggested in 1945 by the science fiction writer arthurc. clarke, then employed at britainõs royal aircraft establishment, partof the ministry of defence. satellites of this type are positioned above theequator and move in synch with earthõs rotation. in 1954 j.r. pierce atat&tõs bell telephone laboratories developed the concept of orbital radio relays and identified the key design issues for satellites: passiveversus active transmission, station keeping, attitude control, and remotevehicle control (bray, 1995). pierce advocated an approach of reachinggeostationary orbit in successive stages of technology development, starting with nonsynchronous, loworbit satellites. hughes aircraft companyadvocated a geostationary concept based on the companyõs patented stationkeeping techniques.in 1957 the soviet union launched sputnik, the first satellite to beplaced in orbit. amateur radio operators were able to pick up its lowpower transmissions all over the world. in 1960 the national aeronauticsand space administration (nasa) and bell laboratories launched thefirst u.s. communications satellite, echo1, in a low earth orbit. the firstsatellitebased voice message was sent by president dwight eisenhowerusing passive transmission techniques. the next advance in satellite technology was the successful launch of the telstar system by nasa andbell laboratories. using active transmission technology telstar delivered the first television transmission across the atlantic in 1962. becauseit was placed in an elliptical orbit that varied from low to medium altitudes, the satellite was visible contemporaneously to earth stations onboth sides of the atlantic for only about 30 minutes at a time. clearlygeostationary orbits were desirable if satellites were to be used for continuous telephone and television communications across long distances.in 1963 hughes aircraft and nasa achieved geosynchronous orbit(known as geo today) with the successful launch of the syncom satellite. the satellite was placed in an orbit of approximately 36,210 km, adistance that allowed it to remain stationary over a given point on earthõssurface. syncom led the way for the next several decades of satellitesystems by demonstrating that synchronous orbit was achievable, andthat station keeping and attitude control were feasible. today most satellites, both military and commercial, are of the geo variety.comsat was formed by an act of congress in 1962 and representedu.s. commercial interests in satellite technology development at intelsat,established in 1964 as an international, governmentchartered organization to coordinate worldwide satellite communications issues.intelsatii (early bird) was launched into a geosynchronous orbit inthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18the evolution of untethered communications1965 and supported 240 telephone links or one television channel. channelcapacities are now measured in the tens of thousands of voice channels (theintelsatvi, launched in 1987, supports 80,000 voice channels).the first military satellites, the dscsi group, were launched by theu.s. air force in 1966. three launches placed 26 lightweight (100pound)satellites in neargeosynchronous orbit. these systems supported digitalvoice and data communications using spreadspectrum technology (animportant signalprocessing approach discussed extensively in chapter2). the satellites were replaced in the 1970s by the dscsii group, whichincreased channel capacity by using spotbeam antennas with high gainto boost the received power. the first crosslinked military satellites, theles 8/9, were launched in 1976. this demonstration fostered a vision ofspacebased architecturesñwithout vulnerable ground relaysñfor communication, navigation, surveillance, and reconnaissance.satellites offer several advantages over landbased communicationssystems. rapid, twoway communications can be established over wideareas with only a single relay in space, and global coverage with only afew relay hops. earth stations can now be set up and moved quickly.furthermore, satellite systems are virtually immune to impairments suchas multipath fading (channel impairments are discussed in chapter 2).but with the rapid deployment of undersea fiberoptic links, the use ofsatellite channels for telephony has been on the decline. the high capacity of fiber provides for competitive costs, which, combined with lowlatency, have attracted consumers. the future of the satellite industrydepends on the emergence of applications other than fixed telephonychannels. a new generation of satellite systems is being deployed toprovide mobile telephone services (see section 1.5).1.2.6 mobile radio and the origins of cellular telephonythe early development of mobile radio was driven by public safetyneeds. in 1921 detroit became the first city to experiment with radiodispatched police cars. however, transmission from vehicles was limitedby the difficulty of producing small, lowpower transmitters suitable foruse in automobiles. twoway systems were first deployed in bayonne,new jersey, in the 1930s. the system operated in òpushtotalkó (i.e.,halfduplex) mode; simultaneous transmission and reception, or fullduplex mode, was not possible at the time (calhoun, 1988).frequency modulation (fm), invented in 1935, virtually eliminatedbackground static while reducing the need for high transmission power,thus enabling the development of lowpower transmitters and receiversfor use in vehicles. world war ii stimulated commercial fm manufacturing capacity and the rapid development of mobile radio technology. thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future19need for thousands of portable communicators accelerated advances insystem packaging and reliability and reduced costs. in 1946 public mobile telephone service was introduced in 25 cities across the united states.the initial systems used a central transmitter to cover a metropolitan area.the inefficient use of spectrum and the coarseness of the electronic filtersseverely limited capacity: thirty years after the introduction of mobiletelephone service the new york system could support only 543 users.a solution to this problem emerged in the 1970s when researchers atbell laboratories developed the concept of the cellular telephone system,in which a geographical area is divided into adjacent, nonoverlapping,hexagonalshaped òcells.ó each cell has its own transmitter and receiver(called a base station) to communicate with the mobile units in that cell; amobile switching station coordinates the handoff of mobile units crossingcell boundaries. throughout the geographical area, portions of the radiospectrum are reused, greatly expanding system capacity but also increasing infrastructure complexity and cost.in the years following the establishment of the mobile telephone service, at&t submitted numerous proposals to the federal communications commission (fcc) for a dedicated block of spectrum for mobilecommunications. other than allowing experimental systems in chicagoand washington, d.c., the fcc made no allocations for mobile systemsuntil 1983, when the first commercial cellular systemñthe advanced mobile phone system (amps)ñwas established in chicago. cellular technology became highly successful commercially with the miniaturizationof subscriber handsets.1.2.7 the internet and packet radiothe original concepts underlying the internet were developed in themid1960s at what is now the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa), then known as arpa. the original application was thearpanet, which was established in 1969 to provide survivable computercommunications networks. the arpanet relied heavily on packet switching concepts developed in the 1960s at the massachusetts institute of technology, the rand corporation, and great britainõs national physical laboratory (kahn et al., 1978; hafner and lyon, 1996; leiner et al., 1997). thisapproach was a departure from the circuitswitching systems used in telephone networks (see box 11).the first arpanet node was located at the university of californiaat los angeles. additional nodes were soon established at stanford research institute (now sri international), the university of california atsanta barbara, and the university of utah. the development of a hosttohost protocol,2 the network control protocol (ncp), followed in 1970,the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20the evolution of untethered communicationsenabling network users to develop applications. at the same time, thealoha project at the university of hawaii was investigating packetswitched networks over fixedsite radio links. the alohanet beganoperating in 1970, providing the first demonstration of packet radio access in a data network (abramson, 1985). the contention protocols usedin alohanet served as the basis for the òcarriersense multiple accesswith collision detectionó (csma/cd) protocols used in the ethernet localarea network (lan) developed at xerox palo alto research center in1973. the widespread use of ethernet lans to connect personal computers (pcs) and workstations allowed broad access to the internet, a termthat emerged in the late 1970s with the design of the internet protocol (ip).the need to link wired, packet radio, and satellite networks led to thespecifications for the transmission control protocol (tcp), which replacedncp and shifted the responsibility for transmission from the network tothe end hosts, thereby enabling the protocol to operate no matter howunreliable the underlying links.3the development of microprocessors, surface acoustic wave filters,and communications protocols for intelligent management of the sharedradio channel contributed to the advancement of packet radio technologyin the 1970s. in 1972 arpa launched the packet radio program, aimed atdeveloping techniques for the mobile battlefield, and satnet, an experimental satellite network. in 1983 arpa launched a secondgenerationpacket radio program, survivable adaptive networks, to demonstratehow packet radio networks could be scaled up to encompass much largernumbers of nodes and operate in the harsh environment likely to be encountered on the mobile battlefield.box 11circuit switching versus packet switchingtelephone systems are based on a connectionoriented or circuitswitched model in which connections are fixed for the duration of a call. such systems are inefficient when transmission occurs in short bursts separated by long pauses. packetswitching replaces the centralized switches with distributed routers, each with multiple connections to adjacent routers. messages are divided into òpacketsó that areindependently routed on a hopbyhop basis. such an approach allows messages tobe multiplexed over the available paths on a statistically determined basis, gracefullyadapting the transmissions to traffic levels and optimizing the use of existing linkcapacity without preallocating link bandwidth.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future211.3 military wireless systems and research1.3.1 terrestrial systemsradio communications technology is widely used by u.s. militaryunits at all levels. the many different types of military radios and applications cause a variety of communication problems. the military environment magnifies common difficulties such as the failure of one radiotype to communicate with another type (interoperability), failure of oneuser to communicate with another (connectivity), incompatibility of newradios with old radios (legacy systems), and one radio at a location interfering with another radio at the same location (cosite interference).in general, u.s. military radio systems can be categorized by the location of users and the information they broadcast and receive (see figure 11). multiple radios are often gathered together in an aircraft, shipboardradio room, or communications van to form tactical radio complexes andcommandandcontrol centers. the radios operate simultaneously usingmany different waveforms across several frequency bands (e.g., high frequency [hf], very high frequency [vhf], and ultrahigh frequency [uhf]).combat net radios take the form of either a single radio in a vehicle(much like a car radio) or a device like a òwalkietalkieó carried around bya soldier. most of the information broadcast on combat net radios consists of voice communications, often to share position information. manyof todayõs combat net radios have been enhanced to carry data in additionto voice. in general, combat net radios have fewer capabilities and costless than do tactical radios (see table 12). military radios generally costmuch more than commercial systems supporting similar applications.deployed military radios have various shortcomings. for example,the mobile subscriber equipment (mse), the u.s. armyõs mobile telephone system for the battlefield, was designed to be like a cellular telephone but is outdated compared to current technology. the singlechanfigure 11military radios are designed for different uses. combat net radios,for example, are designed for communications within a battle group.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22the evolution of untethered communicationsnel ground and airborne radio system (sincgars) has been updatedwith recent technology, including programmable microprocessors, applicationspecific integrated circuits (asics), and surfacemount technology,but it implements a series of outdated waveform standards for singlechannel digital voice. furthermore, sincgars has experienced severecosite interference problems because it hops transmission frequencieswithin the vhf band, a design capability that helps prevent jamming byadversaries but results in hops onto channels already in use for othercommunications traffic. the mobile subscriber radio terminal (msrt)costs $70,000 and is about the size of a microwave oven; an updatedversion, introduced in 1994, is no less expensive and no smaller. numerous hf radios have been built by the army, but most are in storagebecause these radios are not simple pushtotalk designs and user training for the difficult hf channel has not been widespread.the problems posed by individual radios are exacerbated by the difficulties encountered in linking communications systems of varying sophistication together (see box 12). special interfaces can be designed;sincgars, for example, can be interfaced into the msrt. inherent interoperability is among the features sought in sophisticated future systems.but in the near term, frontline troops will continue to use both existing andevolving radios, such as sincgars, mobile tactical satellite (tacsat)table 12 tactical and combat net radioscharacteristicsc4i radiosaarmy tactical radiossimultaneous4ð201channelswaveforms5ð201ð4waveform structurewideband and narrowbandnarrowbandcost$50,000ð$500,000+$5,000ð$50,000deployed examples¥joint tactical informationdistribution system¥joint tactical terminal¥fleet broadcast (uhfsatellitenaval commandandcontrolradio)acommand, control, communications, computing, and intelligence.¥singlechannel groundand airborne radio system¥enhanced positionlocation reporting system¥mobile subscriberequipmentthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future23terminals, mse, msrt, and packet radios. the army is struggling withhow to upgrade the mse, a proprietary system. the sincgars is expected to be replaced and upgraded with a triservice joint tactical radio in1999.the u.s. department of defense established ip as the underlyingòbuilding codeó for the army, making a commitment to migrate all communications networks to the same basic structure as the internet to position the military to integrate and leverage the advances in commercialinformation technologies. the armyõs task force xxi òtactical internetó(boozallen & hamilton, 1995) was the first major experimental fieldingof this new architecture (sass and eldridge, 1994; sass, 1996).box 12realities of military communications in bosniau.s. military communications systems in bosnia have been frustrating, accordingto brigade commander kenneth allard (1996), who described the situation this way:despite the imperative of supporting the warfighter, the river of informationavailable to u.s. military forces in bosnia often diminishes to a trickle by thetime it reaches the soldiers actually executing peacekeeping missions. onone recent operation, a brigade commander who had requested overheadimagery of his area complained that òthe systemó took three weeks to provide photographs that eventually turned out to be six months old. the reasons are many: communications pipelines too narrow to efficiently carrydigital data to the field, outmoded tactical equipment, and automation resources easily overwhelmed by what data are available. . . . the army communications system has generally worked well in bosnia,but only at great costs in manpower and effort. because army tactical radiosoperate on lineofsight transmissions, it is essential to place repeaters andrelays on mountain tops. but with large numbers of radios nets required forthe 15 brigades operating in the u.s. sector, there is a real problem withinterference (òsignal fratricideó). when these critical relay sites must be fortified and defended, support requirements can consume 7ð8 percent of combat manpower in addition to the u.s. signal brigade of over 1,100 soldiers.. . . although the military communications system features free morale calls,most u.s. soldiers òphone homeó with at&t prepaid credit cardsñexpenseoutweighed by clarity and convenience. their commanders have similar feelings. òthe former warring factions have better communications,ó snappedone u.s. brigade commander, òbecause they have cellular phones and idonõt.óthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24the evolution of untethered communications1.3.2 satellite systemssatellite systems play a major role in military communications. theyare attractive alternatives to landbased systems because they providemobile and tactical communications to a large number of users over awide geographical area. in addition, communication links can be addedor deleted quickly, and satellites are less vulnerable to destruction orenemy exploitation than are landbased systems.the dod uses both military and commercial satellites to meet itscommunications needs. fleet communications are supported by the governmentowned fltsat and contractorowned leasat systems, bothof which are geosynchronous. the u.s. air force uses fltsat, the ellipticalorbit satellite data system, and the dscsiii satellites to support theafsatcom satellite system. the dscs, a vital component of the globaldefense communications system, is the dodõs primary system for longhaul, highvolume trunk traffic. the operational dscs space segmentconsists of a mix of dscsii and dscsiii satellites.in 1982 the military began developing new satellite and terminal technology for milstar, a millimeterwave system operating in the 30ð60gigahertz (ghz) range. this new system consists of both geosynchronousand inclinedorbit satellites. the system provides enhanced antijam (aj)capabilities as well as hardening against nuclear attack. only a few of theplanned eight milstar satellites have been deployed so far. the complete system would provide two satellites per coverage area over thecontinental united states and the atlantic, pacific, and indian oceans.in general, existing tacticalsatellite ground terminals incorporate newtechnology (e.g., microprocessors, asics, surfacemount technology) butare still forced to implement legacy waveforms. as a result, they havegenerally not kept pace with innovations in commercial communicationswaveforms and standards. in the case of milstar, the military uses anoncommercial frequency band and is therefore unable to useñor takeadvantage of the price reductions inñcommercial hardware. the newjoint tactical terminal (one of the systems listed in table 12) is designedusing modern radio technology, perhaps even including softwaredefinedradios (see section 1.3.3.2). high data rates sufficient for multimediatransmissions can be achieved only with the most advanced technology.for example, the global broadcast system (gbs), part of the u.s. navyõsuhf followon satellites 8, 9, and 10, has bandwidth exceeding 100 megabits per second (mbps) and worldwide coverage.the most widely used military satellite system is the global positioning system (gps), which encompasses 18 to 24 satellites in inclined orbitstransmitting spreadspectrum signals. the gps receivers extract precisetime and frequency information from these signals to determine withthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future25great accuracy the receiver location, velocity, and acceleration. the system can be used by anyone with a receiver.4 commercial gps receiversare used for numerous applications, including surveying, aircraft andship navigation, and even recreational activities on land. althoughlaunching and upkeep of the entire fleet of satellites are paid for by theunited states, commercial gps receivers were used by both sides in thegulf war.1.3.3 research initiatives in untethered communicationsthe dodõs vision for future communications systems is typicallyexpressed in general terms, such as òmultimedia to the foxholeó (see box13). for example, the armyõs architecture for the digitized battlefield ofthe twentyfirst century consists of fixed highbandwidth infrastructureat the army, theater, and corps levels, integrated with the dodõs globalgrid (a concept for spanning the world with highbandwidth computingand communications systems) and based on asynchronous transfer mode(atm) widearea networking technology (sass and gorr, 1995). bandwidth is allocated not only up and down the command hierarchy but alsohorizontally to cooperating formations. at the division level and below,wireless extensions provided by mobile radio access points (raps) willlink the frontline combat communications systems to the infrastructurein the rear areas. the rap is a wheeled or tracked vehicle with an onthemove antenna system. the raps carry extensive communications systems and are interconnected by highcapacity trunk radios capable ofbox 13preparing for battle in a multisensor environmentthe armyõs force xxi soldier program is developing the prototype technologiesneeded to make the soldier more efficient as a sensor and more lethal. many sensorswill be used in future theaters of operation: everything that moves will have one ormore sensors, and there will be many stationary sensors. soldiers may carry position,identification, health, and imagery sensors, for example, or a networking bodywornradio. they will probably be able to image and locate anything on the battlefieldand notify others of the onset of a firefight, drawing support from nearby assets.finally, soldiers will be able to provide reconnaissance reports in far greater detail,perhaps catching important details missed in traditional daily radio reporting. thedismounted soldier is not the only user of imagery and video services; ships, aircraft,and other platforms may also carry sensors. video and video teleconferencing applications have already been deployed on an experimental basis. all of these sensorswill increase the data load on the military communications system.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26the evolution of untethered communicationscommunicating at up to 45 mbps over a range of 30 km. satellites or othersystems may provide backup communications.to the committeeõs knowledge, the operational requirements for future untethered communications have not been translated into technicalspecifications. in the future, technical specifications will need to be formulated in a way that will make it possible to determine which commercial technologies are capable of meeting military needs. as an alternative,some general dod requirements can be inferred from military plans andthe known technical capabilities of existing and emerging communications technologies. for example, future military wireless systems willrequire high data ratesñthe longrange goal is at least 10 mbpsñand thecapability to transmit over broad and variable frequency bands (someexperimental radios are designed to span frequencies from 2 mhz to2 ghz). the systems will need to be rapidly deployable and the infrastructure will need to be mobile. multilevel communications security thatencompasses the most secure levels possible will be needed. furthermore, to enable worldwide strategic communications, the new equipmentwill need to be interoperable with older military systems as well as thoseused by foreign allies and international forces. there are more than 17different u.s. defense communications networks, and none are readilyinteroperable at present. new concepts and technologies will clearly beneeded to meet all these requirements.to meet its future communications requirements, the dod is funding anumber of research and demonstration projects, typically pursuing highrisk ventures with potentially high payoff. the most comprehensive dodfunded initiative dealing with untethered communications is the globalmobile information systems (glomo) program initiated by darpa in 1994.other relevant research initiatives deal with softwaredefined radios, communications systems, and radio technology (leiner et al., 1996).1.3.3.1 global mobile information systems programthe overarching goal of glomo is to develop technology for robustendtoend information systems in a global mobile environment by exploiting commercial products and generating new technologies with applications in both commercial and military domains. the program supports a wide range of research projects, which are identified based on thepriorities of glomo managers rather than on a systems approach to thedevelopment of topdown solutions. notably missing from the program,for example, is a comprehensive assessment of the suitability of variousnetwork architectures, even though all other component needs are dictated by the system design. (network architecture issues are discussed indetail in chapters 2 and 3.) the glomo program currently focuses onthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future27developing innovative technologies that span the following researchthrusts.design infrastructure. this effort spans tools, languages, and environments for designing and deploying wireless systems. research areasinclude computeraided design tools for estimating power and designinglowpower systems, design libraries and models for mixedsignal integrated circuits (ics) suitable for implementing highly integrated rf chipsets, and simulation tools for modeling the propagation of radio wavesand higherlevel protocols.untethered nodes. this effort focuses on highperformance, modular, lowcost, and lowpower wireless nodes. research activities are aimed at developing the next generation of agile, highly integrated radio technology. radio control points are exposed to higher software layers to make radios andapplications more adaptable to changing needs and conditions. complementary metal oxide semiconductor (cmos) technology (an inexpensive,lowpower technology) is being pushed to its limits to achieve highspeedrf circuitry coupled to high levels of integration. several activities arecombining custom signal processing for audio and video with the radiocircuitry. in these efforts radios are viewed as modular building blocks thatcan be combined to yield systems with different costperformancefunctionattributes. some projects are investigating the architectures of softwareradios, in which many of the radio functions are performed by softwarecombined with veryhighperformance processing architectures.network protocols and algorithms. this effort deals with the developmentof robust network architectures and techniques for rapid deployment ofwireless networks. research efforts include the development of newpacketradio routing schemes such as dynamic routing protocols for adhoc networking. the concepts being studied are not limited to endnodemobility: other possibilities include basestation mobility and networkreconfiguration as base stations are repositioned in a battlefield scenario.endtoend networking. this effort addresses how best to operate across aheterogeneous mix of underlying networks, both wireless and wired.research areas include extensions to tcp/ip that will enable mobile users to access the internet, satellite extensions to the internet, and overlaywireless networking that supports mobility across diverse wireless subnetworks inside buildings and in the wider area.mobile applications support. this effort deals with the development ofdistributed computing techniques that will enable applications to adaptthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28the evolution of untethered communicationsto varying network connectivity and quality of service (qos) needs. thetechniques being studied include software agents (sometimes called mediators or proxies) that adapt data representations to the capabilities ofbandwidthconstrained wireless links; methods of performing computations in the wireline infrastructure on behalf of power and displaylimited portable devices such as personal digital assistants (pdas); capabilities to move code between wired and portable nodes to providelocationdependent or new functionality when the node is poorly connected; file system structures that operate whether well connected, disconnected, or poorly connected to a wired infrastructure; eventnotification protocols that enable applications to learn of changes to theunderlying network connectivity and qos; and techniques for structuring applications to exploit information about their current location.1.3.3.2softwaredefined radio researchthe dod is devoting considerable attention to designing and demonstrating softwaredefined radios, none of which is in production as yet. themost prominent of these initiatives is the speakeasy program sponsoredby darpa, the air force rome laboratory, and the army communicationelectronics command. the key objective of speakeasy is to change theparadigm for military radios. in the past, radios were based on òpointdesignsó with negligible capabilities for functional upgrades or waveformchangesñcapabilities that define speakeasy. in phase 1 of the program,analogtodigital (a/d) converters were used to complete the radio signalpath and highspeed digital signal processors (dsps) were used for filteringand demodulation. the key technologies demonstrated in phase 1 includedigital frequency conversion and wideband signal processing.in speakeasy phase 2, modular radio elements (separate modulesfor the analog elements, a/d converter, and dsps) will be integrated onan openarchitecture bus. the key objective of phase 2 is to demonstratea softwaredefined networking radio with support for legacy and futurewaveform evolution using a single architecture. this approach increasesproduction volume, reduces costs, and enhances logistical support. theopenarchitecture design implies that competitive bids would be soughtfor commercial boards, modules, and software. other goals include theuse of commercial modules in the radio and the commercialization of anyfunctions developed specifically for the radio.the naval research laboratory has an ongoing research programfocusing on a softwaredefined radio known as the joint c4i terminal(jcit). the jcit grew out of an army requirement for an advanced,helicopterbased commandandcontrol system. the jcit will incorpothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future29rate multiple softwaredefined radios for combat net, intelligence communications, and military data links on a single platform.also under development is the advanced communications engine(ace), which evolved from a project sponsored by darpa. the ace isa softwaredefined digital radio with capabilities for multiple simultaneous band and channel transmissions (it has six receiving and transmitting channels). the initial prototypes demonstrate òdualuseó (i.e., bothmilitary and commercial) capabilities including those of combat net radios sincgars and have quick (a uhf system designed to providesecure airtoair and airtoground communications with aj capabilities)and commercial avionics radios such as gps, vhf air to ground, and theaircraft communications addressing and reporting system.a very ambitious program, millennium, was initiated to design anultrawideband radio. one objective was to demonstrate extremely highspeed (approximately 1 billion samples per second) a/d data convertersfor both military and commercial communications. after the data conversion process, all tuning, filtering, demodulation, and decoding functions are performed by software (these processes and the associated technologies are discussed in chapter 2).1.3.3.3 communications systems researchseveral important research programs focus on complete communication systems. the darpa battlefield awareness and data dissemination(badd) program combines radios, atm routers, and various communications networks and airborne relays from the armyõs digital battlefieldtechnology development effort for the deployment of highspeed dataand largefile image transfer to the forward area. the bosnia commandand control augmentation program, which is phase 1 of the gbs andfocuses on satellite communications, grew out of badd testing. phase 2of the gbs involves the incorporation of directv transponders into navyuhf satellites. phase 3 will provide the means for standalone satellitetransfer of highspeed data and largefile images.1.3.3.4 radio component researchthe dodõs extremely lightweight antenna program produced acompact, lightweight (under 2 pounds), and wideband (85 mhz to 2.2ghz) antenna. the antenna incorporates a directional wideband satellitebeam as well as lowgain omnidirectional radiation patterns. the darpaadvanced digital receiver technology program was initiated to demonstrate technology elements for softwaredefined receivers in communicathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30the evolution of untethered communicationstions, radar, and electronic warfare. several of these functions might bemerged into one digital receiver unit.1.3.3.5 small unit operationsthe small unit operations situational awareness system includes asignificant wireless communications component. one goal of the researchis to create a radio system for exchanging information among groups ofup to 12 foot soldiers operating in an area of approximately 4 km2.1.3.3.6 modeling and simulationthe scalable selforganizing simulations (s3) program, supported bydarpa and the national science foundation, uses parallel computers tosimulate communications networks. this program includes projects thatcreate models and a library of computer programs for simulating mobility,radio propagation, and teletraffic patterns in largescale wireless networks.1.4 commercial terrestrial mobile telephonesystems and servicescommercial wireless communications systems have exhibited remarkable growth over the past decade (see figure 12). there are currently morethan 50 million u.s. cellular subscribers (hill, 1997) and more than 34 million u.s. paging subscribers (mooney, 1997). an estimated 17 percent ofthe u.s. population now has cellular service, compared to 95 percent withwireline telephone service (hill, 1997). there are also 50 million subscribersto systems based on the global system for mobile communications (gsm)standard, the european cellular technology. worldwide, the total numberof subscribers to cellular systems is projected at just under 200 million (hill,1997). it should be noted that these figures, as market research estimates,are fundamentally imprecise and, moreover, tend to be volatile because ofthe dynamic nature of the wireless industry.throughout the world, wireless communication systems are enablingdeveloping countries to provide instant telephone service to new subscribers who otherwise would have to wait years for wireline access.although wireless users are still far outnumbered by the approximately700 million wireline telephone users worldwide, the number of new wireless subscribers is growing 15 times faster than the wireline subscriberbase, and this pace is expected to accelerate in the coming years. analystspredict that, by the year 2010, there will be equal numbers of wireless andwireline connections throughout the world.wireless mobile telephone systems can be divided into three generathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future31tions. the first generation, introduced in the 1980s and early 1990s, usesanalog cellular and cordless telephone technology. secondgenerationsystems transmit speech in digital format. they provide advanced callingfeatures and some nonvoice services. there are two categories of secondgeneration systems. hightier systems feature highpower transmitters,base stations with coverage ranges on the order of kilometers, and subscribers moving at vehicular speeds. lowtier systems, serving subscribers moving at pedestrian speeds, have lowpower transmitters with arange on the order of 100 meters (m). some of these systems are designedprimarily for indoor use. thirdgeneration systems, planned for introduction after 2002, are expected to integrate disparate services, includingbroadband information services that cannot be delivered with secondgeneration technology. many users are looking forward to the increasedconvenience promised by the integration or compatibility of systems (seebox 14). in addition to terrestrial mobile telephone systems, other commercial wireless systems include satellite communications, mobile datasystems, and wireless local area networks (lans).1.4.1 firstgeneration systemsof the original wireless communications systems deployed in the1980s, the most popular was the analog cordless telephone, which usesfigure 12 the number of u.s. cellular subscribers and cell sites soared between 1984 and 1996. note that 1984 figures are for january 1985. source: reproduced with the cellular telephone industry associationõs permission fromthe ctiaõs semiannual data survey.0510152025303540451984198519861987198819891990199119921993199419951996yearendmillions of subscribersthousands of cell sitesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32the evolution of untethered communicationsradio to connect a portable handset to a unit that is wired to the publicswitched telephone network. hundreds of millions of such devices havebeen produced, and the technology has been standardized in europe under the cordless telephone firstgeneration (ct0, ct1, and ct1+) standards. there is no single u.s. standard. analog cordless telephones haveranges limited to tens of meters and require a dedicated telephone line.cellular systems have enabled much greater mobility.in establishing cellular service in 1983 the fcc divided the unitedstates into 734 cellular markets (called metropolitan statistical areas andrural service areas), each with an òasideó and òbsideó cellular serviceprovider. historically, the designation of a or b indicated the origins ofthe cellular provider: an aside provider did not originate in the traditional telephone business and was called a nonwireline carrier, whereas abside provider had roots in traditional services and was called a wirelinecarrier. each cellular carrier is licensed to use 25 mhz of radio spectrumin the 800mhz band to provide twoway telephone and data communications for its particular market. because the u.s. analog cellular systemis standardized with amps, any cellular telephone is capable of workingin any part of the country.the amps cellular standard uses analog fm and fullduplex radiochannels. the frequency division multiple access (fdma) technique enables multiple users to share the same region of spectrum. this standardsupports clear communication and inexpensive mobile telephones, butthe transmissions are easy to intercept on a standard radio receiver andtherefore are susceptible to eavesdropping. as of late 1996, 88 percent ofall cellular telephones in the united states used the amps standard (digibox 14so many systems, so little integrationthe proliferation of commercial communications systems can seem overwhelming, especially to international travelers. one such traveler explains: òi have a twoway pager that works in the united states. i have a oneway pager that works insome countries. i have another oneway pager that works in other countries. iõve gota gsm phone. iõve got a cdpd [cellular digital packet data] modem. i have a ram[mobile data] and an ardis radio. i have a cable to connect my cellular phone to themodem in my pc. i have accounts with two internet service providers, compuserve,america online, an account at the office. iõve got seven phone numbers in the 847area code, one phone number in the 708 area code. iõve got one phone number innew jersey because at&t wireless are the only people who will give you a gsmaccount, so i have a new jersey phone number. i live in chicago. . . . i have myown phone book which just has me in it. thatõs the problem today: iõve got all ofthis stuffó (lou dellaverson, motorola, inc., december 10, 1996).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future33tal cellular standards have only recently become available). outside ofthe united states and canada, a wide variety of incompatible analogcellular systems have been deployed (see table 13). the european cellular service, which predated the amps system, used the nordic mobiletelephone (nmt) standard beginning in 1982. other european nationsand japan also developed analog standards.1.4.2 secondgeneration systemsspurred by growing consumer demand for wireless services, standards organizations in north america, europe, and japan have specifiednew technologies to meet consumer expectations and make efficient useof allocated spectrum bands. these secondgeneration systems use advanced digital signal processing, compression, coding, and networkcontrol techniques to conserve radio bandwidth, prevent eavesdropping andunauthorized use of networks, and also support additional services (e.g.,voice mail, threeway calling, and text transmission retrieval).in the united states, secondgeneration technologies have been deployed in the original 800 mhz cellular bands and in personal communications bands around 1900 mhz that were allocated by the fcc between1995 and 1997. in europe and most other parts of the world, secondgeneration technologies are deployed in the 900mhz cellular bands andin 1800mhz personal communications bands. japan operates digitalcellular systems in various bands between 800 mhz and 1500 mhz aswell as a personal communications band near 1900 mhz.the most widespread secondgeneration techniques include three hightier standards: the european standard, gsm; and two north american standards, is136, a time division multiple access (tdma) technique, and is95, acode division multiple access (cdma) technique.5 the gsm standard, whichhas been adopted in more than 100 countries, specifies a complete wideareacommunications system. the other two standards specify only the communications between mobile telephones and base stations. a separate standard,is41, governs communications between mobile switching centers and otherinfrastructure elements in the united states. table 14 summarizes the properties of the principal hightier secondgeneration systems.among lowtier standards, the personal handyphone system (phs)provides mobile telephone services to several million japanese subscribers. two other standards, digital european cordless telecommunications(dect) and cordless telephone second generation (ct2), form the basis ofseveral wireless business telephone (i.e., private branch exchange, or pbx)products. a fourth lowtier system is the personal access communications system (pacs), a u.s. standard. although pacs has attracted considerable industry interest, it has not been widely deployed to date. table15 summarizes the properties of lowtier systems.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34the evolution of untethered communicationstable 13analog cellular systemstransmission frequency (mhz)channelspacingregionsstandardmobile stationbase station(khz)coveredcommentsampsa824ð849869ð89430america, australia, se asia, africatacsb890ð915935ð96025europebands later allocated to gsmcetacsd872ð905917ð95025united kingdomnmte 450453ð457.5463ð467.525europenmt 900890ð915935ð96012.5europe, africa, se asiafrequency overlappingc450450ð455.74460ð465.7410germany, portugalrtmsf450ð455460ð46525italyradiocom192.5ð199.5200.5ð207.512.5francefirst two bands are regional, second2000215.5ð233.5207.5ð215.5two are national165.2ð168.4169.8ð173414.8ð418424.8ð428ntt g925ð940870ð88525/6.25japanfirst band is nationwide, others are915ð918.5860ð863.56.25regional922ð925867ð8706.25jtacsh915ð925860ð87025/12.5japanall are regionalntacsi898ð90184384625/12.5918.5ð922863.5ð86712.5aadvanced mobile phone system.btotal access communications system.cglobal system for mobile communications.dextended total access communications system.enordic mobile telephone.fradio telephone mobile system.gthe dominant telecommunications operating company in japan.hjapanese total access communications.inarrowband total access communications.source: reprinted from padgett et al. (1995) with permission. copyright © 1995 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future35table 14 hightier digital cellular systemssystemis95gsmais136pdcbregionworldwideworldwideamericasjapanaccess methodcdmacfdmad/tdmaefdma/tdmatdmafrequency bands824ð849, 869ð894,890ð915, 935ð960824ð849, 869ð894810ð826, 940ð956, 1477ð(megahertz)1850ð1910, 1930ð1710ð1785, 1805ð18851489, 1429ð1441, 1501ð19901850ð1910, 1930ð19901513, 1453ð1465carrier spacing12502003025(kilohertz)channels persoft capacity (limited833carrierby noise andinterference)aglobal system for mobile communications.bpacific digital cellular.ccode division multiple access.dfrequency division multiple access.etime division multiple access.source: reprinted from padgett et al. (1995) with permission. copyright © 1995 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36the evolution of untethered communicationsin addition to the 1900mhz licensed personal communications bands(see table 15, the fifth column), the fcc has allocated the 1910ð1930mhz band for unlicensed lowtier systems. commercial products basedon dect, phs, and a modified version of pacs (designated pacsub,for unlicensed band) are under consideration for deployment in the 1910ð1930 mhz band.each of the secondgeneration systems has distinct features and limitations, but none was designed specifically with the problems of large,complex organizations such as the military in mind. nevertheless, it ispossible to combine disparate approaches in a customized network builtto meet the unique voice and data communications needs of an organization with national reach (see box 15).box 15tracking packages across north americatotaltrack was established by the united parcel service (ups) and a consortium ofmore than 100 cellular carriers in the united states and canada in response to customer demands for realtime package tracking. the system was the first nationwide cellular data service. in conjunction with the private ups telecommunications network(upsnet), totaltrack provides broad coverage, enabling 60,000 ups vehicles in theunited states and canada to transmit status information to the ups mainframe computer within minutes of package delivery. totaltrack uses existing cellular technologyand infrastructure to process 1.25 million calls and large quantities of data daily.the ups drivers record package information using a custombuilt, handheld electronic data collection device, which is used to scan the package bar code and tocapture the receiverõs signature. this information is transmitted through a modem inthe vehicle to the local cellular network, which provides the link to upsnet. thesystem is designed to be failsafe with cellular redundancies, dual access to upsnet,and multiple connections to the data center.the effectiveness of cellular technology for this application was proven by a 10city field test that compared specialized mobile radio with cellular. initially therewere concerns about cellular reliability for data transmission. cellular was believedto be too noisy and prone to signal interference to transmit data effectively. however, ups achieved link reliability by using a particular combination of errorcontrolprotocols. to reduce the duration and cost of data calls, the cellular carriers connected their switching systems directly into upsnet using a multipurpose access platform. this equipment receives the cellular data from ups vehicles, converts it froman analog circuitswitched to a digital packetswitched format, and then forwards itto one of 40 ups packet switches around the country. other innovations include aphone numbering plan that allows ups vehicles to roam between the service areasof adjacent alliance members, a billing system that consolidates all carrier chargesinto a single ups bill, and a unified òhelp deskó that quickly resolves cellular serviceproblems.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future37table 15 lowtier wireless/personal communications systemssystemct2/ct2+adectbphscpacsdregioneurope, canadaeuropejapanunited statesaccess methodfdmaefdma/tdmaffdma/tdmafdma/tdmafrequency band (megahertz)864ð868, 944ð9481880ð19001895ð19181850ð1910, 1930ð1990carrier spacing (kilohertz)1001728300300number of carriers40107716 per pairchannels per carrier11248 per pairacordless telephone second generation.bdigital european cordless telecommunications.cpersonal handyphone system.dpersonal access communications system.efrequency division multiple access.ftime division multiple access.source: reprinted from padgett et al. (1995) with permission. copyright © 1995 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38the evolution of untethered communicationsthe commercial success of secondgeneration wireless telephone systems has stimulated widespread interest in enhancing their capabilities tomeet public expectations for advanced information services. for example,new speechcoding techniques offering improved voice quality have beenintroduced to all three hightier systems. efforts are also under way tomake these systems more attractive for data services. accordingly, standards for faxsignal transmission have been established, and standardsfor circuitswitched data transmission at rates of up to 64 kilobits persecond (kbps) are under development for gsm and cdma. in addition,technology for packetswitched data transmission, suitable for providingwireless internet access, is being developed for all secondgeneration systems. the technology base will continue to grow as r&d organizationsworldwide design innovations for a third generation of wireless communications systems.61.4.3 thirdgeneration systemsthe original concept for thirdgeneration wireless systems emergedfrom an international telecommunications union (itu) initiative knownas the future public land mobile telecommunication system (fplmts).7over the past decade the itu advanced the concept of a wireless systemthat would encompass technical capabilities a clear step above those ofsecondgeneration cellular systems. the current name for the thirdgeneration system is international mobile telecommunications2000 (imt2000). the number refers to an early target date for implementing thenew technology and also the frequency band (around 2000 mhz) in whichit would be deployed.as envisioned in the imt2000 project, the thirdgeneration wirelesssystem would have a worldwide common radio interface and network. itwould support higher data rates than do secondgeneration systems yetbe less expensive. it would also advance other aspects of wireless communications by reducing equipment size, extending battery life, and improving ease of operation. in addition, the system would support theservices required in developing as well as developed nations. box 16lists the complete set of goals established in 1990 for fplmts.since 1990 imt2000 recommendations have been approved that elaborate on the initial goals, establish security principles, prescribe a networkarchitecture, present a plan for developing nations, establish radio interfacerequirements, and specify a framework for a satellite component. the ituanticipated an international competition leading to a radio interface thatcould be developed and deployed by the year 2000. the competing radiointerfaces would provide minimum outdoor data rates of 384 kpbs and anindoor rate of 2 mbps. other than providing a forum for discussion ofthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future39standards proposals, the itu has not adopted clear plans of how to proceedbeyond the point of reviewing the proposals.the 1995 world radio conference set aside spectrum for nations toconsider for the deployment of imt2000. the bands are 1920ð1980 mhzand 2110ð2170 mhz for terrestrial communications and 1980ð2010 mhzand 2170ð2200 mhz for satellites. as noted in table 14 and table 15, theunited states has already allocated spectrum bands to personal communications that include part of the lower imt2000 band, making it unlikelybox 16 goals for thirdgeneration commercial wireless systemshigh quality and integrity comparable to the fixed networkflexibility for evolutionuse of a small pocket terminal worldwide but accommodation of other terminal typeshigher service quality, especially for voiceavailability of a range of voice and other services, including multimediaflexible radio bearer leading to improved spectral efficiency and lower cost per erlanghigher bit rate capabilityimproved securityimproved ease of operationcompatibility of services within the system and with the fixed networka framework for continuing expansion of mobile network services and access to thefixed networkintegration of satellite and terrestrial componentswider range of operating environments, including aeronautical and maritimeopen architecture that will permit easy introduction of advances in technology andapplicationsservices provided by more than one network in each coverage areaservices provided over a wide range of user densities and coverage areasservices provided to both mobile and fixed users in urban, rural, and remote regionsmodular structure to enable the system to grow in size and complexity as neededcaters to the needs of developing countriesequipment compatible with offtheshelf products worldwideservice creation and service profile management by òintelligentó networkcoherent systems managementefficient use of the radio spectrum consistent with provision of services at acceptablecostsexpanded marketplace leading to lower costsglobal standard promoting a high degree of design commonality while incorporating a variety of systemsworldwide common frequency bandworldwide roaming based on terminal mobilitysource: international telecommunications union task group 8/1 (1996).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40the evolution of untethered communicationsthat u.s. service providers could deploy imt2000 at all. early on, attention to the itu work was limited in both europe and the united states,where growth in secondgeneration digital cellular and personal communications markets has been strong. it was the japanese, virtually aloneamong all nations, who insisted that the itu program proceed as fast aspossible because they were running out of spectrum for their cellular andpersonal communications systems.8 the japanese were able to keep theimt2000 program on schedule, resulting in an itu call for radiointerface proposals, now due in mid1998. in support of this effort, the japanese radio standards group is developing one or more japanese standardsfor use in the itu2000 spectrum. presumably the standard(s) will besubmitted to the itu for possible worldwide use.meanwhile, the european telecommunications industry established aframework for developing thirdgeneration mobile wireless technology.the universal mobile telephone system (umts) is intended to replicatethe commercial success achieved a decade earlier with gsm. the umtsschedule calls for establishing the technology base by december 1997,deploying a minimum system in 2002, and achieving a full system in2005. the technical goals of umts closely resemble many of the imt2000 goals. the europeans plan to propose the technologies adopted forumts as candidates for imt2000.in the united states, action on this issue did not take place until mid1997, when the four u.s. cdma cellular infrastructure manufacturersñlucent technologies, motorola, nortel, and qualcomm, inc.ñannounced a thirdgeneration program called wideband cdmaone. likemany candidate systems under consideration in europe and japan, the u.s.system uses a 5mhz cdma signal, although the operating parametersand design features differ from those of foreign counterparts. additionalu.s. proposals for imt2000 could emerge from other communities of companies supporting other digital radio interface standards.9among related developments, interest in ònomadicityó is growingwithin the internet community in the united states. as originally conceived, the national information infrastructure (nii) placed little emphasis on the wireless delivery of information to mobile users (computerscience and telecommunications board, 1994). but with the growth indemand for internet services, reflected by the transition to private suppliers, providers are seeking to leverage internet technology either directlyor as part of heterogeneous networks. plans are being made to accommodate nomads (i.e., mobile users) who draw on a variety of communications, computing, and information systems simultaneously, a concept thatwill require attention by multiple industries to issues such as security,interoperability, and synchronization within and between systems (crossindustry working team, 1995).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future41other itu activities are addressing network aspects of imt2000.10here again the japanese have made major contributions toward the establishment of a single worldwide network to support wireless systems. onlyin mid1997 did the u.s. and european delegations begin to make significant contributions, concerned about their current investments in cellularand personal communications networks and the possible effects of establishing a worldwide network that was incompatible with their systems.the latest u.s. and european proposals emphasize the idea of a family ofnetworks supporting a family of radio interfaces through the use of appropriate gateways to achieve worldwide roaming and interoperability.although it is clear that many new wireless communications technologies will emerge in the 2002ð2005 time frame, it is not clear when andhow they will be commercialized. the robust evolution of secondgeneration systems will limit commercial incentives to introduce a new generation of systems. it is possible that advances in secondgeneration systems will meet future demand for mobile telephone services and that ademonstrated demand for highbitrate data services will be necessary tostimulate the commercial deployment of thirdgeneration technology.1.5 commercial satellite systemssatellite systems can be classified by frequency and orbit. above 1ghz a satellite signal easily penetrates the ionosphere. transmission athigher frequencies is desirable because additional bandwidth is availablethere, but then expensive components are needed to overcome signal attenuation, absorption, and path loss (see chapter 2 for a discussion ofchannel impairments). most satellite systems are of the geo variety, offering configuration simplicity, wide footprint (i.e., one satellite covers anentire geographical region), and fixed satellitetogroundterminal characteristics. but geo systems also have a number of disadvantages, including long propagation delays (a roundtrip takes approximately half a second), high transmitterpower requirements, and poor coverage at the farnorthern and southern latitudes. moreover, geo satellites are expensive tolaunch, and, because only a handful of satellites are typically used to achieveglobal coverage, they are vulnerable to single points of failure.the international maritime satellite (inmarsat) organization, formedin 1979, is now backed by the governments of 75 member countries. its firstsatellites (inmarsata) became operational in 1982, supporting voiceand lowrate data applications with analog fm technology. by the end of1993, 30,000 ground terminals were in operation. the next generation ofinmarsat satellites (inmarsatb and c) used digital technology, butdata rates remained low (600 bps). with the introduction of inmarsatmin 1996 it is now possible to use laptop computersized satellite terminalsthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42the evolution of untethered communicationsfor voice and lowrate (2.4 kbps) data transmission. however, the voicequality of this system remains poor due to propagation delay, and datatransmission rates are 10 times slower than those of a standard modem.in the late 1980s qualcomm deployed the omnitracs vehicletracking and communications system for both north america (using gstarsatellites) and europe (using eutelsat satellites). the service providestwoway messaging and automatic position reporting. by 1997 more than200,000 trucks, most of them in the united states, were equipped with thesystem. the use of such systems in europe has been restricted by highequipment costs and expectations for lesscostly alternatives with the nextgeneration of systems.recently introduced geo systems for data communications includemobilesat in australia and msat in north america (see table 16). innovations in geo systems include spot beams for custom broadcast coverageand improved onboard processing. although geo satellite communications systems are not fully mobile (i.e., the terminals are not handheld),innovations in terminal design have enabled the development of privatenetworks and rapidly reconfigurable systems. very small aperture terminals (vsats) use small earthstation antennas to form private networksthrough links to geo satellites. the vsat is the result of more than 20years of advances in digital earthstation technology. the applicationshave evolved from pointtopoint transmission links to networking terminals that leverage the broadcasting capability of satellites.table 16 selected geosynchronous earth orbiting systemsnumberdataofratesystemorganizationsatellitescoverage(kbps)amsatbamscc, tmid2north america4.8inmarsatminmarsat5global2.4mobilesatoptus communication2australia2.4emseeuropean space agency1europe, northern10africallmfeuropean space agency1europe, asia10akilobits per second.bmobile satellite.camerican mobile satellite corporation.dtelesat mobile, inc.eeuropean mobile satellite.flband land mobile.source: reprinted from abrishamkar and siveski (1996) with permission. copyright ©1996 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future43the vsat terminals offer various types of access. fastresponse protocols are used for timesensitive transactions such as credit card purchases and hotel or airline reservations, throughputefficient access isused for file transfers, and circuitswitched access is used for speech anddigital video. (throughput is the fraction of time during which a channelcan be used.) an important feature of vsat technology is ease of deployment: installation takes approximately 2 hours. companies are nowinstalling vsats at the rate of more than 1,500 per month. there are morethan 200,000 vsats worldwide, operating in nearly every country; individual networks range in size from as few as 20 nodes operating in asharedhub environment to nearly 10,000 in the general motors corporation network.in 1994 directbroadcast satellites (dbss) became operational, sometwo decades after the first experiments were performed with this technology. these systems broadcast a signal from a geo satellite with sufficientpower to allow direct reception in a home, office, or vehicle with aninexpensive receiver. the two primary applications for dbs systems aretelevision and radio; emerging applications include direcpc and gbs.systems for directbroadcast television are operational in europe, japan,and the united states. by the end of 1996 these systems had more than 2.5million u.s. subscribers. digital audio broadcasting (dab) has the potential to provide every radio within a service area with continuous transmissions of a sound quality comparable to that of a compact disc. systems are being tested around the world that deliver dab from satellites aswell as from terrestrial antennas.communications systems using nongeo satellites are emerging asmajor players in commercial wireless applications. these satellites arecharacterized as either medium earth orbit (meo) or low earth orbit(leo). the leos, deployed in either circular or elliptical orbits of 500 to2,000 km, offer several advantages including reduced propagation delayand low transmitpower requirements, allowing the use of handheld terminals. but at these altitudes a system requires many satellites to achieveglobal coverage. furthermore, satellite movement relative to the groundterminal introduces doppler shift in the received signal, and each satelliteis visible from a ground terminal for only a few minutes at a time so thathandoffs between satellites are frequent. the meo satellites offer features that represent a compromise between leos and geos. the meosare deployed in circular orbits at an altitude of about 10,000 km. approximately 10 to 15 satellites (more than geos but fewer than leos) arerequired for global coverage, and average visibility is one to two hoursper satellite (less than for geos but more than for leos). the dopplershift in meos is also considerably less than that in leos, but highertransmit power is required.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44the evolution of untethered communicationsthe majority of new satellite systems that will become operational bythe year 2000 are leo or meo systems. these satellites can be categorized further by size. big leo/meos (see table 17) support voice anddata communications with large satellites (weighing 400ð2,000 kilograms[kg]) and operate at frequencies above 1 ghz. little leos use muchsmaller satellites (weighing 40ð100 kg) and operate in the uhf and vhfbands, thereby enabling the use of inexpensive transmission hardware forboth the satellite and ground terminal. the 36satellite orbcomm systemis an example.most of these systems provide voice and lowrate data to mobileusers with handheld terminals. the link rates for little leos are asymmetric, with lower rates on the uplink (ground to satellite) than on thedownlink (satellite to ground) because of power limitations in thehandheld unit. teledesic is unusual because it is intended primarily forbroadband wireless data communications with stationary terminals atintegrated services digital network (isdn) rates. teledesic and iridiumhave direct intersatellite communication links independent of the groundsegment, enabling the provision of services to countries lacking a communications infrastructure. iridium is designed to consist of 66 satellitesarranged in six planes, all in a nearly polar orbit. each satellite is expectedto serve as a òswitchboard in the sky,ó routing each channel of voicetraffic through various other satellites in the system; communications areeventually delivered to an appropriate groundbased gateway to terrestrial telecommunications.globalstar is a leo digital telecommunications system that will beginoffering wireless telephone, data, paging, fax, and position location services worldwide beginning in 1998. the 48satellite constellation operating 1,410 km from the planet surface serves as a òbentpipeó relay to localgroundbased infrastructure.1.6 mobile data servicescommercial packetswitched mobile data services emerged after thesuccess of shortmessage, alphanumeric oneway paging systems. mobile data networks provide twoway, lowspeed, packetswitched datacommunication links with some restrictions on the size of the message (10to 20 kilobytes) in early systems. services provided by mobile data networks include the following:¥transaction processing (credit card verification, paging, notice ofvoice or electronic mail);¥broadcast services (general information, weather and traffic advisories, advertising);the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future45table 17selected big low earth orbit (leo)/medium earth orbit (meo) systemsnumber ofdata rateyearsystemorganizationsatellitesorbitcoverage (kbps)aoperationalglobalstarloral/qualcomm48leoglobal9.61998iridiummotorola66leoglobal2.41998odysseytrw12meoglobal9.61998teledesicteledesic240leoglobal20ð2,0002002icoico global10meoglobal2.41999communicationsarchimedeseuropean space agency5ð6meoeurope, asia, canada256after 2000a kilobits per second.source: reprinted from abrishamkar and siveski (1996) with permission. copyright © 1996 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46the evolution of untethered communications¥interactive services (terminal access to host, remote lan access,games); and¥multicast service (subscription information services, law enforcement, private bulletin boards).the first commercial mobile data network was ardis, a private network developed in 1983 by ibm corporation and motorola to enable ibmto provide computing facilities in the field. by 1990 ardis was deployedin more than 400 metropolitan areas and 10,700 cities and towns using1,300 base stations. by 1994 ardis (since then owned by motorola) provided nationwide roaming for approximately 35,000 users, at a rate of 45million messages per month, and a data rate of 19.2 kbps.in 1986, swedish telecomm and ericsson radio systems ab introduced mobitex and deployed it in sweden. this system is available in theunited states, norway, finland, great britain, the netherlands, andfrance. the system supports a data rate of 8 mbps and nationwide roaming (international roaming is planned). this service is distributed byram mobile data in the united states, where by 1994 it had 12,000 subscribers. a total of 840 base stations are connected to 40 switching centersto cover 100 metropolitan areas and 6,300 cities and towns.cellular digital packet data (cdpd) technology was developed byibm, which together with nine operating companies formed the cdpdforum to develop an open standard and multivendor environment for apacketswitched network using the physical infrastructure and frequencybands of the amps systems. the cdpd specification was completed in1993 with key contributions from ibm, mccaw cellular communications,inc., and pacific communications sciences, inc. deployment of the19.2kbps cdpd infrastructure, designed to make use of idle channels inanalog cellular systems, commenced in 1995.in the 1990s metricom, inc., developed a metropolitanarea networkthat was deployed first in the san francisco bay area and then in washington, d.c. the signaling rate of this system is advertised at 100 kbpsbut the actual data rate is substantially slower. the metricom system usesòfrequency hoppingó spreadspectrum (fhss) technology in the lowerfrequencies (around 900 mhz) of the unlicensed industrial, scientific, andmedical (ism) bands.11in 1996 the european telecommunications standards institute (etsi)standard for mobile data services, transeuropean trunked radio (tetra),was completed. it is currently being used primarily for public safetypurposes. work is in progress to enhance the digital cellular and personalcommunications technologies. more recently, the digital cellular standards (gsm, is95, phs, pacs, and is136) have been updated to supportpacketswitched mobile data services at a variety of data rates. key feathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future47tures of existing mobile data services are shown in table 18. althoughmany services are available, the mobile data market has grown moreslowly than have voice services.1.7 wireless local area networkswireless lans provide data rates exceeding 1 mbps in coverage areas with dimensions on the order of tens of meters. they are used for avariety of applications, including the following:¥lan extensions in hospitals, factory floors, branch offices, andoffices with wiring difficulties;¥crossbuilding interlan bridges that serve as pointtopoint,highspeed links connecting separate lans located within a few miles ofeach other;¥temporary ad hoc networks used in conference registration, campaign headquarters, and military camps;¥temporary wireless access to a wired lan from a portable devicesuch as a laptop computer; and¥access to centralized computing facilities of a shipboard or research facility through a wireless device such as a notepad computer.in 1990 the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee)formed a committee to develop a standard for wireless lans operating at1 and 2 mbps. in 1992 the etsi chartered a committee to developa standard for highperformance radio lans (hiperlan) operating at20 mbps.table 19 indicates the technical features of various lan products (including some that use the infrared portion of the spectrum and are therefore not examined in detail in this report). the market for wireless lanproducts is growing rapidly but not nearly as fast as the market for wirelessvoice applications. the $200 million market for wireless lans is tiny compared to the cellular industry, which is worth billions (wickelgren, 1996).1.8 comparison of international research,development, and deployment strategiescommercial wireless technologies have followed divergent evolutionary paths in different parts of the world. for example, strong contrastsare evident in the transition from firstgeneration cellular systems to secondgeneration systems in the united states and europe. at first a singleu.s. system was used for analog cellular communications, amps, andevery cellular telephone in the united states and canada could communithe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48the evolution of untethered communicationstable 18mobile data servicessystemardismobitexcdpdatetrabmetricomfrequency band (mhz)c800 bands; 45 khzd sep.935ð940, 896ð961869ð894,380ð383,902ð928 (isme bands)824ð849390ð393channel bit rate (kbps)f19.28.019.236100rfg channel spacing2512.53025160(khz)channel access/fdmah/alohaslotted alohafdma/alohaalohafhssi/btmajmultiuser accessacellular digital packet data.btranseuropean trunked radio.cmegahertz.dkilohertz.eindustrial, scientific, and medical.fkilobits per second.gradio frequency.hfrequency division multiple access.ifrequency hopping spread spectrum.jbusy tone multiple access.source: reprinted from cox (1995) with permission. copyright © 1995 by ieee.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future49table 19 wireless local area network technologiestechnologydfiradbirbrfcdsssdfhsseadiffused infrared.bdirectedbeam infrared.cradio frequency.ddirect sequence spread spectrum.efrequency hopping spread spectrum.fmegabits per second.gline of sight.hgigahertz.iindustrial, scientific, and medical.sources: reproduced from material in cox (1995) and pahlavan et al. (1995).channel bit rate (mbps)fmobilityrange (meters)frequency bandssystems (companies)1ð4stationary/portable15ð60infraredspectrixlite(spectrixcorp.);photolink(photonics)10ð155stationarywith losg30infraredinfralan(infralan);uwin (joltltd.)5ð10stationary10ð4018 ghzh, ismialtair (motorola,inc.); fast wave(southwestmicrowave, inc.);redicardrf(data race, inc.)2ð20stationary/portable30ð200ismroamabout (digital equipmentcorp.); arlan (aironet wirelesscommunications); wavelan(lucent technologies); intersect(persoft, inc.); airlan (solectekcorp.); rangelan (proxim);freeport (windata); prism (harriscorp.)1ð3portable30ð100ismrangelan2(proxim);portlan (rdcnetworks);netwave(xircom)the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50the evolution of untethered communicationscate with every base station. by contrast, european users were facedwith a complex mixture of incompatible analog systems. to maintainmobile telephone service, an international traveler in europe needed upto five different telephones. the situation was reversed by secondgeneration systems. now there is a single digital technology, gsm,deployed throughout europe (and in more than 100 countries worldwide), whereas the united states has become a technology battlegroundfor three competitors: gsm (dsc1900), tdma (is136), and cdma(is95).the differences in technology evolution are due in large measure todifferent government policies in europe, the united states, and japan, theworldõs principal sources of wireless technologies. three types of government policies influence developments in wireless systems: policies onradio spectrum regulation, approaches to r&d, and telecommunicationsindustry structure. the reasons for the shifts in the above example can befound primarily in changes in spectrum regulation policies adopted in the1980s. in establishing firstgeneration systems in the united states in thelate 1970s, the fcc regulated four properties of a radio system: noninterference, quality, efficiency, and interoperability. in the 1980s, deregulation was in vogue and the scope of the fccõs authority was restricted tononinterference; the other properties were deemed commercial issues tobe settled in the marketplace. although this policy stimulated innovationin the u.s. manufacturing industry, it also meant that operating companies had to choose among various competing technologies.in europe, the main trend in government regulation in the 1980s wasa move from national authority to multinational regulation under theaegis of the european community (ec; now the european union [eu]).the ec had a strong interest in establishing continental standards forcommon products and services, including electric plugs and telephonedialing conventions. in this context the notion of a telephone that couldbe used throughout europe had a strong appeal. to advance this notion,the ec offered new spectrum for cellular service on the condition that theoperating industries of participating countries agree on a single standard.attracted by the availability of free spectrum, operating companies (manyof them governmentowned) in 15 countries put aside national rivalriesand adopted the gsm standard.thus, a new pattern of technical cooperation was established in europe. this cooperation was reinforced by the european commission (theadministrative unit of the eu), which funded cooperative precompetitiveresearch focusing on advanced communications systems, first in the research for advanced communications in europe (race) program andthen in the advanced communications technologies and services (acts)program. in both programs a consortium of companies and universitiesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future51performs the research. spectrum management rules continue to prescribea single standard for each service, meaning that an industry consensus isrequired before a standard is introduced. once a technology is established, companies enter the competitive phase of product developmentand marketing. this process promotes a thorough investigation of technologies prior to standardization and assures economies of scale whencommercial service begins. in preparation for umts, scheduled for initial deployment in 2002, extensive r&d and evaluation of competingprototypes have been under way since 1994. all of this activity willprovide european industry with a strong technical base for realizing thegoals for mobile communications in the first decade of the next century.the u.s. approach to communications technology r&d is much morecompetitive. individual companies perform much of this research in thecontext of their product marketing plans. coordination takes place withindiverse standards organizations such as the telecommunications industry association, ieee, and american national standards institute. someinteraction also takes place in the glomo program, which brings togetheruniversities and industry to fill specific technology gaps identified bydarpa program managers. but for the most part standards setting is acompetitive rather than cooperative process, with each company or groupof companies striving to protect commercial interests. the fcc rules forspectrum management allow license holders to transmit any signals, subject only to constraints on interference with the signals of other licenseholders. similar flexibility is extended to unlicensed transmissions. as aconsequence, there are multiple competing standards (seven in the case ofwideband personal communications) for wireless service in the unitedstates.government policies on industry structure also strongly influencetechnology development. after the fcc issued cellular operating licenses,most of the companies that began offering cellular service had limitedtechnical resources and relied almost entirely on vendors and consultantsfor technical expertise. even the cellular subsidiaries of the regional belloperating companies had to build a new base of expertise: under theterms of the consent decree that broke up at&t in 1984, these cellularcompanies had no access to the abundant technical resources of bellcore,the research unit of the regional bell companies. in this environment,much of the new wireless communications technology in the united stateshas come from the manufacturing industry, with the result that proprietary rather than open networkinterface standards have proliferated. thepublished technical standards for wireless communications were at firstconfined to the air interface between terminals and base stations. eventually the industry adopted a standard for intersystem operation to facilitate roaming. many other interfaces, especially those between switchingthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52the evolution of untethered communicationscenters and base stations, remain proprietary but the situation is changing to allow fully open systems.by contrast, the european cellular operating industry has been dominated by national telephone monopolies. these companies have strongresearch laboratories that participate fully in technology creation and standards setting. to gain the advantage of flexibility in equipment procurement, operating companies favor mandatory open interfaces, a preference reflected in the gsm standard.little has been published concerning the factors that influence theevolution of wireless communications technology in japan. in recentyears ntt, the dominant telecommunications operating company, hasprovided a strong coordinating mechanism for creating and standardizing new technology. the biggest success has been phs, which enteredcommercial service in 1995 and attracted 4 million subscribers in its firstyear of operation. the initial r&d for phs was conducted by ntt, but itlicenses many manufacturers to offer phs equipment. now many japanese companies are cooperating in a study of wideband cdma technology for thirdgeneration systems. a joint experimental trial of one systemis scheduled for the end of 1997. in addition to corporate r&d, a government organization, research and development center for radio systems,is a significant source of wireless communications technology in japan.worldwide efforts to guide the evolution of wireless communicationstechnology come together in the imt2000 project. national delegationsto imt2000 reflect their countryõs policies: the u.s. delegation pushesfor diversity,12 the europeans advocate a structure favorable to umtsand its descendants, and the japanese delegation favors convergence to asmall number of worldwide standards. other countries assert their ownservice needs, which in some cases can be met by mobile communicationssatellites and in other cases by wireless local loops.1.9 summary and report organizationthe history of wireless communications suggests a number of keypoints to be considered in evaluating potential future strategies for thedod and darpa. wireless technology has now evolved to a point wherethe goal of òanytime, anywhereó communications is within reach. since1980 consumer demand for cordless and cellular telephones has drivenrapid growth in wireless services, especially for voice communications.wireless data services have not taken off as yet although expectations arehigh, given the growth of internet applications. extensive research isunder way to develop thirdgeneration commercial wireless systems,which are expected to be in place before 2010. these trends suggest thatthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future53the dod will continue to have an ample selection of advanced commercial wireless technologies from which to choose.the dod, which currently uses a variety of wireless systems basedon 1970s and 1980s technology, is relying increasingly on commercialwireless products to cope with reductions in defense budgets and thegrowing need for flexible systems that can be deployed rapidly. in thegulf war, the dod used commercial equipment such as gps receiversand inmarsat links and found that performance was comparable tothat of technologies designed explicitly to meet military needs. however,the dod will continue to have unique needs for security, interoperability,and other features that might not be met by commercial products. thegaps between commercial technologies and military needs are difficult toidentify precisely because, although the dod has defined its vision forfuture untethered systems in general terms, projected operational needshave apparently not been translated into technical specifications that conform to the capabilities of commercial products.the glomo program and other military r&d efforts are attempting tomeet dodõs future communications needs and have produced some useful results. however, none of these programs has adopted a systemsapproach to the problem, most notably with respect to the design of anetwork architecture. there may be other unmet needs as well; however,the committee based its work on first principles rather than an assessmentof glomo. a new strategy may be needed to identify the needs morespecifically as a basis for determining where to focus darpaõs r&defforts and where commercial products will suffice.the effort to evaluate commercial technologies in light of defenseneeds will be complicated by the characteristics of the u.s. marketplace.in europe there is a single standard (gsm) for digital wireless communications, and precompetitive research on new wireless technologies is carried out in cooperative, governmentfunded programs. the u.s. wirelessmarket features a mixture of competing standards, and most technologyr&d is conducted by individual companies. this environment forcesoperators to choose from an assortment of competing technologies.the remainder of this report is an attempt to help the dod devisestrategies for making those choices. chapter 2 provides technical background on the many issues that need to be addressed in designing wireless communications systems, which are extremely complex. the highlytechnical discussion may not interest all readers but is fundamental toany informed analysis of wireless systems. chapter 3 explores the opportunities for and barriers to synergy between the military and commercialsectors in the development of wireless technologies. chapter 4 integratesall the information presented in this report to provide a set of recommendations for the dod and darpa.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54the evolution of untethered communicationsnotes1.this report does not address unguided optical communications systems,which use the 103ð107 gigahertz frequency band (infrared, visible, and ultravioletlight), because the commercial products that operate in these bands are designedfor indoor applications and therefore would not be of great use in military applications.2.a protocol is a set of rules, encoded in software, for performing specificfunctions.3.the developments since the mid1970s, when the use of computer networks moved beyond the arpa research community, paved the way for commercial services. the csnet project, funded by the national science foundation(nsf) for the computer science community, eventually led to the nsfnet and adramatic increase in the number of interconnected nodes. the commercializationof internet service was symbolized by the decommissioning of the arpanet in1990 and privatization of the nsfnet in 1995.4.two types of codes are used to spread the signal. a long code is reservedfor use by the military to obtain location information within a few meters ofaccuracy and timing information within 100 nanoseconds. a shorter code is usedby commercial systems to obtain location information accurate to within 100meters.5.a fourth digital modulation technique, based on motorolaõs iden technology, is used by some specialized u.s. mobile radio services in the lower800mhz band to provide cellularlike voice, trunked radio, paging, and messaging services.6.one integrated solution not addressed in detail in this report is the newgeneration of public safety radio networks. these systems are used in both themilitary and commercial sectors for applications such as law enforcement andfire fighting. until recently these systems were characterized simply as 25kilohertz fm voice radios and 9.6kbps modems. in the past a municipal law enforcement radio system typically was deployed as a redundant overlay of towersand repeaters separate from the radio systems operated by fire, health, highway,and other municipal departments. todayõs tight budgets often force municipalities to pool departmental funds to upgrade public safety radios and establish asingle system with enough capacity to meet every userõs needs. to assist in thisprocess the association of public safety communication officers (apco), whichincludes law enforcement, highway, forestry, health, and many other municipaland federal users, recently initiated an ambitious program called project25 toreduce the cost of nextgeneration radios. apco project25 seeks to reduce userdependence on proprietary radios from a single manufacturer (generally the system installer) and introduce cost competition in the upgrading and replacementmarket at the municipality level. the strategy is to standardize a digitalmodulation radio, which would be described as apco project25 compliant, thus opening up public radio purchasing to a variety of competing manufacturers. someradios that are apco project25 compliant are now available and are beingadopted by the federal law enforcement radio users group (representing radiousers in the federal bureau of investigation, drug enforcement agency, secretthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.past, present, and future55service, department of the treasury, and other civilian agencies). the apcoproject25 process has encouraged an unprecedented level of cooperation amongmunicipal radio users.7. these activities are carried out by the itu radiocommunication sector(itur) working party 8/13, later renamed itur task group 8/1.8.the implementation of standards based on imt2000 in japan clearlywould give japanese companies early experience with the technology and perhaps position them to dominate future world markets for imt2000 products.9.although optical communications systems are not addressed in detail inthis report, in large part because the commercial research focuses on indoor applications, the advantages of laser systems need to be mentioned. a laser produces optical radiation by stimulating emissions from an electronic or chemicalmaterial. unlike light produced by incandescent or fluorescent sources, the resultant beam is coherent and exhibits extremely low angular divergence, properties that enable transmissions spanning great distances (i.e., thousands of miles).the data, voice, images, or other signals are modulated on a beam of light, whichis detected by an optical receiver and decoded. the transmitter and receiver needto be in direct visual contact, and so the laser beam is steered in the appropriatedirection using mirrors or other optical elements. laser communications systemsoffer several advantages over rf systems. the main advantage is high capacity:systems now under development will support transmissions in the range of hundreds of megabits per second, with systems under consideration attaining thegigabitspersecond range. another advantage is the low power requirement forpointtopoint communications (orders of magnitude lower than rf systems).all the energy is focused into a very narrow beam because the physical dispersion of a laser beam in space is minimal. furthermore, laser communicationssystems offer security benefits because almost no energy is diffused outside thelaser beam, which is therefore not easily detected by an adversary. this combination of features makes laser communications systems attractive for secure transmissions between hub points in mobile, dynamically changing environments (e.g.,between base stations on vehiclemounted switching facilities). however, lasersystems are sensitive to interference from other light sources, such as the sun,and any obstructions of the visual link by dust, rain, or fog. there is also a risk ofdamage to the eyes of unprotected observers. finally, components for laserbased systems are much more expensive than those for rf systems and thereforeare unlikely to penetrate the commercial market for some time.10.these activities are carried out by the itu telecommunications sector,study group 11.11.the ism bands (at 902ð928 mhz, 2400ð2483 mhz, and 5700ð5850 mhz)are available for any wireless device that uses less than 1 watt of transmit power.12.the united states participates in the imt2000 process in task group 8/1through a delegation led by the fcc.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56the evolution of untethered communicationswireless communications networks incorporate a broad range of technologies, including electrochemical materials, electronic devices and circuits, antennas, digital signal processing algorithms, network control protocols, and cryptography. although all of these technologies are welladvanced in other applications, wireless systems introduce a set of constraints and challenges beyond those addressed in the evolution of othercommunications networks, such as the (wireline) public switched telephone network and the internet. these special constraints make it exceedingly difficult to design affordable wireless systems that meet everyneed. the challenges can be grouped into three categories: mobility,connectivity, and energy.mobility is a fundamental feature of untethered communications networks. portable, wireless communications devices significantly enhancethe mobility of users, but they also pose network design difficulties. asthe communications devices move, the network has to rearrange itself.to deliver information to a mobile terminal, the network has to learn thenew location(s) of the terminal and change the routing of informationaccordingly, sometimes at very high speeds. the rerouting must be doneseamlessly without any perceived interruption of service.a wide variety of problems arise when mobile wireless communications terminals send and receive signals over the air. the signals of all theterminals are subject to mutual interference. the characteristics of thepropagation medium change randomly as users move, and the mobileradio channel introduces random variation in the received signal power562technology limits, tradeoffs, andchallengesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges57and other distortions, such as frequency shifts and the spreading of signals over time. signals that travel over the air are also more vulnerable tojamming and interception than are those transmitted through wires orfibers. these limitations are often addressed with a combination of sophisticated signal processing techniques and antennas. however, thesesolutions add to the complexity of portable communications devices andincrease power requirements.wireless systems pose two types of power challenges. first, whenpower is radiated from an antenna, very little of it typically reaches thereceiver, a phenomenon known as path loss. this problem can be partlyovercome with increased transmit power, special types of antennas, andother solutions. second, wireless terminals often carry their own powersupplies in the form of batteries. battery life is limited and is influencedby many aspects of terminal design as well as the technology of the network infrastructure. scarce power constrains the signal processing capabilities and transmit power of the mobile terminal, motivating efforts tokeep these units as simple as possible. however, a lowpower designcannot accommodate the most sophisticated techniques available to copewith the vagaries of the wireless channel and support the network protocols of mobility management. in the absence of research breakthroughsthat simplify these techniques, the only solution is to increase the complexity of the network, which needs to compensate for the simplicity ofportable communications devices.the challenges related to mobility, connectivity, and energy havestimulated a high level of r&d activity in the telecommunications industry and academia. still, a chasm remains between the capabilities ofwired and wireless communications systems. even as commercial wireless systems evolve, additional features will be needed to meet militaryrequirements for untethered communications. military applications introduce additional challenges because the systems need to be rapidlydeployable on mobile platforms in any one of a diverse range of operating environments; they need to interoperate with other systems; andthey need protection against enemy attempts to jam, intercept, and alterinformation.this chapter provides the technical basis for the analysis of militarycommercial synergy in chapter 3 by examining the challenges of mobility, connectivity, and energy and the technologies devised to overcomethem. the discussion refers to the various layers of a network as definedin the open systems interconnection (osi) model (see box 21). section2.1 is a tutorial on the wireless channel, its capacity limits, techniques forovercoming channel impairments, and the access and operational issuesthat arise when multiple users share the same channel. the next threesections address network, system, and hardware issues with an emphasisthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58the evolution of untethered communicationson military needs. section 2.2 examines network design issues includingarchitecture, resource allocation and discovery, inoperability, mobilitymanagement, and simulation and modeling tools. section 2.3 addressesendtoend systems design issues including applicationlevel adaptation,quality of service, and security. section 2.4 reviews hardware issues ofparticular military concern, focusing on radio components.2.1 communication link designthe ideal wireless communications system would provide high datarates with high reliability and yet use minimum bandwidth and power. itwould perform well in wireless propagation environments despite multiple channel impairments such as signal fading and interference. theideal system would accommodate hardware constraints such as imperfect timing and nonlinear amplifiers. the mobile units would have lowpower requirements and yet still provide adequate transmit power andsignal processing. in addition, despite the system complexity required toachieve this performance level, both the transmitter and receiver wouldbe affordable.such a system has yet to be built. in fact, many of the desired properties are mutually exclusive, meaning that tradeoffs need to be made insystem design. a case in point is the choice of approaches for overcomingthe limitations and impairments of the wireless channel. the impairments inherent in any wireless channel include the rate at which receivedsignal power decreases relative to transmitterreceiver distance (path loss),box 21open systems interconnection modelthe open systems interconnection model identifies seven layers, some or all ofwhich are implemented by virtually any network system. the physical layer includesthe mechanical, electrical, and procedural interfaces to the transmission medium. thelink layer converts the transmission medium into a stream that appears to be free ofundetected errors. this layer includes errorcorrection mechanisms and the protocolsused to gain access to shared channels. the network layer chooses a route from thesender to the receiver and deals with congestion and address issues. the ip protocolfalls into this layer. the transport layer is responsible for the endtoend delivery ofdata. the tcp protocol falls into this layer. the session layer allows multiple transportlayer connections to be managed as a single unit. the presentation layer choosescommon representations (typically application dependent) for the data being carried.the applications layer deals with applicationspecific protocol issues.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges59attenuation caused by objects blocking the signal transmission (shadowfading), and rapid variations in received signal power (flat fading). theimpairments determine the types of applications that can be supported indifferent propagation environments. applications require different datarates and biterror rates (ber, or the probability that a bit is received inerror). for example, voice applications require data rates on the order of8 to 32 kbps and a maximum tolerable ber of 103, whereas databaseaccess and remote file transfer require data rates up to 1 mbps and amaximum tolerable ber of 107.1 both sets of specifications are difficultto achieve in many radio environments.in general, systems designed for the worstcase propagation conditions assume high error rates, which limit their capability to support highspeed data and video teleconferencing applications. the random natureof the radio channel makes it difficult to guarantee quality and performance for demanding applications. however, a wireless system can bedesigned to adapt to the varying link quality at both the link and networklevel, such that the system can support improved data rates and quality.applications can also be designed to adapt to deteriorating channel conditions to minimize the degradation perceived by the user. the overallsystem can be optimized by making tradeoffs among various performance measures such as ber, outage probability, and spectral and powerefficiency. these tradeoffs dictate the choice of modulation, signal processing, and antenna techniques used to mitigate channel impairments.these techniques require fairly intensive digital signal processing atthe mobile unit. the extent of the computation that can be performed islimited by the power available to drive the dsp chips and the microprocessor. thus, in addition to being power limited, the mobile unit is alsocomplexity limited, which means that tradeoffs need to be made in designing the communication link. for example, the transmit power requirements of the mobile unit can be reduced if errorcorrection coding isused, but then additional power is needed to drive the encoding anddecoding hardware. in cellular systems it is preferable to place much ofthe computational burden at the base station, which has fewer powerrestrictions than do the mobile units. research aimed at simplifying dspand antenna processing techniques (section 2.4) can also help mitigate thecomputational burden.the remainder of this section outlines the characteristics of the wireless channel, focusing on fading and interference problems (section 2.1.1);key communications technologies, including modulation and coding (sections 2.1.2 through 2.1.4); the countermeasures available to address fading and interference (section 2.1.5); and the various ways in which usersaccess wireless systems (section 2.1.6).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60the evolution of untethered communications2.1.1 characteristics of the wireless channelthe characteristics of the radio channel impose fundamental limits onthe range, data rate, and quality of wireless communications. the performance limits are influenced by several factors, most significantly thepropagation environment and user mobility pattern. for example, theindoor radio channels typically support higher data rates with better reliability than does the outdoor channel used by persons moving rapidly. electromagnetic signals can be characterized by the features of thewaveform: amplitude (the power, or magnitude, of the signal); phase (thetiming of the peak or trough of the signal variations); and frequency (thenumber of repetitions of the signal per second).2 the effects of the wirelesschannel on the received signal power are typically divided into largescaleand smallscale effects. largescale effects involve the variation of the meanreceived signal power over large distances relative to the signal wavelength, whereas smallscale effects involve the fluctuations of the receivedsignal power over distances commensurate with the wavelength. path losseffects are noticeable over large distances (i.e., distances on the order of100 m or more). signal power variations due to obstacles such as buildingor terrain features are observable over distances that are proportional to thelength of the obstructing object. very rapid variations result from multipathreflections, which are copies of the transmitted signal that reflect or diffractoff surrounding objects before arriving by different paths at the receiver.these reflections arrive at a receiver later than the nonreflected signal pathand are often shifted in phase as well. the multipath reflections eitherreinforce or cancel each other and the nonreflected signal path dependingon the exact position of the receiver (if moving) or the transmitter (if moving). the overall effects of multipath propagation involving a movingterminal are rapid variation in the received signal power and nonuniformdistortion of the frequency components of the signal.the first four subsections below discuss path loss, fading, and varioussources of interference as they apply to the path between two terrestrial rfdevices. the fifth subsection details the characteristics of satellite rf links.2.1.1.1 path losspath loss is equal to the received power divided by the transmittedpower, and this loss is a function of the transmitterreceiver separation.for a given transmit power, a path loss model3 predicts the receivedpower level at some distance from the transmitter. the simplest modelfor path loss, which captures the key characteristics for most channels, isan exponential relationship: the received signal power is proportional tothe transmit power and inversely proportional to the square of the transthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges61mission frequency and the transmitterreceiver distance raised to thepower of a òpath loss exponent.ó4 in free space the path loss exponent is2, whereas for typical outdoor environments it ranges from 3 to 5. inenvironments with dense buildings or trees, path loss exponents can exceed 8. thus, systems designed for typical suburban or lowdensity urban outdoor environments require much higher transmit power to achievethe same desired performance in a dense jungle or downtown area packedwith tall buildings.the ber of a wireless link is determined by the received signal power,noise introduced by the receiver hardware, interference, and channel characteristics. the noise is typically proportional to the rf bandwidth. forthe exponential path loss model just described, the received signaltonoise ratio (snr) is the product of the transmit power and path loss,divided by the noise power. the snr required for faithful receptiondepends on the communications technique used, the channel characteristics, and the required ber. because path loss affects the received snr,path loss imposes limits on the data rate and signal range for a given ber.in general, for a given ber, highdatarate applications typically requiremore transmit power or have a smaller coverage range (sometimes both)than do lowdatarate applications. for example, given a transmit powerof 1 w, a transmit frequency of 1 ghz, and an omnidirectional antenna,the transfer of data through free space (for which the path loss exponent is2) at 1 mbps and 10ð7 ber can be accomplished between radios that are728 m apart, whereas in a jungle (for which the path loss exponent is 10)the range can be as low as 4 m.2.1.1.2 shadow fadinga received signal is often blocked by hills or buildings outdoors andfurniture or walls indoors. the received signal power is in fact a random variable that depends on the number and dielectric properties ofthe obstructing objects. signal variation due to these obstructions iscalled shadow fading. measurements have shown that the power, measured in decibels (db), of signals subject to shadow fading exhibits agaussian (i.e., normal) distribution, a pattern referred to as lognormalshadowing. the random attenuation of shadow fading changes as themobile unit moves past or around the obstructing object. because thesignal coverage is not uniform even at equal distances from the transmitter, the transmit power needs to be increased to ensure that the receivedsnr requirements are met uniformly throughout the coverageregion. the power increase imposes additional burdens on the transmitter battery and can cause interference for other users of the samefrequency band.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62the evolution of untethered communications2.1.1.3 smallscale (multipath) fadingsmallscale fading is caused by interference between multiple versions of the signal that arrive at the receiver at different times. multipathcan be helpful if the signals add constructively to produce a higherpower (a random event), but more often it results in harmful interference. the overall effect is a standing wave pattern of the received signalpower. harmful interference can cause the received signal power todrop by a factor of 1,000 below its average value at nulls in the standingwave pattern. moreover, for practical speeds of wireless terminals, thechanges in signal power are extremely rapid: at a frequency of 900mhz the signal power changes every 30 centimeters, or every 23 milliseconds if the terminal is moving at 50 km per hour. in many practicalenvironments, these changes are referred to as òrayleigh fadingó because the received signal amplitude conforms to a rayleigh probabilitydensity function.signal fading can be characterized by determining the delay spread ofthe fading relative to the signal bandwidth. the delay spread is definedas the time delay between the directpath signal component and the component that takes the longest path from the transmitter to the receiver.because the delay spread is a random variable, it is often characterized byits standard deviation, called the root mean square (rms) delay spread ofthe channel. if the product of the rms delay spread and the signal bandwidth is much less than 1, then the fading is called flat fading. in this casethe received signal envelope has a random amplitude and phase (commonly described by a rayleigh distribution), but there is no additionalsignal distortion.when the product of the rms delay spread and signal bandwidth isgreater than 1, the fading becomes frequency selective. frequencyselective fading introduces selfinterference because the delay spread is solarge that multipath reflections corresponding to a given bit transmissionarrive at the receiver simultaneously with subsequent data bits. thisintersymbol interference (isi) establishes an òerror flooró in the receivedbits that cannot be reduced by an increase in signal power because doingso also increases the selfinterference. without compensation, the isiforces a reduction in the data rate such that the product of the rms delayspread and signal bandwidth is less than 0.1. for a 103 ber and a ruralenvironment, the delay spread is approximately 25 microseconds and thecorresponding maximum data rate is only 8 kbps; the data rates for lowerbers are even more limited. some form of compensation, either signalprocessing or sophisticated antenna design, clearly is needed to achievehighrate data transmission in the presence of isi. these techniques impose additional complexity and power requirements on the receiver.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges63movement of a receiver relative to the transmitter (or vice versa)causes the received signal to be frequency shifted relative to the transmitted signal. the frequency shift, or doppler frequency, is proportional tothe mobile velocity and the frequency of the transmitted signal. for atransmitted signal frequency of 900 mhz and a receiver or transmitterspeed of 96 km per hour, the doppler frequency is roughly 80 hz. thisdoppler shift creates an irreducible error floor for noncoherent detectiontechniques (which use the previous bit to obtain a phase reference for thecurrent bit). in general the irreducible ber is not a problem when dataare transmitted at high speed (faster than 1 mbps), but it is an issue formoderaterate (slower than 100 kbps) data applications.in general the signal changes slowly with time because of path loss,more quickly because of shadow fading, and very quickly because ofmultipath flat fading; all of these effects are simultaneously superimposed on the transmitted signal. as noted above, the shadow fadingneeds to be addressed by an increase in transmit power. the deep fadesin signal power caused by flat fading also need to be counterbalanced byan increase in transmit power or some other approach (see section 2.1.5.1).otherwise the transmitted signal typically exhibits bursts of errors thatare difficult to correct.2.1.1.4 interferenceusers of wireless communications systems can experience interference from various sources. one source is frequency reuse, a populartechnique for increasing the number of users in a given region who can besupported by a particular set of frequencies. cellular systems reuse frequencies at spatially separated locations, taking advantage of the falloff inreceived signal power with distance (which is indicated by the path lossmodel). the downside of frequency reuse is the introduction of cochannel interference (see section 2.2.1.1), which increases the noise floor anddegrades performance.other sources of interference include adjacent channels and narrowbands of problem frequencies. adjacentchannel interference can be mitigated by the introduction of guard channels between users, although thistechnique consumes bandwidth. narrowband interference can be removed by notch filters or spreadspectrum techniques. notch filters aresimple devices that block the band of frequencies containing the interference; these devices are effective only if the specific frequencies of concernare known. spreadspectrum techniques (see section 2.1.5.2), whichspread a signal across a larger band of frequencies than is required fornormal transmission, can reduce the effect of interference and hostilejamming signals.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64the evolution of untethered communications2.1.1.5 satellite channelssatellite channels (the link between a receiver or transmitter on earthand an orbiting receiver or transmitter) have inherent advantages overterrestrial radio channels. multipath fading is rare because a signal propagating skyward does not experience much reflection from surroundingobjects (except in downtown areas with densely packed buildings). moreover, most satellite systems operate in the gigahertz frequency range,allowing for largebandwidth communication links that support very highbit rates.the primary limitation of satellite channels is very high path loss,which generally follows the formula described earlier in this chapter. forsatellites the path loss exponent is 2. because satellites operate at highfrequencies and the path distance is long (500 to 2,000 km for a leosatellite), much higher transmit power is needed than is the case for terrestrial systems operating at the same data rate. satellite signals are alsosubject to attenuation by earthõs atmosphere. the effects are especiallyadverse at frequencies above 10 ghz, where oxygen and water vapor,rain, clouds, fog, and scintillation cause random variations in signal amplitude, phase, polarization, and angle of arrival (similar to the adverseeffects of multipath fading in terrestrial propagation). satellite systemscompensate somewhat for the large path loss and adverse atmosphericeffects by using highgain directional antennas to boost the receivedpower.2.1.2 capacity limits of wireless channelsthe pioneering work of claude shannon determined the total capacity limits for simple wired and wireless channel models: these limitsestablished an upper bound on the maximum spectral link efficiency,measured as the data rate per unit of bandwidth as a function of thereceived snr. for a channel without fading, isi, or doppler shift, thismaximum bandwidth efficiency was identified by shannon to be the logarithm of the term [snr + 1] (shannon, 1949).determining the capacity limits of wireless channels with all the impairments outlined in the previous section is quite challenging. a relatively simple lower bound for a channel capacity that varies over time isthe shannon capacity under the worstcase propagation conditions. thisis often a good bound to apply in practice because many communicationlinks are designed to have acceptable performance even under the worstconditions. however, this design wastes resources because typical operating conditions are generally much better than the worstcase scenario.for channels that exhibit shadow fading or multipath fading, the channelthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges65capacity under worstcase fading conditions is close to zero. the capacityof these fading channels increases greatly when the data rate, power, andtransmission are adapted using sophisticated modulation techniques,which are discussed in the next section. as measured by spectral linkefficiency, these adaptive techniques in both rayleigh fading and lognormalshadowed channels can support much higher data rates than aretypical in todayõs wireless systems. for example, typical digital voicesystems deliver 8 kbps in a 30khz channel, which corresponds to a spectral link efficiency of 8/30, far less than 1. if this channel experiencesrayleigh fading, then an snr of approximately 30 db is required. at thissnr, a spectral link efficiency of approximately 8 can be achieved inrayleigh fading by using adaptive techniquesña 30fold improvementover the typical voice system of today (see figure 21).52.1.3 modulationmodulation is the process of encoding information into the amplitude, phase, and/or frequency of a transmitted signal (ziemer andtranter, 1995). this encoding process affects the bandwidth of the transmitted signal and its robustness under impaired channel conditions. inthe case of bandwidthlimited channels, digital modulation techniquesencode several bits into one symbol. the rate of symbol transmissiondetermines the bandwidth of the transmitted signal: the larger the number of bits encoded per symbol, the more efficient the use of bandwidthbut the greater the power requirement for a given ber in the presence ofnoise.modulation techniques fall into two categories: linear and nonlinear.in general, linear modulation techniques use less bandwidth than do nonlinear techniques. however, linear modulation techniques also tend toproduce large fluctuations in signal amplitude. this is a disadvantagewhen using nonlinear amplifiers such as class c amplifiers (the least expensive, most readily available, and most powerefficient amplifiers), becausethey distort linear modulation signals. thus, the bandwidth efficiency oflinear modulation is generally obtained at the expense of the additionalpower needed for very linear amplifiers (and reduced battery life).2.1.4 channel coding and linklayer retransmissionchannel coding improves performance by adding redundant bits inthe transmitted bit stream that are used by the receiver to correct errorsintroduced by the channel, thus reducing the average ber. this approach enables a reduction in the transmit power required to achieve atarget ber. conventional forwarderrorcorrection (fec) codes, which rethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66the evolution of untethered communicationsfigure 21 spectral link efficiency can be greatly increased using adaptive techniques. theoretical efficiencies are shown.rayleigh fadingsignaltonoise ratio (in decibels)signaltonoise ratio (in decibels)adaptive coded modulationreceiver adaptationfading inverted (optimal cutoff)fading inverted (no cutoff)fading inverted (no cutoff)lognormal shadowingspectral link efficiency spectral link efficiency adaptive coded modulationfading inverted (optimal cutoff)receiver adaptationthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges67duce the required transmit power for a given ber at the expense of increased signal bandwidth or a reduced data rate (lin and costello, 1983),use block or convolutional code designs. block codes add parity bits toblocks of messages. convolutional codes map a continuous sequence ofinformation bits onto a continuous sequence of encoded bits. trellis codescombine channel code design and modulation to reduce the ber withoutbandwidth expansion or rate reduction (ungerboeck, 1982). more recentadvances in coding technology, such as turbo codes (berrou et al., 1993),exhibit superior errorcorrection performance, although they are generallyvery complex and impose large delays on endtoend transmission, drawbacks that make them unsuitable for many wireless applications.another way to reduce the link errors prevalent in wireless systems isto implement link retransmission (part of the protocol known as automaticrepeat request, or arq). the data are encoded with a checksum (the sumof the 1s and 0s in the transmitted digitized data), which the receiver compares to the data received; if the data are corrupted, then the receiver requests a retransmission. linklayer retransmission wastes system resourcesbecause of the added power requirements and interference with other users. in addition, retransmission schemes can result in the delivery of data inthe wrong order: when a block is lost on the link because of an error burst,a subsequent block is likely to be sent and received before the lost block issent again. this phenomenon triggers duplicate acknowledgments andendtoend retransmissions at the transport layer, further burdening thenetwork. (when countermeasures for fading are used to reduce link errors,as discussed in the next section, the problems introduced by retransmissionare similarly reduced.) even so, arq is the only alternative in many casesbecause fec is not sufficient in applications with stringent ber requirements. some linklayer schemes, such as asymmetric reliable mobile accessin link layer (airmail; ayonoglu et al., 1995), can avert outoforder delivery to higherprotocol layers, but this approach increases delays andvariability in the interpacket delivery times.2.1.5 countermeasures for fadingnumerous signal processing and design techniques have been developed to counter the effects of fading on the wireless channel. of particular interest are countermeasures for the two types of smallscale fadingdescribed above: flat fading and frequencyselective fading.2.1.5.1flatfading countermeasuresthe random variation in received signal power caused by multipathflat fading results in a very large increase in ber. for example, to mainthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68the evolution of untethered communicationstain an average ber of 103 (a typical requirement for pointtopoint voicesystems at the link level) using binary phaseshift key modulation, 60times more power is required than would be in the absence of flat fading.the difference in required power is even larger at the much lower berrequired for data transmission. it follows that the required transmit powercan be significantly reduced by combating the effects of flat fading. themost common flatfading countermeasures are diversity, coding and interleaving, and adaptive modulation. spreadspectrum techniques alsomitigate fading effects (see section 2.1.5.2).in diversity, several separate, independently fading signal paths areestablished between the transmitter and receiver and the resulting received signals are combined. because there is a low probability of separate fading paths experiencing deep fades simultaneously, the signal obtained by combining several such paths is unlikely to experience largepower variations. independent fading paths can be achieved by separating the signal in time, frequency, space, or polarization. time and frequency diversity are spectrally inefficient because information is duplicated; polarization diversity is of limited effectiveness because only twoindependent fading paths (corresponding to horizontal and vertical polarization) can be created. that leaves space diversity as the most efficientof these techniques. independent fading paths in space are obtainedusing an antenna array, in which each element receives a separate path.multiple antenna elements are mounted at the receiver with a separationgreater than or equal to half the signal wavelength (yacoub, 1993). almost all of the multipath variation is removed by first creating and thenlater combining four independent paths, with each path weighted by itsreceived signal power. because the wavelength is inversely proportionalto frequency, antenna arrays can be mounted on handheld units whenusing superhigh frequencies (above 10 ghz) but not when using frequencies below the 1ghz range.coding and interleaving can also be used to combat flat fading.coding and interleaving involves the spreading of a burst error overmany òcode words.ó if the errors are sufficiently spread out that eachcode word has at most one error, then these errors can be correctedeasily. this technique results in time diversity without the need forrepeat transmissions. however, errorcorrecting codes typically resultin the loss of spectral link efficiency. the cost of coding and interleavingñincreased delay and complexity of the interleaverñcan be large ifthe fading rate is slow relative to the data rate, as is typically the case forhighspeed data. for example, at a doppler frequency of 10 hz and a bitrate of 10 mbps, an error burst will last for approximately 300,000 bits,and so the interleaver needs to be large enough to handle at least thatmuch data.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges69in general, flat fading causes bit errors to occur in bursts corresponding to the times when the channel is in a deep fade. channel codes(discussed in section 2.1.4) are best suited for correcting one or two simultaneous errors; code performance deteriorates rapidly when errors occurin large bursts.the third type of countermeasure is adaptive modulation. in theory,the receiver can make an estimate of the channel conditions and send itback to the transmitter, which can then adapt its transmission scheme asappropriate. adaptation to signal fading enables adjustments in thepower level and data rate to take advantage of the favorable conditions,saving more than 20 db of power. but most modulation and codingtechniques do not enable sufficiently rapid adaptation to typical fadingconditions. if the channel is changing more rapidly than the rate at whichcondition estimates are fed back to the transmitter, then adaptive techniques perform poorly. another drawback is the additional complexityrequired in the transmitter and receiver to carry out all the requisite steps.finally, the channel estimate needs to be relayed to the transmitter on afeedback path, which occupies a small amount of bandwidth on the return channel.2.1.5.2 countermeasures for frequencyselective fadingtechniques for combating the isi delay spread of a frequencyselective fading channel fall into two categories: signal processing (at thetransmitter or receiver) and antenna solutions. transmitterbased signalprocessing techniques, including equalization, multicarrier modulation,and spread spectrum, can make the signal less sensitive to delay spread.antenna solutions, including distributed antenna systems, small cells,directive beams, and òsmartó antennas, change the propagation environment to reduce or eliminate delay spread.the goal of equalization is to invert the effects of the channel or cancelthe isi. channel inversion, or linear equalization, can be achieved bypassing the received signal through a filter with a frequency response thatis the inverse of the channel frequency response (the channel being theoriginal òfilteró for the transmitted signals). this process neutralizes theeffects of the channel. although linear equalization can be implementedusing relatively simple hardware, the technique has drawbacks in thatnoise and interference are also passed through the inverse filter. if thechannel frequency response is small anywhere within the signal bandwidth, then the noise and interference components at those frequenciesare amplified. thus, on channels with deep spectral nulls, a linear equalizer enhances the noise, resulting in poor performance on frequencyselective fading channels.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70the evolution of untethered communicationsa more effective technique is the nonlinear decisionfeedback equalizer (dfe), which determines the isi from previously detected symbolsand subtracts it from the incoming symbols. the dfe does not enhancenoise because it estimates the channel frequency response rather thaninverting it. on frequencyselective fading channels the dfe has a muchlower probability of error than does a linear equalizer but also slightlyhigher complexity. the main drawback of the dfe is the chance of errorpropagation: if a symbol is detected incorrectly then the associated isiis still subtracted from subsequent symbols, possibly causing errors inthese symbols as well. moreover, because of decoding delays, the isiestimates cannot benefit from errorcorrection coding. therefore, a dfecan be used only on channels where the probability of error withoutcoding is reasonably low. in addition, because the isi at low data ratesis small, the dfe does not yield substantial ber improvement for datarates much less than 100 kbps. in general, equalizers (especially thedfe) are most beneficial at high data rates, when the product of rmsdelay spread and the data rate is much greater than 1. the ber can beimproved by as much as 2 to 3 orders of magnitude depending on thedata rate and snr. in indoor environments, 20 mbps can be achieved ata ber of 103 using a dfe (pahlavan et al., 1993). the achievable rateson outdoor channels are generally much less because delay spreads aremuch greater and there are other channel impairments. commercialoutdoor wireless systems using delayspread countermeasures currentlyachieve on the order of tens to hundreds of kilobits per second, depending on the available bandwidth.the use of equalizer techniques requires continuous, accurate estimates of the channel frequency response, usually obtained with finiteimpulseresponse (fir) filters in the receiver. the number of filter delayelements (or equalizer taps used to track variations in the channel) isproportional to the delay spread. updates are needed at the doppler rate.to assist in the estimation process, the transmitter sends training sequences that have known characteristics. because they consume bandwidth, training sequences need to be as short as possible to maximizespectral link efficiency. the tradeoff is that short training sequencesrequire rapid estimation of the channel and, typically, increased signalprocessing complexity.multicarrier modulation is another technique that compensates fordelay spread. the transmission bandwidth is divided into subchannelsand the information bits are divided into an equal number of streams,which are transmitted in parallel. each stream is used to modulate oneof the subchannels. ideally, the subchannel bandwidths are narrowenough that the fading on each subchannel is flat as opposed to frequency selective, thereby eliminating isi. the simplest approach is tothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges71implement nonoverlapping subchannels, but spectral link efficiency canbe increased by overlapping the subchannels in such a way that they canbe separated at the receiver. this is called orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, which can be implemented efficiently using the fastfourier transform (invertible mapping from the time domain to the frequency domain) to separate the subchannels in the receiver. in this casethe entire signal bandwidth experiences frequencyselective fading because wideband channels tend to have different fading characteristics atdifferent frequencies, and so some of the subchannels will have weaksnrs. their performance can be improved by coding across subchannels, frequency equalization, or adding more bits in subchannelswith high snrs. multicarrier modulation offers an advantage in thatless training is required for frequency equalization than for time equalization. however, timevarying fading, frequency offset, and timingmismatch impair the separation of the subchannels, resulting in selfinterference. moreover, multicarrier signals tend to have a large peaktoaverage signalpower ratio, which severely degrades the power efficiency when nonlinear amplifiers are used.spreadspectrum techniques increase the signal bandwidthñbeyondwhat is needed to transmit the informationñto reduce the effects of flatfading, isi, and narrowband interference. each channel is spread over thelarger bandwidth by a pseudonoise sequence, which is used by receiversto invert the spreading operation and recover the original data. spreadspectrum techniques first achieved widespread use in military applications because they òhideó the signal below the noise floor during transmission, reduce the effects of narrowband jamming, and reduce multipathfading. there are two common forms of this technique: direct sequence,in which the data sequence is multiplied by the pseudonoise sequence,and frequency hopping, in which the carrier frequency is varied by thesequence.during the demodulation process, multipath signal components andinterference are reduced in two stages: first the spectrumspreadingmodulation is removed, and then the remaining signal is demodulatedusing conventional frequency or phaseshift techniques to obtain theoriginal data signal. in directsequence systems, the received signal ismultiplied with an exact copy of the code sequence, perfectly synchronized in time. when narrowband interference and delayed multipathsignal components are multiplied by the spreading sequence, their signal power is spread over the bandwidth of the spreadspectrum code. anarrowband filter can be used in the demodulator to remove most oftheir power. alternatively, a rake receiver can be used to combine allmultipath components coherently.6 a rake is a means of implementing diversity (see section 2.1.5.1).the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72the evolution of untethered communications2.1.6 channel accessin many modern wireless systems, multiple users share the samebandwidth, creating a need for a protocol that ensures efficient, equitablechannel access. wirelesschannel access issues are complicated by thevariability and statistical nature of user traffic: voice traffic typicallyrequires a 40 percent duty cycle (i.e., the channel is used 40 percent of thetime), whereas data traffic tends to come in bursts with a much lowerduty cycle. all traffic generally varies depending on how many transmitters are active. in addition, many new applications do not exhibit thesymmetric twoway flow of voice data that is characteristic of standardtelephone service. in typical surfing of the world wide web, for example, 100 to 1,000 times more data flows to the user than from the user.this variability and asymmetry are creating a need for new access strategies for digital integrated networks.channel sharing through fixedallocation, demandassigned, or randomallocation modes is called multiple access.7 the three basic multipleaccess techniquesñfdma, tdma, and cdma (all introduced inchapter 1)ñcan be implemented in any of the three modes.2.1.6.1 fixedallocation multiple accessfixedallocation multipleaccess techniques assign dedicated channels to multiple users through some type of channel resource division.the assignments are made by a protocol for the duration of a single transmission.8 in fdma the total system bandwidth is divided into channelsthat are allocated to the different users. in tdma time is divided intoorthogonal slots that are allocated to different users. in cdma (which isthe same as direct sequence spread spectrum) time and bandwidth areused simultaneously by different users, modulated by different spreading signals, or codes. the spreading codes allow receivers to separate thesignal of interest from the cdma channel. the three primary competingu.s. standards for cellular and personalcommunications multiple accessare mixed fdma/tdma with three time slots per frequency channel (is54), mixed fdma/tdma with eight time slots per frequency channel(gsm), and cdma (is95).the debates over multiple access among standards committees andequipment providers have led to numerous analytical studies claimingthe superiority of one technique or another (e.g., gilhousen et al., 1991;gundmundson et al., 1992; baier et al., 1996). however, there is no widespread agreement as to which access technique is the best. theoreticalanalysis indicates that under heavy traffic conditions cdma combinedwith some form of detecting all users simultaneously9 (using knowledgethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges73of all spreading codes to eliminate interference) results in higher spectralefficiency than does tdma or fdma (gallager, 1985; goldsmith, 1997).without simultaneous detection and in the absence of fading, tdma andfdma are more spectrally efficient than is cdma.10 the spread spectrum gives cdma the advantage of soft capacity (there is no absolutelimit on the number of users), but performance is degraded in proportionto any increase in users on the system. the tdma and fdma techniquesplace hard limits on the number of users sharing a given bandwidthbecause each time or frequency slot can support a maximum of one user(less than one if multiple slots are assigned to the same user). in generalfdma is the simplest technique to implement, tdma is slightly morecomplex because of the requirement for time synchronization among allthe users, and cdma is the most complex because of the need for codesynchronization. another consideration with respect to cdma is theneed for stringent power control to prevent the ònearfar problem,ó whicharises when signals from mobile units close to the base station overwhelmthose of units farther away. such control is difficult to maintain in afading environment and is one of the major challenges of spreadspectrum multiple access.fixedallocation multipleaccess techniques are inefficient for manyvoice and data applications because the variability in traffic from a singletransmitter limits throughput on dedicated channels. for example, asingle channel in a twoway voice conversation usually occupies less thanhalf of the available bandwidth; for many data applications the traffic iseven more intermittent. cellular and satellite systems generally serve aslowly changing set of active terminals with a relatively fixed traffic pattern. the inability to predict terminal traffic requirements accurately andthe need to handle a dynamic set of active terminals create a need formore flexible forms of multiple access.2.1.6.2 demandassigned multiple accessone method of providing flexibility is the assignment of networkchannels to remote terminals on demand. in these systems a commonsignaling channel is assigned to handle requests from transmitters fornetwork capacity. demandassigned multiple access (dama) is veryefficient as long as the òoverheadó traffic required to assign channels is asmall percentage of the message traffic and as long as the message trafficis fairly steady. otherwise two types of problems can arise. first there isa setup delay, or latency period. for transmissions of sufficient lengththis is not a serious limitation, but for networks with a considerableamount of short, interactive messages the delay and overhead of eachmessage make demandbased assignment impractical.11 second, thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74the evolution of untethered communicationstransmission of requests on the signaling channel is not possible when thenetwork is overloaded and the transmitter cannot communicate with thehub station, effectively shifting the multipleaccess problem from the datachannel to the signaling channel.2.1.6.3 random accesswhen networks serve a wide variety of data rates and the trafficconsists of small messages that are roughly the same size as the overheadmessages of the access protocol, dama is not an efficient use of channelresources. in these cases a connectionfree protocol, such as randomaccess cdma or aloha, is preferable. the randomaccess cdma approach requires complex receivers that can demodulate all possiblespreading codes. in aloha random access, channel packets are storedat each terminal and transmitted over a common channel to the hub station; no attempt is made to synchronize transmissions from the varioususers. this technique has high reliability in moderate network traffic, butthe probability of a collision between packets from different users increases with the traffic. therefore, such channels are usually sized tooperate at about 10 percent of the peak data rate.12conventional aloha is a narrowband technology. in wireless networks, aloha channels rarely operate at more than 10 kbps or 20 kbpsin terrestrial systems and 56 kbps in satellite systems. because alohacan be viewed as a randomaccess version of tdma, the same peakpower constraints that limit a tdma channel also apply to conventionalaloha channels. recent work on spread aloha, a combination ofaloha and spreadspectrum transmission, shows how these limits canbe overcome for highdatarate applications.throughput is not necessarily the most appropriate performance measure for a multipleaccess channel. in the case of powerlimited satellitechannels or batteryoperated transmitters, access efficiency is a more appropriate measure. the access efficiency of an aloha randomaccesschannel is the ratio of spectral link efficiency using the aloha protocolto the spectral link efficiency of a continuously transmitting channel withthe same average power and total bandwidth. the access efficiency of analoha channel approaches 1 (meaning no restrictions are needed onthroughput) when most users are idle and transactions are brief, as can bethe case for some data communications systems. in other words, thistechnique offers the highest throughput of any randomaccess protocolunder these conditions.it is much easier to design an access protocol for a single type ofnetwork traffic rather than for a range of traffic types. all the majorthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges75digital cellular standards designed for voice applications, use a damaarchitecture with some form of aloha request channel superimposedover a tdma or cdma channel structure. the resulting throughput isadequate for voice applications, but when a network handles data as wellas voice the connectionoriented architecture limits the channel throughput. it is difficult to size channels that are assigned on demand for a wideand unpredictable range of user data rates. new, highly flexible randomaccess structures will probably be needed to enable the seamless integration of data services within a voice network as promised in some newpersonal communications networks.2.2 network issues2.2.1 architecturethe choice of an architecture for a twoway wireless network involvesnumerous issues dealing with the most fundamental aspects of networkdesign. the primary issue is whether to use a peertopeer or a basestationoriented network configuration. in a peertopeer architecture,communication flows directly among the nodes in the network and theendtoend process consists of one or more individual communicationlinks. in a basestationoriented architecture, communication flows fromnetwork nodes to a single central hub.the choice of a peertopeer or basestationoriented architecturedepends on many factors. peertopeer architectures are more reconfigurable and do not necessarily have a single point of failure, enablinga more dynamic topology. the multiple hops in the typical endtoendlink offer the advantage of extended communication range, but if one ofthe nodes fails then the localized link path needs to be reestablished.basestationoriented architectures tend to be more reliable becausethere is only one hop between the network node and central hub. inaddition, this design tends to be more costefficient because centralizedfunctions at the hub station can control access, routing, and resourceallocation. another problem with peertopeer architecture is the significant cosite interference that arises for multiple users in close proximity to each otherña problem that can be averted in a basestationoriented architecture by the coordinated use of transmission frequenciesor time slots.the wireless basestationoriented architecture is exemplified by cellular telephone systems, whereas the most common peertopeer architecture for wireless systems is a multihop packet radio. fundamental differences between the two types of systems are indicated in table 21.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76the evolution of untethered communications2.2.1.1 cellular system designone of the biggest challenges in providing multimedia wireless services is to maximize efficient use of the limited available bandwidth.cellular systems, which exploit the falloff in power at increased distances,reuse the same frequency channel at spatially separated locations. frequency reuse increases spectral efficiency but introduces cochannel interference, which affects the achievable ber and data rate of each user.the interference is small if the users operating at the same frequency arefar enough apart; however, area spectral efficiency (i.e., the data rate perunit bandwidth per unit area) is maximized by packing the users as closetogether as possible. thus, good cellular system design places users thatshare the same channel at a separation distance such that the cochannelinterference is just below the maximum tolerable level for the requiredber and data rate. because cochannel interference is subject to shadowing and multipath fading, the design of a static cellular system needs toassume worstcase propagation conditions in determining this separationdistance. system performance can be improved through dynamic resource allocation, which involves allocating power and bandwidth basedon propagation conditions, user demands, and system traffic; however,the increases in spectral and power efficiency are achieved at the price ofincreased system complexity.in cellular systems, a given geographical area such as a city is dividedinto nonoverlapping cells (see figure 22) and different frequencies areassigned to the cells. for fdma and tdma, cells using the same frequency are spatially separated such that their mutual interference is tolerable. frequency reuse in fdma and tdma systems introduces cochannel interference in all cells using the same channel. in cdma, interferencecan be introduced from all users within the same cell as well as from usersin other cells.regardless of the multipleaccess technique used, area spectral efficiency is maximized when the system is interference limitedñthat is,table 21 comparison of cellular and multihop packetradio architecturesfeaturecellular systemmultihop packet radiotopologystaticdynamicnumber of hopsonemultiplenetwork controlcentralizeddistributedlink distancefixed (by cell size)variable (òover the horizonó)xxxthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges77when the receiver noise power is much less than the interference powerand can be ignored. the received snr for each user is determined by theamount of interference at the receiver; if the system is not interferencelimited, then spectral efficiency could be further increased by allowingadditional users on the system or reusing the frequencies at reduced distances.the transmitter in each cell is connected to a base station and switching office, which allocates channels and controls power. in analog cellular systems, the switching office also coordinates handoffs to neighboringcells when a mobile terminal traverses a cell boundary. in digital cellularsystems and lowtier systems, base stations and terminals play a moreactive role in coordinating handoffs. the spectral efficiency can be increased by dividing each existing cell into several smaller cells becausemore users can then be accommodated in the system. however, reducingthe cell size increases the rate at which handoffs occur, sometimes affecting higherlevel protocols. in general, if the rate of handoff increases,then the rate of call dropping will increase proportionally. routing is alsomore dynamic with small cells because routes need to be reestablishedwhenever a handoff takes place.figure 22 in cellular systems each cell has a central hub (the basestationoriented design) and is assigned different frequencies, time slots, or codes, depending on how users access the system.basestationthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78the evolution of untethered communications2.2.1.2packet radio system designa packet radio system provides communications to fixed and mobile network nodes that use radios to form the physical links (lauer,1995; leiner et al., 1997). the earliest such systems were thealohanet, which operated at the university of hawaii in the early1970s, and the darpa prnet, a multihop peertopeer packet networkthat operated in the late 1970s and early 1980s. commercial packetradio networks have been built around singlehop basestationorientedarchitectures, as in the ardis or mobitex systems, and multihop peertopeer architectures, as in the metricom system (see chapter 1, section1.6). these networks can be constructed with fixedlocation infrastructure elements (as in metricom) or can achieve connectivity in a completely ad hoc manner. in general, multihop ad hoc packetradio networks can be set up, deployed, and redeployed rapidly. thesecharacteristics are important to military operations. however, multihopad hoc packet radio networks can pose difficulties in defense applications, because a peertopeer architecture does not correspond to themilitary command structure.many of the challenges in packet radio system design are the same asthose for any widearea wireless communications system. these issuesinclude how best to deal with the fading characteristics of rf propagationand whether to use a random or reservation access strategy. packet radionetworks also pose special challenges related to the dynamic nature of thenetwork topology. the terrain, distance between nodes, antenna height,and antenna directionality all influence whether network connectivitycan be established and maintained. physical connectivity in ad hoc packetradios is more complex than in cellular systems because cell sites cannotbe surveyed in advance and may be situated in locations that are difficultto access. furthermore, it is not economical (commercially at least) to uselarge antennas or extensive antenna processing and directionality at eachpeertopeer node; the network nodes are all more or less identical, highlyportable, and always moving, although additional repeaters can be addedwithin the system to improve performance. repeaters demodulate packets, remodulate them, and send them again.military packet radio systems typically operate at lower frequenciesthan do cellular systems so as to cover large areas within the battlefield.active interference needs to be considered in system design, and transmitter power is chosen not only to ensure successful reception at thereceiver but also to hide the network from adversaries. military packetradio systems make extensive use of spreadspectrum methods for channel access and in general require a higher degree of flexibility in codingthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges79schemes than do commercial systems. preamble spreading codes (simpleversions of the data spreading codes used for synchronization or headerinformation) may be different from the codes used during the data portion of the packet, and codes can be changed on a bitbybit basis toreduce the probability of interference (a feature of secondgenerationdarpa packet radios). all transmitters use either a common preamblecode or a receiverdirected preamble code that directs the transmission toa single node that is tuned to the specific code. the latter approach makesit possible for multiple packets to be in the air yet have a low probabilityof interference.2.2.2 physical resource allocationany system using a fixed assignment of network resources needs tobe designed based on worstcase signal propagation and interference assumptions. a more efficient strategy is dynamic resource allocation, inwhich channels, data rates, and power levels are assigned depending onthe current interference, propagation, and traffic conditions. for cellularsystems, dynamic resource allocation includes assignment of channels tobase stations. dynamic channel allocation in cellular systems improveschannel efficiency by a factor of two or more, even when using simplealgorithms (katzela and naghshineh, 1996). however, analyses of dynamic resource allocation to date have been based on fairly simplisticsystem assumptions, such as fixed traffic intensity, homogenous user demands, fixed reuse constraints, and static channels and users. little workhas been done on resource allocation strategies that consider simultaneous, random variations in traffic, propagation, and user mobility. theextent to which system performance can be improved under realistic conditions remains an open and challenging research problem with respectto both cellular and packetradio architectures. previous research hasfocused primarily on cellular systems; little attention has been devoted topeertopeer networks.an emerging and important research area focuses on reducing thecomplexity of dynamic resource allocation, particularly in systems withsmall cells and rapidly changing propagation conditions and user demands. even under simplistic assumptions of fixed conditions, optimizing channel allocation is highly complex. current allocation proceduresare not easily generalized to incorporate power control, traffic classes(e.g., multimedia), cell handoff, or user priorities. in addition, the efficiency of dynamic resource allocation is most pronounced under lightloading conditions. thus, the optimal dynamic resource allocation strategy is also dependent on traffic conditions.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80the evolution of untethered communications2.2.3 interoperabilityfor elements of a system to communicate, they must be compatible.one way to achieve compatibility is to mandate a òpoint designó in whichall devices conform to the same standard. as described in chapter 1, thisapproach was taken for firstgeneration cellular systems in the unitedstates and in secondgeneration systems in europe. as used in this report, the term òinteroperabilityó refers to the capability of network elements that do not conform to the same standard to communicate. interoperability can be achieved in two ways using different enabling devices:gateways and adapters. in the compatibility context, a gateway is a device that conforms to more than one standard, whereas an adapter translates information formats between two standards. a cableready television set is an example of a gateway, and a settop box is an example of anadapter.with respect to military wireless communications systems, there willbe no convergence to a single technology in the foreseeable future, formany reasons. the number of incompatible systems will remain high,and yet evolving military missions will require increasing communications between individuals and machines using different systems. as aconsequence, interoperability among these systems will be essential.in sophisticated multimedia networks such as the ones required formilitary operations in the next century, interoperability is necessary at alllayers of a communication protocol. the internet approach to interoperability is a narrowwaist protocol suite with compatibility at the middlelayers (tcp and ip) and diversity at higher (i.e., application) and lower(i.e., physical) layers (computer science and telecommunications board,1994). although this approach can be adopted in all types of communications systems, there are several physicallayer problems unique to wireless communications. for example, wireless systems may operate indifferent frequency bands and use different modulation and coding techniques. multimode radios are gateways that address these problems.the commercial dualmode cellular telephone is an example of this typeof radio.the software radio is a promising means of achieving interoperabilityat the physical layer. software radio receivers digitize the rf signal andimplement most receiver functions by means of software running on generalpurpose hardware (see section 2.4). similarly, transmitters synthesize waveforms in digital format and convert them to analog prior toamplification. a software radio can be programmed to be compatiblewith a number of communications systems and provide interoperabilityacross the required data encoding, transmit waveforms and bandwidths,timing, and clock accuracy of the individual modes. chapter 3 (sectionthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges813.4.3.1) notes the initial success of experimental speakeasy radios inimplementing gateways between several military waveforms. however,currentgeneration software radios are limited in terms of the range ofradio waveforms they can handle.the implementation of gateways and/or adapters raises the issue ofwhere they would best be situated in a communications system. thereare various possibilities depending on network architecture. in peertopeer networks, the terminals need to be capable of implementing all coexisting technologies. in this case any terminal would be capable of communicating with any other terminal within range; the disadvantage wouldbe the added cost, weight, and power drain relative to singlemode terminals. on the other hand, in basestationoriented networks, it may bepossible to concentrate the tasks of interoperability in base stations. thisapproach has the disadvantage of disabling communications between terminals when base stations are out of service. this issue could be addressed in research on network architectures (see chapter 4).2.2.4 routing and mobility management2.2.4.1multihop routingthe routing of messages through a multihop packetradio networkrequires the identification of existing communication links and an assessment of their relative quality. routing protocols perform these tasks. thebest route is the one with the smallest number of hops providing acceptable connectivity; the link quality can be determined by measuring signalstrength, snr, or ber. poor link quality can be improved to some extentthrough the use of higher transmission power, wider spreading codes,aggressive hopbyhop error correction, or retransmission schemes. however, link capacity is also a function of the traffic on nearby links; it maybe necessary to route around nodes experiencing heavy congestion.in general, network topologies vary rapidly in mobile packet radionetworks, with links constantly being lost and new ones established.therefore, the network management component needs to disseminateconnectivity information more rapidly than is necessary in wired networks. the network also needs to be able to handle gracefully any network partitions caused by link outages, which are more likely to occur inmobile packet radio networks than in a conventional wired network.routing algorithms choose a hopbyhop path based on informationabout link connectivity. the simplest scheme is flooding, in which apacket is transmitted on all links from the source to neighboring nodes,which then repeat the process. flooding is inefficient but can be the beststrategy when a network topology changes rapidly. another scheme,the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82the evolution of untethered communicationsconnectionoriented routing, maintains a sequence of hops for communications between a single source and specific destination in the network. givenrapid topology changes, network partitions, and large numbers of nodes,keeping this information updated and available to all nodes is difficult atbest. a third scheme is connectionless routing, which requires no knowledge of endtoend connections. packets are forwarded toward their destination, with local nodes adapting to changes in network topology.connectionoriented and connectionless approaches require that routing information be distributed throughout the network. in small networks this distribution was originally accomplished by a centralized routing server; by now, distributed algorithms with improved scalingbehavior have largely replaced centralized servers, especially in largenetworks. each node independently determines the best hop in the direction of the destination, and updated routing tables are periodically exchanged among neighboring nodes.routing schemes have also been used that combine elements of thecentralized and distributed approaches. for very large multihop packetradio networks, such schemes impose a hierarchy on the network topology, hiding changes in the distant parts of the network from local nodes(the nexthop routes to distant network nodes are not likely to change asrapidly as are routes within each cluster). a combined strategy is to use acentralized route server, known as a cluster head, to maintain routesbetween clusters in the direction of òborder radios.óa final routing issue relates to packet forwarding, which is initiatedwhen several transmission attempts fail to deliver a message to the nextnode. in these cases a node engages in localized rerouting, broadcastingthe message to any node that can complete the route. packet forwardingcan cause flooding if multiple nodes hear the request and choose to forward the packet. the process can be optimized by filtering based onoverheard traffic: if a node has a packet in its send queue and òhearsó thesame packet being forwarded from a second node, then the first nodeassumes that the packet has been sent and removes it from the queue.2.2.4.2 terminal mobilitythe mobile internetworking routing protocols (mobile ip) were designed to accommodate the mobility of internet users. there is somedisagreement concerning whether mobile ip was originally designed foran individual user moving from one fixed location to another (myles etal., 1995) or for onthemove wireless operations. in any case, the internetengineering task force (ietf) has addressed the issue of full mobility,and mobile ip is now suited for highly mobile users.13 on the internet,every node (fixed or mobile) has a unique identifying address, its ip adthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges83dress. mobile ip has to circumvent the association of ip addresses withspecific networks because mobile nodes can attach to and detach frommultiple networks as they roam. changing an ip address on the fly is notalways possible. if a node has an open tcp connection when its ip address changes, then the tcp connection will fail. if the node requires anaccurate domain name system (dns) entry, then the entry will need tobe updated as the address changes, and in todayõs implementation ofdns such an update can be very slow.communications take place between a sender and receiving mobilehost (mh). in the mobile ip specifications, every mh has a home networkand its ip address is called the home address. a router called the homeagent, which resides in the mhõs home network, is responsible for intercepting each packet destined for the home address of a roaming mh. thepacket is placed inside another ip packet through a process called òipinipencapsulation.ó the source address in the encapsulating packet is that ofthe home agent. the packet is usually sent òin care ofó another agent, theforeign agent, which resides in the network in which the mh is roaming.the packet is sent by conventional ip routing to the foreign agent, wherethe contents (i.e., the original packets) are removed and delivered to themh. the mh can transmit information directly to the sender but the senderalways directs its own communications to the home network. the mh canalso request a locally assigned careof ip address in its roaming domain byinvoking the dynamic host configuration protocol; this address could beused by the home agent directly, eliminating the foreign agent.when an mh enters a new mobile subnetwork it needs to obtain acareof address. it can find a foreign agent using a process built on top ofthe existing internet control message protocol capabilities for router discovery. once accepted by the local network, the mh registers its newcareof address with its home agent. all registration attempts need to becarefully authenticated to prevent a malicious user from hijacking thepackets simply by furnishing another careof address. the mobile ipspecifications use a message authentication code (similar to a digital signature) based on a secret key shared by the mh and home agent, typicallyusing a secure oneway function called md5. only the mh that knowsthe secret key can provide the digital signature expected by the homeagent. replay protection is required to prevent a malicious user fromfalsely registering an mh with a stale careof address.the major performance challenge is to circumvent the indirect routing among the sender, home agent, and foreign agent. this path can beeliminated if the sender caches bindings between the mhõs home andcareof addresses. the management of these bindings is called routeoptimization.14 for example, when a sender first sends a packet to an mhthrough its home agent, the home agent could send a bindingupdatethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84the evolution of untethered communicationsmessage to the original sender. until the binding expires because of a timeout, the sender can use the careof address directly. if the mh moves to anew subnetwork, then it can ask its former foreign agent to forward packetsto the new careof address while also alerting senders of that new address.2.2.4.3 wireless overlay networksno single network technology can simultaneously offer widearea coverage, high bandwidth, and low latency. in general, networks that spansmall geographical areas (e.g., lans) tend to support high bandwidth andlow latency, whereas networks that span large geographical areas (e.g.,satellite networks) tend to support low bandwidth and high latency. toyield flexible connectivity over wide areas, a wireless internetwork needsto be formed from multiple wide, medium, and localarea networks interconnected by wired or wireless segments (katz and brewer, 1996). thisinternetwork is called a wireless overlay network because the wans arelaid on top of the medium and localarea networks to form a multilayerednetwork hierarchy. a user operating within the lan enjoys high bandwidth and low latency, but when communicating outside the local coverage area the user accesses a widerarea network within the hierarchy, typically sacrificing some bandwidth or latency in the process.future mobile information systems will be built on heterogeneouswireless overlay networks, extending traditional wired and internetworked processing òislandsó to hosts on the move over a wide area. overlay technologies are used in buildings (wireless lans), in metropolitanareas (packet radio), and regional areas (satellite). the software radio,with its capability to change frequencies and waveforms as needed, is acritical enabling technology for overlay networks.handoffs may take place not only òhorizontallyó within a single network but also òverticallyó between overlays. if each overlay networkassigns the mh a different ip address, then mobile ip needs to be extended to correlate all the addresses for one user. alternatively, the mobile node can treat each new ip address as a new careof address. thehome agent maintains a table of bindings between the home and locallyassigned addresses. the applications running on the mh may participatein the choice of route. for example, an application might specify thathighpriority traffic traverse an overlay with low latency. lesscriticaltraffic might travel over higherlatency connections. signal quality, ber,and packet loss and retransmission need to be considered. under certainconditions such as the transmission of urgent data, a slowspeed overlaywith a strong signal strength might be preferred to one with a higherbandwidth but a weaker signal.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges852.2.5 resource discoverynew protocols are being developed to support convenient operationsby mobile users. one example is the service location protocol, whichallows user agents to determine access information for generic networkservices such as printing, faxing, schedule management, file system access, and backup. a directory agent delivers universal resource locators(urls) to user agents, which use the urls to access service agents. newservice agents can register or withdraw their urls as needed. much ofthe protocol research is geared toward enabling the identification of directory agents in unfamiliar environments. other strategies based onmodifications to directory services have been proposed as well.2.2.6 network simulation and modeling toolsnetwork performance analysis can take three forms: mathematicalanalysis, experimental trials, or system simulation. mathematical analyses can incorporate only a limited range of realistic phenomena, and fieldtrials are expensive as well as difficult to set up under repeatable conditions. consequently simulation is often the best tool for optimizing system design and predicting performance.networklevel simulation tools are used to simulate the dynamic behavior of routing, flow, and congestionmitigation schemes in packetswitcheddata networks. these tools can model arbitrary network topologies, linkerror models, router scheduling algorithms, and traffic.15 network simulators have been used to investigate new linklayer algorithms for packet scheduling and retransmission, new mechanisms within routers for determininglocal congestion conditions and sending this information to transmitters andreceivers, and transportlayer algorithms for retransmission and rate control.performance tools can also help troubleshoot problems in real networks bycollecting statistics about the throughput of the various nodes and links. thisinformation can be used to identify bottlenecks and develop remedial strategies such as changing the topology of the network. debugging tools enablethe protocol designer to capture detailed traces of network activity (mccanneand jacobson, 1993); these tools are invaluable for tracking down errors inprotocol implementation.to model mobile networks accurately, simulators require special features, some of which have yet to be developed. they need to model thenature of errors on the wireless link precisely because errors are not uniformly distributed but rather tend to cluster (nguyen et al., 1996). theyalso need to model node mobility, especially in the case of packet radionetworks. existing simulation technology consists of good models ofradio propagation at microwave frequencies but only standard teletrafficthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86the evolution of untethered communicationsmodels and few abstract mobility models. some proprietary tools integrategeographical modeling, propagation, and cellular networking behavior,but no integrated tools are available commercially to predict the performance of the next generation of wireless technologies, such as smart radios.similarly, existing tools can simulate the creation of relativelynarrowband waveforms at the transmitter and analyze the effects of radiopropagation on the received signal, but they cannot model the antennaradiation or reception properties of a signal that spans more than 1 ghzof spectrum. no existing tool can model the propagation performance ofurban, suburban, rural, or freespace radiation of wideband signalcontaining components with diverse propagation characteristics. no tool cananalyze the effects of the motion of network elements on the receivedsignalõs multipath characteristics, such as spectral nulls and doppler shiftover wide bandwidths. no widely available tools allow for the geographical or topological analysis of specific network deployments. finally, no analysis tool is sophisticated enough to examine the performance of software radios or radio networks in the presence of interferencesources common to wideband mobile communications. the evaluationand optimization of mobile wireless networks would be enhanced by thedevelopment of sophisticated, flexible models of communications trafficand node mobility.2.3 endtoend system design issuesmost endtoend system design issues, such as security, design tools,and interoperability with other systems, are relevant to any wireless application (katz, 1994). however, some endtoend design issues dependon the application(s) to be supported by the network. for example,videoconferencing is an extremely challenging application for a wirelesssystem because of its high bandwidth requirement and strict constraintson delayed endtoend transmissions. to support this application, thecapability to adapt to channel conditions, perhaps through a slight degradation in image quality, might be built into the endtoend system protocols. similarly, many military commandandcontrol operations requirethe capability to assign priorities to certain messages, and this flexibilityneeds to be built into the system. the following sections deal with threekey endtoend design issues for wireless systems: applicationlevel adaptations, quality of service (qos), and system security.2.3.1 applicationlevel adaptationa system can adapt to the variability in mobile client applications inthree ways. one approach is to exploit datatypespecific lossy (i.e., inthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges87volving some distortion) compression mechanisms and use data semantics to determine how information can be compressed and prioritized enroute to the client.16 a second approach is onthefly adaptation involving the transcoding of data into a representation that can be handled bythe end application. the third approach is to push the complexity awayfrom the mobile clients and servers into proxies, which are often used inwired networks but are not currently optimized for wireless applications.introduced in response to security concerns, the proxy approach is anew paradigm for distributed applications. a proxy is an intermediarythat resides between the client and serverñoutside the clientõs securityfirewallñto filter network packets on behalf of the client. proxies providea convenient place to change data representations en route to the client(thereby mitigating the lossy, constrained bandwidths of wireless links),perform typespecific compressions, cache data for rapid reaccess, andfetch data in anticipation of access. by supporting the adaptation to network variations in bandwidth, latency, and link error rates as well as tohardware and software variations, proxies enable client applications running on limitedcapability end nodes to appear as if they were running onhighend, wellconnected machines. lowend clients (e.g., pdas) havelimited processing capabilities due to small displays and memory, relatively slow processors, and limitedcapability software and runtime environments.2.3.2 quality of servicequality of service refers to trafficdependent performance metricsñbandwidth, endtoend latency, or likelihood of message lossñthat a connection must have or can tolerate for the type of data transmitted. anetworkõs admissioncontrol mechanisms, which are invoked whenever anew connection is initiated, provide assurance that qos requirements willbe met; a new connection is aborted if its qos requirements cannot bemet. attention to qos issues is increasing because of at least two converging trends: the growing market for applications (e.g., video) that requirerealtime service, and the evident interest in using the internet for a rangeof activities that are critical to both the public and private sectors.2.3.2.1 approaches to quality of servicewithin the internet, three categories of qos are currently defined:guaranteed, predictive, and besteffort service. guaranteed service isachieved if the connection conforms to a wellspecified traffic specification. if the network determines that it can support this traffic, then itallows the connection to be established and guarantees that its requirethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88the evolution of untethered communicationsments will be met. guarantees of this type are required when the application needs tight, realtime coupling between the end points of the connection. an example of guaranteed service is the telephone system, which isdesigned to meet the level of perceived audio/speech quality, endtoendswitching delays, and likelihood of call blocking required for telephonecalls. certain values for these metrics are determined and the network isdesigned to offer the desired number of simultaneous connections. another example of guaranteed service is that provided by atm, a transmission protocol that handles voice, data, and video. if absolute guaranteesare too expensive, then it is often sufficient to provide predictive service,indicating that the applicationõs requirements are highly likely to be met.the internet as it exists today does not provide explicit qos to different packet flows; instead it is based on a besteffort model that makes noperformance guarantees. (flows are groups of packets that share common characteristics, including the tolerated delay.) besteffort servicesare appropriate for applications that do not demand realtime performance and that can adapt gracefully to the bandwidth available in thenetwork. besteffort service tolerates simple network components and isa good match for data transmitted in interactive bursts, interactive bulktransfer, and asynchronous bulk transfer. the common internet datatransfer applications are sensitive to losses but tolerant of latency. however, the reverse is true for emerging realtime internet applications,which are tolerant of losses but sensitive to latency. the ietf is workingto provide guaranteed services on the internet (peterson and davie, 1996;tanenbaum, 1996).the internet carries two broad classes of applications: delay tolerantand delay intolerant. the former applications, such as file transfer, tolerate some packet losses and delays. for these services, which are commontoday, the network does not reserve resources or limit the number oftransfers in progress at any one time. instead, it shares the availablebandwidth among all the active applications as best it can. this is the socalled besteffort service. delayintolerant applications require data thatis delivered with little or no delay. for these applications, different services are being developed. the components of these services consist oftraffic and network descriptions, admission control procedures, resourcereservation protocols, and packet scheduling mechanisms. these specifications are associated with flows. given a service specification, the network can admit a new flow or deny access when the specifications exceedwhat the network can provide. the network can also police a flow toensure that it meets the traffic specification.realtime internet applications are developed on top of the realtimeprotocol (rtp). with rtp, a node moderates its transmission rate basedon periodic reports of successfully received data at the receiver. if thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges89senderõs rate exceeds that which is reported as received, then the sendingrate is reduced. periodically the sender probes the network by attemptingto increase the rate to see if a higher rate can be supported. in this way,the sender and receiver adapt to the available bandwidth without requiring any special support from the network itself. the rtp protocol isappropriate for realtime data streams, such as video and audio, that cantolerate some losses.the realtime internet services proposed by the ietf use the resourcereservation protocol (rsvp), which enables dynamic changes in qos andpermits receivers to specify different qos requirements.17 the rsvp protocol is closely integrated with multicast services in which receivers determine a path through the network on which senders distribute theirtraffic specifications and receivers distribute their network service requirements. these senderdirected path messages and receiverdirected reservation messages are built on top of the existing multicast protocols. senders and receivers are responsible for periodically signaling the networkabout their changing specifications. once the reservations have beenmade, the final step is to implement them in every router on the path fromsender to receiver through packet classification and scheduling. therouter implementation achieves the performance specified by the network end points. the classification process maps packets on flows intotheir associated reservation, and scheduling drives queue management toensure that the packets obtain their requested service.proponents of atm networks view them as the foundation of integrated voice, video, and data services because they combine flexibilitywith performance guarantees. the atm approach involves breaking updata into short packets of fixed size called cells, which are interspersed bytime division with data from other sources and delivered over trunk networks. an atm network can scale up to high data rates because it usesfast switching and data multiplexing based on these fixedformat cells,which contain 48 bytes of traffic combined with a 5byte header definingthe virtual circuits and paths over which the data are to be transported.the virtual circuits need to be established before data can flow. in settingup connections, the network makes resource allocation decisions and balances the traffic demands across network links, thereby separating dataand control flows and enabling switches to be simple and faster.two types of guaranteed service are available on atm networks:constant bit rate (cbr) and variable bit rate (vbr). the cbr service isappropriate for constantrate data streams that demand consistency indelay. an example of such a data stream is telephone traffic that usesconstantbitrate encodings for audio and places bounds on delivery latency. the vbr service is appropriate for traffic patterns that have a fairlysustained rate but also may feature short bursts of data at the peak transthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90the evolution of untethered communicationsmission rate. bursttype traffic tolerates higher delays and higher variations in delay than does constantrate traffic. two types of bestefforttraffic classes are available on atm networks: available bit rate, whichguarantees zero losses (but makes no other guarantees) if the source follows the traffic management signals delivered by the network; and undefined bit rate, which provides no performance guarantees.the connection orientation of atm presents problems when dealingwith network mobility. movement between cells requires existing connections to be reestablished: even brief transmissions invoke the fulllatency of connection setup. in addition, atm is not appropriate for lossylinks because there is no agreedupon mechanism for error recovery orretransmission at the link layer. considerable controversy exists as towhether atm will be used throughout a system or only at the link orsubnetwork level. full atm connectivity, from one end of a system to theother, is required to take advantage of the service guarantees.18 manybelieve that it will be necessary to run tcp/ip over atm to ensureinteroperability across heterogeneous subnetworks. debate continuesover how to interface atmõs performance guarantees with the emerginginternet capabilities for predictive service.wireless communications introduce additional qos issues. the qosguarantees for expected loss rates, latencies, and bandwidths were developed based on the assumption that switched, fiberoptic wired networkswould be used. such networks feature low linkerror rates, easily predicted link bandwidths, and qos parameters that are largely determinedby how the queues are managed within the switches. as a result, lossesare due almost entirely to congestionrelated queue overflows. wirelesslinks, on the other hand, have high biterror rates, high latencies due tolink layer retransmissions, and unpredictable link bandwidths.19 furthermore, the quality of a wireless link varies over time, and connectionscan be lost completely. two wireless end nodes sharing the same link canexperience vastly different link bandwidths depending on their relativeproximity to the base station, location in a radio fade, or loss of receiversynchronization in a multipath environment. link quality can also bedegraded by interference from a nearby transmitter. in addition, hiddenterminals cause timeconsuming backoff (i.e., waiting before resending)that further degrades network performance.because link quality varies on small time scales, it is difficult to improve a wireless link through agile error coding or increased transmitpower. moreover, attempts to improve a link for one user can adverselyaffect others. guarantees are elusive in this complex environment.20 theatm endtoend qos model is difficult to implement if the limiting link iswireless. in general, however, approaches such as adaptive spreadingcodes, fec, and transmitpower control can be used at the media accessthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges91control and link layers to improve higher protocol layers in a wirelessenvironment (acampora, 1996).2.3.2.2 transportlayer issuesthe most widely used reliable transport protocol is tcp, a connectionoriented protocol that combines congestion control with òslidingwindowó flow control at the sender and cumulative acknowledgmentsfrom the receiver. as each segment is received in sequence, the receivergenerates an acknowledgment indicating the number of bytes received.in the current generation of tcp, congestion is controlled by the sender,which maintains a variable called the congestion window that regulateshow much data the sender can have in flight across the network at anyone time. the sender adjusts the congestion window in response to perceived network conditions.when a tcp connection first starts, or after a major congestion event,the congestion window is set to one packet, which means the sendercannot send a second packet until it receives an acknowledgement of thefirst. the sender then adjusts the congestion window by doubling it eachroundtrip across the net. this part of the algorithm is called slowstart.once a certain threshold is crossed, the congestionavoidance phase istriggered and the window size grows in increments of a single packet foreach roundtrip. the sender uses these mechanisms to probe the networkto discover how much data can be in flight.a lost packet creates a gap in the sequence number of data arriving atthe receiver. when this occurs, the receiver generates a duplicate acknowledgment for the last segment received in order. when a thresholdnumber of duplicate acknowledgments is received, the sender retransmits the lost segment and halves the congestion window; this part of thealgorithm is known as fast retransmission and recovery. a more seriouscongestion event can cause the loss of so many packets that no duplicateacknowledgments are generated by the receiver. the sender detects andcorrects this situation using a timer. the tcp protocol sets timeouts as afunction of the mean and standard deviation of the roundtrip time. if noacknowledgment is received within this interval, then the sender retransmits the first unacknowledged segment, sets its window to one packet,and reenters the slowstart phase. this event causes a major reduction inthroughput until the window opens and also can cause a silent perioduntil the timer expires.fast retransmission works well in many circumstances today. however, specific issues arise in wireless systems. when a packet is lost ordamaged because of bit errors on the wireless link, this loss is detectedand corrected by the fastrecovery algorithm. however, fast retransmisthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92the evolution of untethered communicationssion reduces the window size as a side effect, thus keeping throughputlow. these problems can be mitigated through a tcpaware link layer(balakrishnan et al., 1996), in which the base station triggers local retransmissions of lost segments. by intercepting the duplicate acknowledgments, the base station shields the sender from the effects of local lossesthat would have the effect of shrinking the congestion window and reducing throughput. more seriously, burst errors on the wireless link cancause the loss of several packets, which will trigger the slowstart algorithm even though there is no congestion.asymmetric connections, in which the bandwidth in one direction farexceeds that available for the opposite path, can present problems fortransportlayer connections because the effective bandwidth on the forward path is limited by the amount of acknowledgment traffic that can besent along the reverse path. an example of asymmetry is directbroadcastsatellite, which sends data to the user at several hundred kilobits persecond but uses substantially smallerbandwidth technologies (such asconventional telephone or widearea wireless) for the return path at tensof kilobits per second. asymmetries also arise because of the nature ofdata traffic patterns. for example, web access involves much more datatransmitted from servers to users than in the opposite direction. yet poorperformance on the acknowledgment path moderates the performance oneven a highbandwidth forward path. one solution to is to compress theacknowledgment packets; another is to delay acknowledgments so thateach one acknowledges an expanded range of received data.asymmetries can undermine reliability in the application of tcp towireless links. the tcp protocol can adapt the duration of its timeoutsas long as the roundtrip time estimate is not highly variable. asymmetries in the connection bandwidth, coupled with differential loss rates andcongestion effects on the forward and reverse paths, increase the variability in estimated roundtrip time. this means that when losses do occur,the retransmission timeouts can become very large, significantly degrading a connection if losses occur often.2.3.3 securitywireless communication systems are inherently less private than arewired systems because the radio link can be intercepted without anyphysical tap, undetected by the transmitter and receiver. wireless networks are therefore especially vulnerable to eavesdropping, usage fraud,and activity monitoring, threats that will grow as wireless banking andother commercial services become available. in addition, both wired andwireless networks need to be designed to maintain the integrity of dataand systems and assure the appropriate availability of services. thus,the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges93security is an important issue for both commercial and military applications. for purposes of this discussion, which considers key aspects of theinformation security challenge but is not comprehensive, the issues canbe divided into three categories: network security, radio link security,and hardware security.21network security encompasses endtoend encryption and measuresto prevent fraudulent network access and monitoring. one userorientedframework distinguishes several levels of endtoend encryption (gargand wilkes, 1996). level 0 has no encryption, meaning that anyone witha scanner and knowledge of the communication link design can intercepta transmission. analog cellular telephones offer this level of security,which has been a problem and has motivated security upgrades in thedigital cellular standards.22 level 1 provides lowlevel security such thatindividual conversations might take a year or more to decrypt. this levelis probably secure enough for commercial telephony applications, provided that an equivalent effort would be needed to decrypt subsequentconversations (òperfect forward secrecyó). level 2 provides increased(perhaps by a factor of 10) security for sensitive information related toelectronic commerce, mergers and acquisitions, and contract negotiations.level 3 provides the most stringent level of security, meeting governmentand military communications requirements as defined by the appropriateagencies.radio link security prevents the interception of radio signals, ensuring the privacy of user location information and, for military applications,aj and lowprobabilityofdetectionandinterference (lpd/i) capabilities. link security was primarily a military concern before commercialwireless communications became prevalent. military systems are designed to avert the detection of radio signals, jamming of communicationlinks, and interception and decoding of messages. many military radiosare based on spreadspectrum technology, which provides both aj andlpd/i capabilities. however, because knowledge of the spreadspectrum code would enable an adversary to intercept a spread signal, encryption is usually applied as well to prevent signal interception andmessage recovery. many military techniques for reducing interceptionand detection are classified.for commercial systems the primary linksecurity issue is privacy,which is not typically assured. conversations on analog cellular telephones are accessible to anyone with an fm scanner, as demonstrated byrecent publication of communications involving public figures. moreover, the location of a cellular user can be determined by triangulating thesignal from two or more base stations, a feature that has been exploitedsuccessfully by law enforcement authorities. it is difficult to prevent theinterception of commercial radio signals, not only because communicathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94the evolution of untethered communicationstions protocols are publicized in patents and standards but also becausemost communications devices have a òmaintenanceó mode for monitoring calls (a capability intended for testing purposes that could also beused to eavesdrop).it is unlikely that commercial devices will ever require a level ofsecurity equivalent to military systems and may not even provide theòhooksó enabling the addition of lpd/i capabilities. similarly, althoughthe growing use of wireless systems and growing dependence on networked communications have heightened concerns about the possibledenial of service in commercial contexts, there is probably greater tolerance for privateservice outages than for jamming in a military situationat this time.hardware security also has different implications for commercial andmilitary applications, although encryption keys typically need to be protected in both contexts.23 commercial systems require sufficient securityto prevent the fraudulent use of information in the event of theft or loss,and user databases need to be secured against unauthorized access. themilitary has similar requirements but at a much higher security level. italso has additional requirements: military devices need to be protectedso that opening them will not reveal any of the specialized hardware orsoftware technology.2.4 hardware issuesamong the hardware issues that are critical to thirdgeneration wireless systems, radio stands out as being central to the military mission.the radio receiver consists of an antenna, rf amplifier, mixer, filters,demodulator, and decoder (see figure 23). radio signals are received bythe antenna, amplified, passed through the mixer and filters, demodulated, and decoded. transmitters have similar architectures but the opfigure 23 a radio receiver has six basic components. in transmit mode theoperations proceed in the reverse order.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges95erations are performed in reverse order: the data are encoded, modulated, passed through the filters and mixer, amplified, and transmittedthrough the antenna.section 2.4.1 reviews antenna technology, which has become increasingly sophisticated with the addition of adaptive capabilities. section 2.4.2discusses other radio components, emphasizing the transition from analogto digital technology and from singlepurpose to multipurpose systems.traditional radios were designed for a single air interface (i.e., one modulation type occupying a particular bandwidth). given the proliferation ofstandards and the need for compatibility with older equipment, the generaltrend in radio design is to build flexible systems that can handle multipleair interfaces. section 2.4.3 discusses portable terminals. in modern mobiledevices, the radio system is integrated with sophisticated user interfacesand computing capabilities in lightweight, modular packages. the designof portable terminals relies on advanced microprocessors, displays, userinterface devices, power sources, and software.2.4.1 antennasan antenna serves as the interface, or transducer, between the electronic circuitry of a transmitter or receiver and the medium through whichradio waves travel. classical antenna designs include simple stub oròwhipó antennas such as those found on cellular telephones, as well asmassive, parallel panels that are aligned in phase to provide flexible electronic steering (examples include the phasedarray radars used on somewarships). while in transit between the transmitter and receiver, the rfsignals are subject to a variety of distortions (see section 2.1.1.3). in addition, they create interference for other communications and provide opportunities for interception. to limit interception and interference andalso to conserve power, antennas can be designed so that the rf energyradiates in only a particular direction, providing gain along the intendeddirection and attenuation in undesired directions.various antenna structures have been developed to direct electromagnetic signals. receiving antennas also have directional properties:the most common examples are rooftop television antennas that point inthe direction of the local television transmitter and satellite dishes thatpoint at the orbiting satellite. directional antennas in cellularsystem basestations focus power in a particular direction, thereby minimizing therequired transmitter power and significantly reducing the amount of interference. directional antennas need to be positioned carefully. positioning is not difficult in local television broadcasting because both thetransmitter and receiver are stationary and a fixed, narrow beam workswell. in cellular and personal communications systems, however, thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96the evolution of untethered communicationstransmitter and receiver locations are mobile. therefore, most directionalantennas in mobile communications have a fairly large beam width (60 to120 degrees). although narrower beams would enable the use of lowpower transmitters and reduce interference, many such beams would berequired to cover even a small service area, and mobile users would constantly be moving from one beam to another.user mobility is a key motivation behind the development of steerableantennasñsocalled smart or adaptivearray antennasñthat can changethe shape and direction of their transmission beams depending on userlocation. a steerable transmitting antenna controls the phases of the electromagnetic signals generated at each of its numerous elements, therebychanging the physical locations at which the wavelike signals add constructively (to create a beam) or destructively (to create a null). usingfeedback control, an antenna beam can follow the movement of a mobileunit. spot beams can be created by both the transmitting and receivingantennas. these technologies increase system capacity, reduce transmitter power requirements and interference, and dramatically reduce thelikelihood of unwanted signal interception. future mobile systems willpinpoint the relative positions of the transmitter and receiver with evengreater accuracy than is currently possible, making sophisticated locationbased services feasible.the physical size of the elements in an antenna is related to the wavelength of operation, which is inversely proportional to the transmissionfrequency. thus, higher operating frequencies mean shorter wavelengths,smaller antenna features, more elements per antenna, and the possibilityof more complicated and precise beam patterns. adaptive antennas arealready used in military operations, particularly at frequencies above 20ghz, to accommodate very wideband signals used for communications,tracking, or guidance. such antennas are composed of many elementsand are fully capable of electronic beam forming and steering. each element is controlled electrically through changes in the properties of dielectric materials; the antenna does not change physically and therefore needsno moving parts.older communications systems have a number of shortcomings. somehave multiband capabilities but are expensive and bulky. commercialapplications for adaptive antennas are limited to relatively lowcost, singleband units with limited flexibility in beam pattern. moreover, virtually allexisting adaptive antennas for mobile radio applications are designed foruse at base stations rather than mobile units. the key technical challengesin the design of adaptive antennas for military applications are to reducethe size and cost of the rf and signalprocessing technology and achieveadditional gain in a handset by designing threedimensional instead ofplanar designs. the commercial sector is likely to need such designs inthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges97the future as new spectrum is allocated at higher frequencies (above 2ghz) and multiband radios become available. for the time being, thedod may need to fund its own r&d in this area.2.4.2 other radio componentsthe evolution of digital technology is transforming radios. other thanantennas, all the components of the radio systemñrf amplifier, mixer,filter, demodulator, and decoderñare amenable to either analog or digitalimplementation. many commercial radios and other communications products already use programmable digital modules (see table 22).there are many advantages to replacing analog hardware with programmable digital technology, although tradeoffs are involved. as notedabove, digital technology offers inherent security advantages. anotherbenefit is time to market: as with pcs, product development time can bereduced because changes and improvements can be implemented throughsoftware. digital technologies also make it easier to achieve temperaturestability and reliability and to manufacture, support, and test equipment.digital radios can be designed for performance peaks, whereas analogradios deoptimize performance because the filters are detuned to makethe system easier to manufacture and tolerant of component variability.finally, digital components can reduce costs by providing increased functionality per unit and reducing the need for multiple types of radios.the design of wideband (i.e., multiband) digital radios has been enabled by rapid advances in microelectronics, including dsps, a/d converters, asics, and fieldprogrammable gate arrays (fpgas). in newradio architectures, referred to variously as softwaredefined radio, programmable radio, or simply software radio, analog functions such as tuntable 22 use of digital components in commercialcommunications productsproductrfa amplifiermixerfilterdemodulatordecodercar radio withanaloganaloganaloganaloganalogequalizerdirectv receiveranaloganaloganalogdigitaldigitaldualmode cell phoneanaloganalogdigitaldigitaldigitalpc telephone modemanalogdigitaldigitaldigitaldigitalfddib modemdigitaln/an/adigitaldigitalaradio frequency.bfiberdistributed data interface.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98the evolution of untethered communicationsing, filtering, demodulating, and decoding are replaced with softwaredirecting the digital equivalents. the mixers and filters can process multiple modulations spanning multiple bandwidths; the demodulation anddecoding processes are programmed; and modulation and coding areusually performed using dsp chips.the wideband a/d conversion of the software radio enables theimplementation in handsets of direct frequency conversion (i.e., eliminating the typical intermediate steps between the baseband and transmitfrequencies, thereby reducing noise and the need for filtering). this design is not yet appropriate for commercial systems, because it is not feasible at this point to service a large number of subscribers using suchreceivers simultaneously. in the handset, the rf amplifier is required toobtain a reasonable noise figure and input intercept. the antialias filterselects which of the multiple subbands to digitize. the wideband (multiband) digitizer converts all rf signals into a digital representation. theprocessor uses software to implement all legacy and future radio systems.the processor is capable of implementing multiple simultaneous radios,much like a pc can run multiple applications simultaneously.the use of digital radio hardware still presents challenges and requires tradeoffs that may not be readily apparent. a digitally implemented radio needs to be at least as good as the analog radio it replaces interms of qos parameters such as reception sensitivity or power. thischallenge is being met: coding and decoding improvements, driven bydsp advances, are making digital radio systems not only equal to analogsystems but also better. however, four limiting technologies need to bedeveloped further if wideband (i.e., multiband) software radios are tobecome a practical reality: advanced a/d converters, dsp chips, filters,and rf amplifier components.2.4.2.1 analogtodigital convertersthe key enabling component, and the most complex and misunderstood element of wideband software radios, is the a/d converter. mosta/d converters are characterized by maximum clock rate and number ofoutput bits, digital metrics similar to those used to characterize microprocessors or memory devices. however, because signal quality is key, a/dconverters are better characterized using analog characteristics such assnr, signal range free from spurious noise, and usable bandwidth(known as nyquist bandwidth). the use of these metrics helps ensurethat the critical a/d transition can be accomplished with minimum degradation in signal quality.an a/d converter can be implemented in many different architectures; the three significant modern architectures are known as flash (orthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges99parallel), subranging, and sigmadelta. the choice involves tradeoffsbetween the accuracy and conversion rates. the flash a/d uses the mosthardware and power but also operates at the fastest sampling rates andproduces the largest usable nyquist bandwidth. these converters aregenerally inadequate because of a lack of dynamic range. subranginga/d converters are slower but offer both the bandwidth and dynamicrange needed for software radios. sigmadelta a/d converters generallyhave very low sample rates and are appropriate for narrowband applications. it is not clear at this stage which technology can be improved mostreadily to provide the requisite lowpower converters with high dynamicrange that process bits as rapidly as possible. a demonstration of ultrafasta/d converters was planned as part of the dodfunded millenniumprogram. the commercial sector is also performing r&d in this area andis likely to produce advances that would be appropriate for military applications.2.4.2.2 digital signal processorsfor the past few decades semiconductor manufacturing has followedmooreõs law, which predicts that the number of devices on an ic willdouble every 18 months. this trend is directly related to the steady reductions in the minimum feature size, or linewidth, that can be manufacturedin large volumes. the semiconductor industry association road map callsfor the production of devices with more than a billion transistors by theyear 2010. such densities could enable entire systems to be built on a few oreven a single chip. indeed, software radio architectures may be implemented increasingly in small numbers of ics (see figure 24).figure 24 future wideband (i.e., multiband) software radios may implementsome functions, such as analogtodigital conversion and signal processing, insingle integrated circuits.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100the evolution of untethered communicationsthe several generalpurpose, programmable dsps now on the marketare primarily a customized segment of the ic industry. although dspspeed is improving every year, singlechip performance is still very limited for software radio applications. high speed can be achieved withlarge arrays of dsps but the size, weight, power, and cost of this designare not attractive for small or handheld radio applications. because filtersare critical to the performance of a software radio, gains could be achievedthrough the use of integrated firfiltering ics. these devices, developedvery recently, could perform the processing function at a small fraction ofthe complexity and cost of a programmable dsp.24 regardless, the rapidcommercial advances in signal processing technology are likely to produce chips that meet military needs.2.4.2.3 filtersfilters influence not only a radioõs signalprocessing speed but also itssensitivity, dynamic range, and capability to avert cosite interference.their importance is reflected in their physical presence: filters constitute25 percent of the volume of a typical software radio, in part becauseseveral different filters are needed (i.e., for receive preselectors, amplifieroutput, local oscillators, and mixers). improvements in frequencytuningrange and selectivity as well as miniaturization would be helpful, especially for application in handheld devices. the commercial sector continues to rely on older technology (e.g., mechanical filters are used in cellulartelephone systems) whereas the military has unique needs to reduce cosite interference, both within software radios and across multisystem platforms, and cover wide frequency ranges. existing radios that span widefrequency ranges require combined filters made of new materials thathave remarkably flexible and adaptive electrical properties, far beyondolder static inductors and capacitors. the new materials and modernfilter fabrication techniques will lead to new and smaller implementations of wideband filtering based on the fundamentals of transmissionline techniques. thus, filters may merit a significant military r&d investment.2.4.2.4 radio frequency amplifiersthe commercial sector is designing ultralinear amplifiers that willprocess many signals from multiple transmitters and add them coherently to achieve good fidelity. these designs will improve power efficiency and consume less space than traditional amplifiers. however, thecommercial sector is unlikely to produce multiband amplifiers, whichwill be very expensive, anytime soon. alternative materials might offerthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges101advantages in the design of future military systems and could be a topicfor dodfunded research.the most important recent development in rf technology is the reemergence of semiconductors (i.e., silicon) as an alternative to the semiinsulator materials (e.g., gallium arsenide) traditionally used for rf device manufacturing. semiconductors offer two advantages. first, theyform a natural ground plane on an ic such that microwave devices can befabricated much closer together, resulting in smaller chips and enablingthe design of circuits that cost less and support higher frequencies andperformance than do conventional circuits. second, semiconductors costless than semiinsulators because they are produced in higher volumes(they are also used in the most advanced cmos microprocessors andrandomaccess memory [ram] chips).as a consequence, silicon is now being used in moderateperformancerf front ends for cellular and personal communication systems. further,a new technology involving the implantation of germanium atoms insilicon to create heterojunction bipolar transistors promises an extremelylow cost, siliconbased approach for rf (30 mhz to 2 ghz) and microwave (2 ghz to 40 ghz and above) analog front ends and power amplifiers.2.4.3 portable terminal designthe small size and portability of wireless communicators provideobvious benefits for users but also introduce challenges for system designers because they limit display, processing, power, and storage capabilities. the following subsections review the limitations and the newtechnologies designed to overcome them. the commercial sector is making rapid advances in all these areas that the dod can exploit to goodadvantage.2.4.3.1displays, user interfaces, and input devicessmall, highly portable devices contain relatively low quality displays.there are three reasons for this. first, portable devices have limited physical space and power available for the display. second, display pixelscannot be smaller than the resolving limit of the human eye, meaning thatthe number of pixels in a given display (i.e., the resolution) is limited. inaddition, bright colors can be produced only if there is sufficient powerfor backlights and display elements; otherwise the display is dim andmonochrome. for these reasons the user interface of a portable deviceneeds to be designed for monochrome presentations in a very small screenareaña significant impediment to the display of video or highqualitythe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102the evolution of untethered communicationsimages. nevertheless, significant market forces are fueling a trend toward ubiquitous information displays, and commercial displays offeringhigh resolution, full color, and reduced power requirements are likely tobe developed.because portable devices lack the space for standard keyboards, iconbased interfaces and penbased input have been considered as alternatives. in some devices the keyboard is replaced with a small number offunctionspecific buttons. these devices still support functionally specificvirtual keyboards, which are displayed on a touch screen and can beoperated by applying pressure to the keys with a stylus. the penbaseddevices either support handwriting recognition or simply capture penstrokes (òdigital inkó).ideally, mobile communication devices will be able to send imagesfrom remote sites. this capability will be enabled by chargecoupleddevices (ccds)25 and cmos camera chips. these chips are already usedin commercial camcorders and have become inexpensive and widespreadas a result. highly integrated cameras have been declining in price, andsuch a camera is integrated into at least one stateoftheart japanese pda.2.4.3.2 processorsthe successful development of lowpower devices with long batterylife has placed limits on the raw performance of embedded processorsbecause processing speed and clock cycle directly influence power consumption. new metrics are therefore required to measure the performance of processors for portable applications: millions of instructionsper second (mips) per watt, a measure of the impact on battery life andheat dissipation in highly integrated systems; mips per square millimeter, a measure of the silicon manufacturing costs of the processor; andbytes per task, a measure of the amount of memory that devices need toincorporate to perform signalprocessing functions. because consumersare demanding highly integrated yet portable computing devices, thecommercial sector is performing r&d with the aim of increasing processor capabilities while also reducing power requirements.2.4.3.3 batteriesthe commercial sector has made tremendous strides in battery technology in recent years because it plays a role in many technologies, ranging from surgical implants to electric cars. nickel cadmium (nicd) batteries are the most widely used rechargeable batteries, found in manyconsumer electronic devices. most laptop computers now use nickel metalhydride batteries, which have slightly better energy storage per weightthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges103and substantially improved energy storage per volume. lithium ion(liion) batteries are used in some new portable products, such as smallcellular telephones. the energystorage capacity of liion batteries is morethan twice that of nicd technology by both weight and volume. lithiumpolymer (lipoly) batteries are about 10 percent more efficient than areliion batteries. both liion and lipoly batteries use solid electrolytes,making it possible to form the battery into arbitrary shapes, a significantimprovement over other battery technologies.2.4.3.4 storagethe diskdrive capacity of information processing devices continuesto increase while physical size shrinks, but the 2.5inch disk widely usedin notebook and laptop computers is still too large for handheld devices.in pdas the disk is replaced by ram in the form of batterybackedupstatic ram and flash ram on personal computer multiple componentinterface access (pcmcia, or just pc) cards, which can cost 30 times morethan disk storage per megabyte. commercial r&d in this area is producing steady, impressive advances that are likely to meet military needs.2.5 summarythe design of wireless communications systems presents countlesschallenges. some solutions are available and many more are on the horizon. although the review presented in this chapter is general in nature,consideration of this information in the context of dodõs needs suggestsa number of areas deserving careful attention in the design of futuremilitary systems.specifically, network architecture is a fundamental issue that definesall other aspects of the system design. the basic choice is between a peertopeer and basestationoriented design, but there are also other questions related to how infrastructure elements are connected and the natureof communications with other networks. the commercial and defensesectors have differed in their choice of network architectures in the pastand continue to have some different needs and concerns. the selection ofan optimal military network design could be assisted by simulation andmodeling. however, current tools are inadequate to the task of modelingan untethered communications system that uses wideband signals andadvanced components such as software radios.the dod also has unique needs for interoperability and security ofcommunications systems, although commercial concerns about systemintegrity and service availability are growing. the evolution of softwareradios will enable interoperability among advanced and legacy systems,the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104the evolution of untethered communicationsbut this technology presents cosite interference problems that will require new solutions. similarly, the available aj and lpd/i technologieswill need to be complemented with security advances that accommodateglobal, heterogeneous communications systems and multiple security levels. the emergence of wideband, programmable radios for military applications will also depend on advances in hardware components such asantennas, which need to be designed for mobile units, and filters, whichneed to be miniaturized and designed for wideband applications.these issues are examined further in chapter 3, which explores theopportunities for synergy between the commercial and military sectors inthe development of advanced wireless communications systems.notes1.these error rates are associated with the link layer of the osi model andare commonly accepted as tolerable for these applications. at higher levels of theosi model the use of errorcorrection protocols can improve the rates.2.these definitions apply only to unmodulated waveforms. modulationchanges the phase and frequency with time (see section 2.1.3) such that the definitions are no longer accurate.3.there are numerous path loss models that conform to a variety of propagation mechanisms, including free space, reflection, diffraction, scattering, orsome combination of these (rappaport, 1996).4.the relationship is l = pr/pt = k/f2dn, where pr is received power, pt istransmitter power, f is the center frequency of the transmitted signal, and k is aconstant that depends on the average path loss at a reference distance d0 from thetransmitter (d0 is the far field of the antenna, typically 1 m for indoor environments and 0.1ð1 km for outdoor environments). the exponent n is the path lossexponent.5.this analysis is based on the assumption that the channel is changingslowly enough to allow for adaptation, and that the channel fading can be estimated accurately at the receiver and this information fed back to the transmitterwith minimal delay.6.a rake receiver produces a coherent sum of individual multipath components of the received signal. the components can be weighted based on theirsignal strength to maximize the snr of the rake output. the sum provides anestimate of the transmit signal. a rake receiver is essentially another form ofdiversity because the spreading code induces a time diversity on the transmittedsignal such that independent multipath components can be resolved.7.if multiple systems share the same bandwidth without any channel accesscoordination and are not interoperable, then some technique is still needed toenable efficient operations. etiquette rules permit incompatible systems to coexist when using the same bandwidth (whereas interoperability requires standardizationñagreement on all waveforms and protocols before systems are built anddeployed). the wireless information network forum, an industry group, hasthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges105defined etiquette rules for the unlicensed personal communications bands andhas taken the same basic approach for the 60ghz spectrum allocation (steer,1994). the key elements of etiquette rules are (1) listen before transmitting toensure that the transmitter is the only user of the spectrum, thereby minimizingthe possibility of interfering with other spectrum users; (2) limit transmissiontime to allow others to use the spectrum in a fair manner; and (3) limit transmitterpower so as not to interfere with users in a nearby spectrum.8.for many networks, including voiceoriented cellular networks, the number of transmitters active at any one time is much smaller than the total numberof possible transmitters that need be recognized by the hub station. the unpredictable and dynamic nature of the set of active transmitters clearly precludes thefixed assignment of separate channels to each transmitter.9.simultaneous detection of multiple users is not currently possible becauseof the increased complexity required in the receiver. multiuser detection schemesalso require low bers because bits that are incorrectly detected are subtractedfrom the signals of other users, possibly causing those signals to be decoded inerror as well.10.these analyses are based on simplifying assumptions about the hardwareand communications environment; many of these assumptions would breakdown in a real operating environment. moreover, it is not known which technique has a higher spectral efficiency in flat or frequencyselective fading, particularly when countermeasures to fading are used.11.techniques are available to avert the delay. for example, a certain number of packet slots can be allocated for unreserved transmissions using a contention scheme. the successful sending of a packet in this slot is taken as a requestfor a reserved slot (or two) in the next roundtrip. as long as the slots are usedthis reservation continues to be available, and as long as there is capacity thereservation is allowed to grow. but the reservation is abandoned as soon as thesender does not use the slot. this approach involves no delay (except for contention failures on the first packet), poses contention issues only for the first packetin a burst, and matches the natural behavior of the tcp slowstart phase (whichis described later in this chapter). however, for applications that alternate a shortmessage in each direction (e.g., transaction processing) the procedure still produces latency equal to one roundtrip for each message, and, assuming fixedlength slots and a perfect fit between the data to be transmitted and a slot, has afundamental throughput limit of 33 percent. if the transmission is smaller than aslot, then the throughput will be even lower (and lower still in many realisticapplications with short transaction times). if the information to be transmitted isless than or even comparable to the amount of information required to set up thedama resources, then efficiency will be compromised.12.assuming that a collision results in the loss of two packets, the maximumthroughput in an aloha channel is about 18 percent of the peak data rate if theprobability of a collision is to be reduced to a level acceptable to the user. various modifications of aloha channels, such as slotted aloha or csma/cd,can increase efficiency, but they also impose restrictions on data transmission.13.the latency of mobile ip is typically much less than a secondñthe time itthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106the evolution of untethered communicationstakes for one roundtrip between the foreign agent and home agent, or perhapstwo roundtrips counting the time for message receipt verification.14.route optimization is an enhancement to the base specification for mobileip and has not to date reached an equivalent level of standardization within theietf. mobile ip is a proposed standard (rfc 2002ð2006), whereas route optimization has yet to be standardized or shown to be interoperable in multiple implementations.15.a typical simulator accepts as input a description of network topology,protocols, workload, and control parameters. the output includes a variety ofstatistics, such as the number of packets sent by each source of data, the queuingdelay at each queuing point, and the number of dropped and retransmitted packets. visualization packages have been developed to allow the simulatorõs dynamic execution history to be made visible to the network designer. the simulators are designed in such a way that they can modified easily by users.16.recent research has investigated the adaptation of compression algorithms to a channel of varying quality (i.e., a channel with fading or varying noiseor interference levels). such adaptation can reduce distortion significantly. thisdesign is based on the idea that, because the transmission rate is constant, thisrate needs to be divided between the compression algorithm and the channelcode. the optimal way to divide the transmission rate and minimize distortion isthe following: on a channel with high snr, no channel coding is needed, and allthe rate is allocated to the compression scheme; as the channel quality degrades,more of the rate is allocated to the channel coding to remove most of the effects ofchannel errors. however, joint compression and channel coding creates someproblems. first, this approach requires that the compression algorithms, whichtypically sit at the application layer, have access to information about the linklayer, which means that the layer separation of the opensystems interconnectionmodel breaks down. second, the design can become very complicated. it is ofteneasier to design the compression algorithms and the channel coding independently and then òglueó them together (the compression and coding communitiesprefer this approach because they have developed separate languages and perspectives, which make it difficult for them to work together). some future cellular systems will implement a crude form of this joint design using òvocodersó(compression schemes for voice) that operate at multiple rates. if the channel hasa high snr, then the higherrate vocoder (which performs poorly at low snrs) isused, and the vocoder rate is decreased as the channel quality decreases.17.the internet community is carrying forward two proposals for realtimeservice: guaranteed service provides perflow hard guarantees (i.e., no statisticalaggregation or probabilistic bounds), whereas controlledload service provides aprobabilistic bound based on aggregation of a number of realtime flows into onescheduling class. although guaranteed service provides a delay bound that iscomputed in advance, controlled load provides a bound that is stable but notexplicitly computed. the application must adapt to the service it receives. bothare set up using rsvp. the soft and hard states differ in terms of what happenswhen a route fails. in atm the connection is cleared and no traffic is delivereduntil a new connection is established. in internet/rsvp the packets start flowingonce the routing tables have found a new route, but only with default qos untilthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology limits, tradeoffs, and challenges107rsvp reestablishes the state. in both cases the new request may fail if there is notenough capacity after the failure.18.the wireless atm working group of the atm forum (an industrygroup) is addressing the problems of end user mobility. this effort may be theonly avenue for extending atm to the end user.19.latencies in the wireless channel are not only high but also variable overtime because of fluctuations in retransmission. forward error correction can mitigate this problem somewhat but imposes a penalty even when the channel quality is good.20.because of the error characteristics of wireless links, some of the qosissues need to be addressed locally at the link layer rather than from an endtoend perspective. the darpa prnet had a strategy of accomplishing enough atthe link level that tcp could handle the remaining reliability issues. however, thisapproach requires interaction between the link layer and higher layers (e.g., if thelink layer needs to implement a stronger channel code, then its transmission ratemay be reduced or its delay increased). in addition, the wireless channel may be sodegraded that little can be done at the link level to improve matters. there needs tobe a way to cope with this situation through higherlayer protocols.21.software security is another category but it is not unique to wireless communications and therefore is not addressed here.22.some security concerns are being alleviated in the transition from analogto digital systems, which offer an inherent advantage because the meaning of apattern of 1s and 0s cannot be casually discerned.23.for example, systems based on the gsm standard keep the key in a separate smart card, not in the telephone.24.for example, most contemporary software radios use commercial filtersby graychip, inc., or harris corp. for highly programmable channel access tofdma, tdma, and cdma systems with the low size, weight, and power ofasics.25.a ccd detector turns light into an electric charge, which is then transformed into the binary code recognized by computers. some commercial cameras use this technology, but they remain expensive.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108the evolution of untethered communications1083commercialdefense synergy inwireless communicationswireless communications technology development is a complex process that includes interactions between the commercial and military sectors. an understanding of these interactions, including the opportunitiesfor and barriers to synergy, is crucial to an evaluation of the potential forexpanded military use of commercial products. building on the historicaland technical foundation provided earlier in this report, this chapter identifies broader organizational and r&d issues that need to be addressed toensure that the dod fields affordable, stateoftheart untethered communications systems that meet future military needs.wireless technologies are often transferred among government, industry, and academia. such interactions take place through multiplemechanisms, sometimes in a continuing cycle from the commercial to thedefense sector and back again (see box 31). the synergy can evolveeither during the initial research or after technologies are developed. forexample, the dodõs funding of basic academic research on wireless technologies and networking (currently through the darpa glomo program)creates an active technology base for use in both military and commercialindustries. similarly, there is overlap within companies that have bothcommercial and defense divisions. most large corporations also supportacademic research to gain access to important new concepts.this chapter examines how this synergistic process might be leveraged to meet future military needs in untethered communications. section 3.1 provides a brief overview of military use of commercial wirelessproducts. section 3.2 identifies the motivations and opportunities forthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications109commercialdefense synergy in the development of wireless technology.section 3.3 outlines the barriers to synergy posed by mismatches betweencommercial capabilities and military needs and operating requirements.section 3.4 examines three broad issues that need to be addressed in thedesign of future wireless systems for defense applications. section 3.5reviews the relevant defense technology policy issues.3.1 overviewmyriad wireless technologies have originated within the government.satellite programs initiated by the federal government in the early 1960sproduced technologies that were quickly adopted for commercial use,starting with intelsat in 1965 in the united states and other countriesin the 1970s. another important governmentinitiated technology waspacket switching, developed by darpa (then known as arpa) in thelate 1960s. this advance led to commercial and military packetswitchedsystems worldwide as well as to the internet. the government also ledthe work on advanced coding techniques (for recovering data from deepspace probes), spreadspectrum techniques, signal and data encryption,and more recently onboard digital processing. all of these technologieshave been adopted by commercial enterprises.1box 31handietalkies serve both military and commercial needsin 1940 motorola developed the first handheld twoway radio, the handietalkie, a 2.3kg am unit with a range of 1.6 to 4.8 km. within three weeks of u.s.entry into world war ii, handietalkie production exceeded 50 units a day; by1945 more than 130,000 units had been built. in 1942 motorolaõs design for theworldõs first portable fm twoway radio, the scr300 backpack unit, won a competition to replace an older army signal corps radio, the òwalkietalkie.ó the scr300 weighed almost 16 kg, had an average range of 16 to 32 km, and could betuned to various frequencies in the 40ð48 mhz band. motorola police radios wereused in the armyõs first radio relay system for behindthelines communications andits first radio teletype hookup. after the war, motorola introduced the first commercially available portable radiophones, the handietalkie radio line. a fully transistorized, vhf pocket transmitter version was developed in 1960. a fully transistorized, portable twoway radio was developed in 1962; its weight of approximately 1kg was reduced by almost half in 1969. these devices have evolved into motorolaõs current line of cellular telephones. component technologies from commercialcommunications equipment are now designed into future generations of militaryequipment, thus furthering the ongoing cycle of commercialdefense synergy.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110the evolution of untethered communicationsconversely, the u.s. military uses many commercial communicationsproducts. the military uses a variety of commercial systems, includingsatellites developed in the mid1970s to transfer weather data to computer processing centers and disseminate the processed data; commercialsatellites and landbased services to transport militaryencrypted communications links; vsat networks operating over commercial satellitesto disseminate logistical and weather data; satellite video teleconferencing networks to provide training and distance learning to the nationalguard and reserve units and for telemedicine applications; and accessmanagement approaches such as tdma.the ongoing synergy between the commercial and defense sectors isreadily apparent in satellite communications. the introduction of commercial satellite communications in 1965 was limited to very small satellite payloads and required very large earth stations to receive the veryweak signals (e.g., intelsat earth stations required antennas 100 feetin diameter). a 1971 experiment clearly demonstrated the feasibility ofproviding satellite communicationsñincluding digital voice, data, andfax servicesñto ships at sea. however, the business aspects of suchservices were not strong enough to justify the required investment insatellite and ground control systems. subsequent events led to a contract between comsat, an international industry consortium, and thenavy to provide a geo satellite system with an added commercial lband package for shiptoshore use. this agreement eventually led toinmarsat, now widely used not only by large ships (e.g., tankers,cruise ships) but also by pleasure craft and mobile users around theworld, who can transmit and receive data and voice via lowcost, briefcasesized terminals. terminals are also used on transoceanic airlineroutes for navigation, control, and passenger telephone calls. aninmarsat spinoff, ico, is building a meo mobile telecommunications system using 12 satellites.similarly, the introduction of commercial dbs sparked military interest in developing the gbs to satisfy broadband data requirements in allenvironments, including the battlefield, ships, and logistics. the architectures of kaband (superhigh frequency, or shf), highspeed interactivesystems planned for commercial operation by the year 2000 will have animpact on the ultimate gbs design in the near future. ultrasmallaperture terminals in these systems will be able to transmit several megabitsper second and receive 100 mbps from a 24satellite constellation. thegbs has been designed to leverage the current dbs satellites throughmodifications such as moveable spot beams and different frequencybands.the opportunities for defense use of commercial offtheshelf (cots)products depend in part on the particular characteristics of a militarythe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications111operation. for the purpose of analyzing communications requirements,military activities can be divided into the following four categories:¥nonmissioncritical operations require general communications infrastructure to provide logistics, training, entertainment, and general administration. for these activities, the military has either purchased cotssystems or leased services operated over commercial carrier systems. forexample, the army training and doctrine command uses a commercialteleconferencing system based on a vsat to provide training to the national guard as well as telemedicine services.¥limited peacekeeping missions, such as the bosnia deployment, canfeature a mix of cots communications equipment (primarily vsats andvideo teleconferencing) and military systems.¥regional conflicts, such as desert storm, can feature a mix of cotsand military systems depending on the threat to commercial assets. conflicts of this type seem likely to benefit from the use of emerging cotssystems (or derivations) such as satellitebased personal communicationsand broadcast data satellites.¥strategic/global conflict requires the use of òsurvivableó militarycommunications systems whatever the cost, implying reduced use ofcots systems.3.2 motivations for commercialdefense synergytwo key factors currently motivate the dod to seek commercial products and services. first, the size of the business and consumer marketsand the nature of many commercial practices help achieve economies ofscale at many levels. second, commercial approaches to r&d reducecycle time such that advances in technical performance can be integratedinto field operations in a timely manner. the dod therefore has botheconomic and functional reasons to adopt commercial products and approaches when they meetñor could be adapted to meetñdefense communications requirements. the commercial equipment is likely to costmuch less overall than would equivalent defenseunique systems. furthermore, because commercial industry evolves very rapidly in responseto a competitive marketplace, the dod can leverage commercial developments to field equipment that offers advantages in size, weight, power,bandwidth, or performance much more rapidly than is possible usingtraditional defense procurement practices.economies of scale are extremely important in the development anddeployment of commercial products. firms seek a balance of cost andquantity when deciding whether and how to enter business or consumermarkets. as examples, business products such as vsats are built inthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112the evolution of untethered communicationsvolumes of thousands per month, and consumer products such asdirectv (see box 32) are manufactured in quantities of hundreds of thousands per month. the costquantity relationship forced the semiconductor industry, which originally evolved to support military and space applications, to switch to a commercial focus. as shown in figure 31, thecommercial market for semiconductors soared, whereas the defense sharedeclined. in 1975 worldwide military purchases of semiconductors totaled $700 million, approximately 17 percent of the global market(instat/sia information services, 1997). at that time all major semiconductor manufacturers had militaryquality product lines, particularlyfor highreliability and extremetemperature applications. by 1995 themilitary share of the market had dropped to less than 1 percent (instat/sia information services, 1997). most major semiconductor manufacturers have announced the phasing out or termination of military productlines. now military contractors must use either commercially availableparts or obsolete, but militaryquality, semiconductor parts.the commercial sector far outpaces the defense sector in productionrates and volumes, not only for final products but also for subsystems andcomponents. the largest dod acquisition of communications equipmentis the sincgars radio: the dod has purchased 75,000 units over 10box 32directv receivers: an example of the volumecost relationshipa directv receiver consists of an 18inch antenna and a sophisticated mechanism for receiving a 40mbps, digitally mutiplexed data stream. with more than 1million units sold in the first year, these receivers are among the fastestgrowing newproduct lines in the consumer electronics industry. directv receivers were introduced at a list price of $700; after 2.5 million units were sold, the price dropped bynearly 50 percent because of competitive market pressures and economies of scale.impressed by the capability of such a small receiver system, the navy and otherservices determined that directv technology could be adapted to meet the militaryõsbroadband transmission requirements. however, the quantity needed by the militaryñhundreds of terminalsñis significantly smaller than the commercial market. ifa directvlike receiver were developed as a standalone military product, then thecost per unit might be hundreds of times higher than the commercial price becausethe development, tooling, and manufacturingsetup expenses would be amortizedover a smaller production base and optimized for smaller production volumes. threeyears after directv was announced, the services were still working to define a military version. had the features necessary to support military needs been consideredbefore the product design was finalized, the dod could have taken advantage of thecost reductions enabled by the market growth.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications113years of production. in contrast, commercial production of landbasedmobile radios is in the range of 400,000 units per month, and cellularradios are produced in volumes exceeding 2.5 million units per month forthe largest suppliers. to meet such market demands a typical cellulartelephone factory might produce 5,000 telephones a day. another factordistinguishing the two sectors is the open, competitive environment ofcommercial production. the market pressure for improved quality, pricing, and other features is felt by all commercial competitors, whereas thedefense market has typically been limited to a few and sometimes just onecontractor.the next four subsections examine economies of scale manifested inseveral areas of commercial technology development: design, production, maintenance, and training. the fifth subsection reviews how cycletime can be reduced, thereby moving technical advances into the fieldquickly and also lowering costs over the life of a product.3.2.1 design reusecommercial communications equipment typically is produced with abasic design that has a 2 to 5year life span. the components used in thatdesign are selected in the 1 or 2 years just prior to product introductionand typically represent the thencurrent state of the art in performanceand cost effectiveness. thus, during the product life the componentsfigure 31 the world military share of the world semiconductor market droppedfrom 17 percent to 1 percent between 1975 and 1995 (the line graph, which corresponds to the scale on the right). during the same time period, the commercialmarket soared from $4.2 billion to $144 billion (the left bar graph for each decade)while the military market grew only slightly (the right bar graph for each decade).source: joseph neal, commercial plus technology operations, motorola, inc.reproduced from bradley (1996), with permission from the semiconductor industry association and world semiconductor trade statistics.19751985199502040608010012014016018011441.8240.74.20020406081012141618military % of world semiconductor marketworld semiconductor market ($b)the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114the evolution of untethered communicationsremain costeffective for the suppliers and are manufactured using stateoftheart, costeffective manufacturing facilities. manufacturers typicallyanticipate new features in the market by modifying the design to use newcomponents after 2 years of production. they also use components andmanufacturing processes that are within a generation of the thencurrentstate of the art, thereby operating close to the optimum level of cost effectiveness. by contrast, military equipment is often outdated: sincgarswas designed more than 10 years ago, for example.commercial firms achieve the initial economies of scale through design reuse. the use of previous hardware and software designs can oftensave 50 to 80 percent of development time because detailed design documentation can be readily reproduced and design weaknesses can belargely eliminated using experience as a guide. although the design cycleis not a major contributor to the economic cost of a commercial product, itis typically a large part of defense deployment cost. the dod typicallydoes not reuse hardware designs, instead relying on independent òstovepipeó systems, which are optimized to solve a specific problem. someefforts have been made to create software libraries for reuse. increasedreliance on common building blocks could significantly reduce designcycle time (see section 3.2.5).3.2.2 production learning curvethe learning curve is a statistical tool used to predict production costsand plan and control production. the curve is based on the assumptionthat there is a relationship between the time required to build a unit andthe number of units that have been built; specifically, the learning processreduces the time needed to produce a unit as the cumulative number ofunits produced rises. it follows, then, that the less time it takes to build aunit, the lower the cost of that unit. if the cost of producing a unit followsan 80 percent learning curve, then there will be a 20 percent reduction incost per unit each time the total number of units produced doubles. in theexample shown in figure 32, the first unit took 100 hours to build and thesecond unit took 80 hours, or 80 percent of the time and cost involved inbuilding the first unit. the 10th unit required 48 hours, and the 20th unitrequired 80 percent of that effort, or 38 hours. the major factors thataffect the cost of production are the initial cost, or the starting point of thecurve, and the rate of improvement or learning, or the slope of the curve(anderlohr, 1969).the implication of the learning curve is that large volumes of standardized items, produced continuously (i.e., without significant hiatuses),reduce the cost per unit. heeding this message, commercial production isfairly continuous, fluctuating somewhat with the demands of the marketthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications115but generally changing processes gradually and with few interruptions.although customized versions of products are increasingly in demand,the basic platform is usually consistent and the adaptations are minimal.by contrast, defense programs frequently begin with the building of onlya few units, perhaps a few hundred, to determine feasibility or fulfill alimited need. often these units are produced in numerous small batcheswith interruptions between the production cycles.cost management is practiced throughout the design and productionof commercial products. for example, production volume typically needsto be known before detailed designs can be completed. the componentcosts, labor costs, and investments in laborsaving manufacturing devicesare factored into the final design of a consumer electronic device. largeproduction volumes enable the manufacturing of designs that would notbe viable at smaller volumes. a significant example is the fabrication ofcustomized ics with many functions that normally would be implemented in separate ics. the large volume reduces the overall cost ofcomponents, parts, and assembly, even after the nonrecurring investmentsare taken into account. another example is the design of electronic equipment for costeffective manufacturing. these designs typically featuremodules that snap together and minimal numbers of wiring bundles,fasteners, moving parts, and different part types. costs are reduced further through incremental production changes. during the repetitive commercial design and production cycles, the boundaries between system,subsystem, unit, and component begin to blur as automation enableslarger and larger subsystems to be treated as components. in this way,what was once a hightechnology system (e.g., computer memory) becomes a commodity part.following the lead of the commercial sector, the dod might achievesome economies of scale in production by revising its procurement pracfigure 32 as more units are produced, manufacturing costs per unit declinesteadily.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116the evolution of untethered communicationstices to make largevolume purchases of basic cots communicationsequipment for entire departments at one time. some isolated efforts havebeen made in this regard, but there are ample opportunities to expandthis approach.3.2.3 maintenance and logistics supporteconomies of scale can be achieved in the maintenance of equipmentafter it has been developed and fielded. equipment occasionally fails inthe field because of design defects, manufacturing defects, wornoutmechanisms, lightning or power surges, or simply heavy use. sometimesfielded equipment is upgraded during maintenance procedures to addnew features or functions.in the commercial sector fieldfailure data are typically analyzed onhighly automated equipment, which can trace failures to specific modulesand components and automatically update design and component history databases, including any links to environmental factors. design updates are inserted into the manufacturing process throughout the commercial life of a product, thereby improving its robustness. afterapproximately one year of production, experience with field failures often has produced the feedback necessary to eliminate most design defects, reduce manufacturing defects to a level consistent with the currentstate of the art, and generally achieve the best product possible withinprice constraints.consumers rarely, if ever, pay for the maintenance or repair of lowcost communications equipment. rather, warranties and service contracts are often viewed as a necessity in maintaining complex productsthat are not easily repaired; products are often replaced if they need repairs after the warranty expires. viewing warranties as insurance policies, or guaranteed streams of income, specialty maintenance companieshave emerged to provide a variety of maintenance tasks, both on site andat the factory.in the defense sector, communications equipment is often maintainedby the acquiring agency rather than the manufacturer, typically at greaterexpense. typically a module is replaced and the equipment is retested, astrategy that usually finds the primary defect but sometimes misses marginal problems elsewhere. large numbers of spare components need tobe kept available, either in replacement modules or in component formsuch that modules can be manufactured, throughout the useful servicelife of the system. the supply of spares is often threatened when, becauseof the small production volume, the supplier no longer finds the component profitable to produce. when this occurs the manufacturer usuallynotifies customers of an òendoflife buyout.ó the customers then try tothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications117project future needs and purchase enough components to satisfy them(not always at competitive prices). the dod is known for keeping communications equipment in service far beyond the life span of equivalentcommercial technology; typically, military systems are removed from service only after catastrophic failure. defense equipment is often kept inuse for 20 years, whereas component suppliers often set product lifetimesat less than 8 years; thus, the military needs to stockpile approximately 10yearsõ worth of components. under normal circumstances, the dod assumes that 25 percent of its equipment will need to be refurbished atsome point.the additional maintenance costs associated with traditional defenseacquisition could be reduced if manufacturersñwho can efficiently analyze all field failures, suggest redesign enhancements, and redesign components and modules to enhance cost effectiveness and other featuresñprovided for maintenance and logistics support when appropriate. inaddition, a reevaluation of military equipment maintenance practices maybe warranted in light of the capabilities of advanced communications andtransportation systems. defense acquisition systems have historicallyprovided logistics support for rapid equipment repair (i.e., within a fewminutes of field failure) anywhere in the world by staging replacementmodules near locations where critical equipment is in use. such an approach may no longer be necessary.3.2.4 trainingthe commercial sector achieves additional economies of scale in training. the expense of user, logistics, and support training is built into thecost of new product introductions, and training is subsequently convertedfrom expensive formats (i.e., personal, facetoface support) to videotape,interactive cdrom manuals, online help, and literature. by contrast,the training of defense maintenance and logistics support personnel offers few economies of scale. training materials are developed, but theyare neither as detailed nor as widely distributed as are commercial manuals. indeed, defense support training can remain somewhat diffused andsuperficial because the military uses so many types of equipment andrelatively small numbers of each type. as the dod purchases more cotsproducts, the use of commercial training materials might be appropriate.3.2.5 cycle timecommercial product design cycles, which usually last from one tofour years, are set by competitive pressures: the first company to marketa product with a new feature can reap large increases in market share andthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118the evolution of untethered communicationsprofitability.2 a new commercial communications product is releasedevery few months. manufacturers therefore begin to field test and optimize the features of products before the designs are completed, accelerating the development process by several years. this environment fostersthe introduction of new and improved technologies at a very rapid pace,often at a low incremental cost to consumers. companies gain additionalreductions in cycle time by designing products to accommodate new features on each new production run, often every six months.3 these advanced commercial technologies are then available for rapid insertioninto commercial or defense applications.the military product design cycle is much slower. it begins when acontract is awarded and ends with delivery of the final product, which isnot field tested or optimized until the design is completed. the developerdoes not have sufficient control over systems integration, testing, andevaluation to perform concurrent engineering that would reduce overallcycle time. further delays are imposed because training, logistics, marketing, and distribution processes are not generally developed concurrently with manufacturing tooling equipment as they are in commercialsystems.a key design feature affecting cycle time is the ease of upgradingequipment. commercial baseline products are designed to accommodatehardware and software extensions throughout the planned lifetime of theproduct. this is critical because of the high cost of the wireless infrastructure. the longevity of the infrastructure depends on a complex tradeoffbetween the equipment offered by vendors and the pace of change inservices. typically service providers have a detailed road map that identifies when new services will be offered; these services are selected basedon the equipment available at a reasonable cost and the market demandfor a profitable service.commercial upgrades to accommodate new services and changes inmarket direction are generally implemented through software updatesrather than morecostly hardware changes. therefore, software plays agrowing role in product development and cycletime planning. softwareis also often used to correct hardware problems, such as designs that wereoversimplified to meet a price point. in such cases new software requirements are discovered late in the product development cycle, meaning thatsoftware is the last element to be developed and may be installed eitherjust before or even after production. yet software updates need to bethoroughly tested and tolerant of all environmental and loading factors.as a result, the software development process is now of great interest.the quality and timely release of software as well as softwaredefinedinfrastructure services are therefore becoming critical factors in the commercial communications industry.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications119military radios, by contrast, are typically optimized to meet a singlespecification rather than designed for easy upgrading. moreover, whenupgrades are possible they usually can be implemented only by the original vendor. an exception is speakeasy, which was designed to supporthardware and software extensions through its open architecture. emerging military requirements (e.g., interoperability, open architecture) aredriving the trend toward more flexible systems such as software radios.with the role of software expanding in both sectors, the commercial experience in software management may offer lessons for the dod.both sectors are concerned about retaining the use of legacy equipment. as the complexity and cost of each new generation of infrastructure rise, the effects of obsolescence become more important to systemplanners, investors, and consumers. concepts such as backward compatibility, while ill defined, have a very pragmatic meaning in the consumerelectronics business: a technological advance should not result in denialof service to owners of older systems. backward compatibility is alsoimportant to the military, which is likely to continue using legacy equipment for some time to come.3.3 barriers to commercialdefense synergyalthough many defense communication needs can be met with commercially available equipment, a variety of barriers prevent a completematch across all systems. for example, commercialdefense synergy isnot appropriate in the development of some highly specialized or classified commandandcontrol systems. there are organizational limitationsas well. traditional government acquisition has led to a large number ofstovepipe systems, which are developed by a single contractor, meaningthat other contractors cannot compete for followon development or production.there are additional concerns regarding industryõs current capabilityto meet the unique requirements of some military systems. in the wake ofcutbacks in some procurement programs, many defense communicationssuppliers have begun to develop a commercial orientation to preservetheir technology and manufacturing base. commercial applications areattractive not only because of the vast market but also because they arenot subject to federal and defense acquisition regulations: the supplierbenefits from simplified accounting and has greater freedom to structurethe details of contractual agreements. in the past, an increase in contractswas sufficient to rebuild capacity following a period of reduced defensespending. now, however, action might be necessary to ensure that critical design and manufacturing capabilities are not lost altogether.in view of the need to maintain surge capacity for those times whenthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120the evolution of untethered communicationssudden military action is needed,4 the declining industrial interest in military communications systems makes it all the more important to understandñand either overcome or accommodateñthe barriers to commercialdefense synergy. these barriers include the risks of military dependenceon the commercial sector, the contrasting approaches to making tradeoffsbetween cost and complexity, and differences in communications infrastructures.3.3.1 risks of dependence on commercial technologiesthe dod assumes certain risks when using commercial technologies.most importantly, significant military use of commercial technology increases the possibility that a potential adversary could have or gain detailed knowledge of the systems. in the case of computer networks, thedefense infrastructure is built almost entirely of widely available computers, software, and networking components. an adversary could exploit theknown weaknesses of these components, a possibility that has promptedefforts to improve network robustness. any weaknesses in the commercialcommunications infrastructure might be vulnerable to similar exploitation.one solution is to use communications equipment that is unavailableto potential adversaries. such products include those subject to u.s. exportcontrols, which are intended to keep certain advanced technology productsand weapons systems away from designated hostile countries. severaltypes of advanced commercial communications technologies, includingthose involving extensive computations or spreadspectrum techniques,fall into this category. it is difficult to gauge the impact of internationaltechnical awareness of military effectiveness because technology is onlyone of several influences (the others include strategy, tactics, training, andweaponry). critics of export controls contend that many affected technologies are readily available from offshore sources and that the controls serveonly to reduce sales for u.s. manufacturers and provide evidence of who isacquiring these commodities.5 but with the rapid evolution of commercialwireless technologies, especially softwarebased systems that could be converted to implement new waveforms or military countermeasure capabilities, there is also an argument for strengthening controls on the export ofcertain advanced communications technologies. although the issue is beyond the purview of this committee, a review of export controls may bewarranted.another risk of commercial dependence is the sometimeshidden difficulty of making what seem initially to be simple modifications to cotssystems. endtoend encryption or aj technologies, for example, mightbe added to a commercial system to meet military security needs. however, given the high commercial production rates, such modifications arethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications121often very difficult to implement. for example, the key interface signalsor connections could be embedded in an ic and unavailable for specialized wired connection to an addon feature. the safest strategy for thedod is to use a common baseline technology and common componentsbut pursue a separate design effort. in addition, the dod could participate in standardssetting activities to encourage the development of baseline commercial equipment designed to accommodate the addition ofmilitarily useful features.a third concern is the availability of commercial systems in wartime.many of the largest satellite networks, including those shared by the u.s.military, are owned or operated by international consortia. althoughthese providers are reliable partners in peacetime, whether they wouldgive dod priority or expanded bandwidth during times of conflict isunclear. such preferential service could be hampered by the operatorsõneed to serve other customers or possible unwillingness to provide support in a controversial conflict.3.3.2 tradeoffs between cost and complexityperhaps the most obvious barrier to direct commercialdefense synergy lies in the contrasting strategies used to make tradeoffs betweensystem cost and complexity. as a potential user of commercial servicesthe dod has certain expectations, many of which are requirements if it isto fulfill its mission. in a number of dimensions, these expectations are atodds with the criteria used by commercial communications services indesigning and deploying their products. simply stated, the military hassome extraordinary needs, whereas the commercial sector tends to focuson delivering reliable but ordinary service.3.3.2.1 performance issuesfor example, the military expects to use leadingedge technology.the present analysis is based on the assumption that the dod cannotachieve its mission with technology that is inferior to that of an adversary.it is also assumed that every adversaryõs technology is state of the art. butcommercial communications services are rarely based on the most advanced technology available. rather, providers deploy technology basedprimarily on its cost effectiveness and affordability, that is, whether customers are willing to pay for the capability.6 over time, production volumes increase and costs decline, but the initial costs of an advanced technology can be a barrier to its commercial application.the dod also requires that certain functional capabilities (assumingthey are technologically feasible) be deployed in any location where thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122the evolution of untethered communicationsmilitary needs to operate. military operations are extraordinary events inwhich communications traffic is unpredictable, driven by the characteristics of the individual operation. yet the cost of an inability to communicate can be very high, and so the probability of such a breakdown needsto be kept very low. by contrast, commercial communications providershave limited resources and cannot cover every service area that could beprofitable. commercial systems are designed to serve a particular areafor many years with slow changes in technologies, features, and volumes.to minimize lifecycle costs, such systems are based on fixed facilities thatcannot be deployed or shifted rapidly to meet an immediate demand.commercial wireless systems are generally engineered to meet the peaktraffic requirements of the average business day. they are not designedto meet the requirements of extraordinary events under emergency conditions, even regular and predictable ones.7similarly, commercial and defense equipment differ in their tolerancefor unusual environmental conditions. military units are likely to encounter extreme environments such as jungles, deserts, or polar regionsand be subjected to the harsh conditions of battle. therefore, regardlessof the added cost and system complexity, defense communications equipment needs to be designed and built to tolerate extreme temperatures,submersion, high levels of shock, explosions, and vibration. by contrast,commercial manufacturers and consumers are unlikely to incur additional expenses for equipment that operates under extreme conditions. infact, consumers often favor the least expensive product over one with thebest performance, warranty, survivability, and advanced features. consumer products such as telephones are designed to survive reasonablelevels of wear and tear and perform under moderate environmental conditions.3.3.2.2 quality and testingmilitary communications equipment can be highly complex and posedifficult testing and diagnostic challenges. for example, a military system can encompass networks of computers, each running a realtime suiteof applications in support of a systemlevel application. when a safety ormissioncritical function is involved, elaborate procedures are followed toprovide for multiple redundancies, failure detection, independent software development, and crosschecking to ensure reliability. but exhaustive testing to identify problems that have an extremely low probability ofoccurrence (e.g., once every few hundred thousand instructions) may notbe costeffective if there are no safety implications or critical effects onperformance. in cases that may not justify exhaustive testing, new workin formal methods (i.e., mathematical techniques that obviate the need tothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications123test every possible situation) holds promise for further reducing the likelihood of rare anomalies.there is a widespread perception that defense equipment is testedmuch more thoroughly than are commercial products. in truth, commercial testing procedures vary widely but can be quite rigorous. for example, manufacturers of industrialgrade communications products havelargely adopted high levels of integrated quality control. in the semiconductor industry, firms expend significant resources even after a chip isdesigned to create an exhaustive test pattern capable of catching bothdesign and manufacturing flaws.8 many vendors have adopted processesthat are comparable in function to those required for defense equipment,although the conditions are likely to be less extreme.9 likewise, commercial electronics systems have improved in recent years because consumersnow demand unprecedented quality and reliability, even under environmental conditions that just a few years ago would have been consideredstrictly military grade. table 31 displays the stringent test parameters forone modern commercial product, a car radio. drivers now view theperformance of a radio as reflecting on the quality of the vehicle. as aresult, most of the environmental qualification tests for a car radio areactually comparable to tests conducted on a highperformance navy jetfighter.as a result of these trends, some commercial products may be testedthoroughly enough to meet defense needs without further testing undermilitary conditions. in some cases, it may not be costeffective for themilitary to test and inspect commercial components already shown tohave very low failure rates. this is most likely to be the case for equipment that has few moving parts and is designed for human use underextreme conditions.table 31 commercial and military testing parametersenvironmental test parameterdelco am/fm radiohughes f14 radarlowtemperature storage40 c62 chightemperature storage 85 c 95 chightemperature endurance 70 cnot testedstillair operation 35 cnot testedlowtemperature operation40 c18 chightemperature operation 70 c 71 crandom vibration0.05 g per hertz0.015 g per hertzshock20 g per 11 milliseconds15 g per 11 millisecondshumidity90% @ 65 c85% @ 71 cpower/temperature cycling1,000 cyclesnot testedexplosionnot testedtestedxxxthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124the evolution of untethered communications3.3.3 infrastructure differencesthe differing expectations of defense and commercial customers affect communications infrastructures. cellular customers want to be ableto make calls whenever they wish. military users have much more complex needs for security, lpd/i capabilities, concealment of network functions, message priority and preemption, tolerance of severe environmental conditions, and, perhaps most crucially, the capability to work withoutany fixed infrastructure. these needs generally preclude the use of antennas on fixed towers, highly engineered site installations, sitespecific antenna selection, microwave links to central switching offices, andpreplanned routing tables for switches. (exceptions include permanentposts and fortifications and a considerable amount of mobile infrastructure mounted on trucks, trains, and large aircraft.)in operations other than war, the use of existing local communications infrastructure (where available) can offer tremendous cost and performance advantages. it remains crucial, however, to provide militarygrade security when using cellular communications or other wireless dataservices; such security measures need to be interoperable with the u.s.based military communications infrastructure, including the secure terminal unit iii (stu iii; the government standard in secure telephony) andrelated systems, and the array of secure networking products (e.g., thenetwork encryption system [nes] equipment for strategic defense networks).10 the dod is addressing these issues through the condorprogram, which is developing a cryptography module for cellular telephones used by the military (commercial versions are already on themarket, and additional spinoffs are likely). the system will be interoperable with stu iii. the security of local infrastructures remains anissue, however, as does the continuing need for interoperability amongdefense networks.11in regions lacking a local communications infrastructure, substituteswill soon be available. the iridium, teledesic, and gbs satellite systemswill provide worldwide communications. the military could also useunmanned aerial vehicles (uavs; special aircraft that can fly along aprogrammed set of waypoints and perform programmed tasks) as highaltitude platforms for communications and reconnaissance services.among their advantages, uavs weigh less than manned aircraft (leavingmore room for payload) and have no need to carry lifesupport systemssuch as oxygen and emergency ejection equipment. the uavs couldserve as relays between wideband satellite links and battlefield communications systems, carry sensors, jam or otherwise attack enemy information systems, and even provide positioning information in the event thatthe gps is shut down during hostilities to prevent its use by adversaries.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications125the highaltitude endurance system (a uavbased airborne sensor system) and the airborne communications node (acn)12 uavbased platform are designed to be costeffective, multipurpose platforms deliveringc4i capabilities.3.4 designing wireless systems formilitary applicationsas noted previously in this report, some features required in defensecommunications equipment are not generally available in standard communications products and could be difficult to add. some advanced features, such as lpd/i and aj waveforms, interoperability with the dodõsnearly two dozen legacy waveforms, or highly specialized spreading waveforms, may be attainable only in specialized military systems such as thespeakeasy software radio. the following sections discuss the design offuture wireless systems for defense applications, focusing on three keyissues: network architecture; security; and multimode, multiband systems.some commercial products could be adapted to meet defense needs inthese areas, but specialized military research will likely be needed.3.4.1 network architecture3.4.1.1 network design issuesmost commercial communications infrastructures use a basestationoriented architecture, in which communication flows between a base station (equipped with a wellsited antenna and a highpower transmitter)and wireless terminals. cellular, paging, trunked radio, and various dataradio services use this model. this design is not entirely appropriate formilitary communications infrastructures, which need to allow for immediate deployment with no setup time, no siting advantages, minimal antenna advantages, and continuous movement of all network participants.the darpa glomo program has focused on peertopeer, multihoppacket radio networks. however, there are valid questions about thesuitability of a peertopeer model for military commandandcontrol hierarchies as well as the rf link penalty paid by this design.13 the glomoperspective was expanded recently to include other architectures, but theprogram has never assessed all the possible choices, even though networkarchitecture forms the basis of any telecommunications system. amongthe issues to be addressed are peertopeer versus basestationorienteddesign, connectionoriented versus connectionfree architecture, singlechannel (e.g., ethernet) versus twochannel structures, bandwidth issues,and protocol selection.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126the evolution of untethered communicationsfor example, the choice of a connectionfree architecture is particularly important for applications that are intermittent in content, as is typically the case in battlefield situations. (the inefficiencies of a connectionoriented architecture are discussed in chapter 2, sections 2.1.6.2 and2.1.6.3.) the choice of a twochannel architecture can be particularly important if, as is often the case in military applications, much more data aredelivered to a client than are received from the client. this design enablesmaps and situationalawareness data, for example, to be disseminated ina battlefield without any multipleaccess penalty to an unlimited numberof receivers. meanwhile, location information, such as identification andcoordinates, can be sent from many field areas in short, spreadspectrumbursts over a separate multipleaccess channel.numerous research issues need to be resolved before a military topology with optimum performance and overhead can be defined. continuing r&d and demonstration projects over the next decade will help define the basis for commercially successful standards, which may or maynot suit military needs. current commercial systems treat each application separately, whereas the military probably needs to take an integratedapproach. however, many commercial designs, such as the followingeight examples, could have military applications. these designs wouldneed to be analyzed and perhaps modified before their application tomilitary systems. even so, the effort would likely yield a considerablesavings to the dod.enterprise networks. enterprise networks are being deployed worldwidebased on standards such as atm, x.25 (a standard interface for packetnetwork access), frame relay (a potential successor to x.25), and tcp/ip.the products include comprehensive wan solutions that encompassmultiple technologies such as lan/wan interconnections, dynamicrouting, accounting, statistical information, and performance monitoring.some new architectures unite connectionoriented wans with connectionfree lans over both narrow and broadband channels. critical questions remain to be answered about the suitability of this technology in thebattlefield environment; these are issues that could be addressed as partof a broader assessment of military network architectures. system planners need to minimize the vulnerability of centralized control points anddetermine the bandwidth required to distribute routing information updates on degraded channels as units move around the battlefield.cellular telephone systems. commercial cellular networks consist of bothanalog and digital systems conforming to various standards. with cellsizes of up to 10 km, these systems can cover a broad area, sometimesincluding wireless local loop service. the technical feasibility of usingthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications127cellular systems in a battlefield environment requires further study. forexample, cellular systems introduce special complexities because of theneed to hand off transmissions between cells. performing a handoff whensystem coverage may be incomplete over the theater is an elaborate process; equally complex are the rules for assessing when a handoff might beadvantageous in light of possible jamming. furthermore, mechanismsstill need to be developed for authorizing access in a mobile tactical network. in cellular systems, these activities are performed in the cellularmobile switching office using the home location register.lowtier systems.  in contrast to cellular systems, lowtier systems uselowpower microcells of up to a few hundred meters in radius, smallrather than towermounted antennas, and 32,000bps voice coding forhigh quality and low delay. these systems are designed to serve usersmoving at pedestrian speeds. they are also suited to wireless localloopapplications because the roundtrip delay is under 2 milliseconds, thequality of speech is comparable to that for wired services, and the shortdistances between hub stations and users generally result in low fadelevels. given these features, lowtier technologies could play a role inmilitary communications.authentication and roaming capabilities are also provided in currentgeneration pacs and phs systems. packettransfer protocols are beingdeveloped that will enable lowtier systems to serve as the transportmechanism for a wireless lan while simultaneously carrying voice traffic. commercially, the most successful lowtier system is phs, whichserves several million subscribers in japan. the pacs system, developedin the united states, has not attracted significant markets to date but is thefocus of active r&d efforts. areas of investigation include techniques toincorporate flexible antennas and channel equalization to extend the rangeof pacs systems, especially to highspeed mobile applications. to determine the applicability of pacs and other lowtier systems in the battlefield environment, system planners need to address various issues, including security, antennas, adaptive waveforms, and operating range.radio lans. the pacs system provides a protocol that is ideal for wireless lan applications. the pacs packet channel (ppc) protocol provides the user with a variable bandwidth and asynchronous, asymmetrical data service at rates up to 256 kbps per radio port. the ppc convertsthe physical layer of pacs from a circuitswitched protocol to a packetswitched protocol consistent with tcp/ip. the current voicepacs architecture is capable of circuitswitched connections, with a radio portcontrol unit at the hub providing connectivity into the public telephonesystem. the radio lan pacs has a distributed hub architecture, appearthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128the evolution of untethered communicationsing to the user like a device connected to a wired lan, when in fact it isconnected to a radio transmitter. a radio port can be configured to provide packet data on some time slots and voice on other time slots. radioports are small units that are easy to install, require no special towers, andcan support up to 238 users each. the lan pacs system can provide aquick, efficient means of installing a wireless lan. the pacs technologyis an open standard, which makes it easy to obtain equipment.local multipoint distribution system and related technologies. kaband(shf) frequencies are now being used in wireless cable connections linking end users, urban fiber loops, and local telecommunications bypasscompanies. the frequencies involved are the 18ð19 ghz band, known asthe digital electronic message exchange; the 27.5ð30 ghz band, known asthe local multipoint distribution system (lmds), which is used in somelocations as a oneway television delivery system (òwireless cableó); andthe 38ð40 ghz band, which can be used for lineofsight (los) data transmission at rates of up to 155 mbps. the last band is used extensively ineurope for backhaul transmissions of personalcommunications signalsfrom base stations to mobile switching centers. because lmds and related systems offer high throughput, they could be useful to the militaryin shortrange (approximately 5 km), nonmobile elements of untetheredcommunications systems. further study is required, however, becausethe system would require a high snr to be demodulated correctly andmight not be suitable in the presence of jamming.lineofsight relays. the introduction of wireless cable systems has led tothe development of highspeed los relays. these devices provide wideband access through a remote hub in areas lacking direct los access to aprimary hub station. the relays generally operate at low power becausethe antennas pointing in both directions (i.e., toward the primary hub andthe users) are parabolic dishes with very narrow beam widths rather thanthe sectorized antennas used in wireless cable systems. among otheradvantages, los relays operate continuously and therefore do not require burstmode modulation. systems based on relays are actually simpler in design than are wireless pointtomultipoint systems.satellite networks. the dod currently takes advantage of vsat and telephony earth stations for information gathering and twoway, transactionoriented traffic. approximately 40 hubs exist around the world,which could be used to backhaul pacs or cellular wireless nets deployedin the field. regional and global mobilepersonalcommunications systems (e.g., iridium, ico, globalstar) are being developed for deploymentaround the year 2000. these systems are being designed to operate inthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications129either lband (uhf) or sband (uhf/shf) frequencies. broadband kaband satellites (e.g., teledesic) are being designed to use highspeed, interactive, lowcost earth terminals.satellite traffic service levels for leo and meo systems tend to runan average of 0.05 to 0.2 erlangs (i.e., the channel is occupied 20 percent ofthe time) per square kilometer. planned systems are expected to havespotbeam capabilities that will increase traffic service levels by severalorders of magnitude, but dod battlefield communications needs willlikely exceed the service level of any single system. because the linkmargin varies with the square of the range, shorter links provide greateradvantage. therefore, battlefield communications services will need tobe supported with a hierarchy of links that graduate in altitude accordingto the transmission distance. satellite communications will play a rolebut many types of systems will be required, including handheld units,vehicular and aeronautical platforms, and highaltitude uavs.network management systems.  network managers enable a central controller to monitor and change system parameters using standard software, graphical user interfaces, and relational databases. the controllerisolates faults, produces status summaries, keeps usage statistics, andchanges configurations. as these functions become standardized, thedod could adopt commercial network management systems as a meansof simplifying enterprise network operations.3.4.1.2 bandwidth requirementsbattlefield communications currently consist mostly of voice and avery limited amount of textmessage traffic. communications equipmentis not broadly available to individual soldiers below the noncommissionedofficer ranks.14 approximately 10 percent of soldiers now have voicecommunications, and only satellites, certain aircraft, and smart missilescarry sensors for still imagery or video.the digitized battlefield of the future is based on the concept, verifiedby the gulf war, that extensive realtime data gathering and surveillancecan improve situational awareness and battle management. military commanders want an accurate, realtime image of the total battlefield thatindicates the positions of friendly and enemy forces; provides still andvideo images as well as data from infrared, radar, and other sensors; andis integrated with communications systems to ensure that the right information is distributed wherever needed. the realization of this vision willrequire significantly higher bandwidth, both on a linkbylink basis andin the aggregate (bits per second per cubic kilometer), than is now possible on the battlefield. indeed, assuming that all future ground troopsthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130the evolution of untethered communicationsare equipped with communications and image sensors, there will be orderofmagnitude increases in both the numbers of users and the bandwidth required for imagery, as the data will flow higher and farther in themilitary hierarchy than voice typically does. moreover, users will not bewilling to spend half an hour delivering a single image, nor will theirbatteries tolerate such loads. new systems will be needed to providehigher bandwidth and hierarchically sensitive storeandforward networking that will minimize the power required to transmit widebandsignals.the commercial sector has focused primarily on providing as manynarrowband voice channels as possible. wideband applications such asremote surveillance systems are becoming common in the industrial sector,and videoondemand and video games are potential commercial markets.but unless substantial markets emerge for highbandwidth services, thecommercial sector will be slow to produce highbandwidth wireless communications products that exploit the results of the thirdgeneration r&defforts described in chapter 1. military system planners have one advantage over their commercial counterparts in that mobile soldiers often operate within a short distance of a vehicle. in the digitized battlefield concept,many military vehicles could be equipped with radio equipment that canserve as highpower repeaters and may have veryhighgain antennas relative to those on the handheld units. although practical levels of transmitpower and antenna gain depend on the carrier frequency used, the availability of wellequipped vehicle platforms will make it feasible to transmitimagery to and from soldiers with handheld units.the dodõs combined requirements for realtime data traffic and highbandwidth suggest that atm technology, which is expected to be popular commercially, might be appropriate for battlefield systems, at leastwithin the wired network. this technology operates at high bit ratesthrough fiberoptic interconnections. fixedsize data units (53byte cells)facilitate efficient switching while connectionbased semantics (i.e., virtual circuits) enable bandwidth to be allocated before a connection routeis established. in addition, atm switches can provide sophisticatedmechanisms for choosing how to multiplex flows, thus offering a varietyof qos levels for different types of traffic. finally, atm supports messagepriority, queue management, and admission control mechanisms to yieldperformance guarantees.the seamless integration of atm and tcp/ip technology into thewireless battlefield communications architecture would not be a trivialundertaking.15 gateway functions will likely be provided at hierarchicalraps, nodes that provide a variety of crossnetworking, repeater, andother information services. the implementation issues are widely debated in the network community (and extensively studied in the atmthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications131forum) because atmõs mechanisms for endtoend qos cannot be supported directly by current internet protocols. an atmonly solution isalso problematic for many reasons, most significantly because it is impossible to guarantee qos for wireless systems in motion (the link margin iscontinually changing and the signal can be lost completely).16 thus, wirelesslinklevel protocols of increased sophistication will be needed to ensure that data can be delivered successfully across the link while stillmeeting the qos guarantees given during connection setup. the commercial sector is likely to resolve these technical problems eventually, butthe dod would do well to stay close to these debates to ensure that itsinterests are represented. support for research and prototype development, coupled with testing of emerging technologies in battlefield exercises, could be useful government roles.the use of gbs services will enable the direct delivery of widebandservices to the battlefield and provide terminal integration opportunitiesfor the òsmart push, smart pulló concept (in which the warfighter receivescustomized data in a timely fashion without expending much effort todefine the needs). realtime, intheater sensors will provide more recentinformation and more immediate task assignments than will dodõs satellite assets; thus the realistic information flow model is within the battlefield,with copies back to the pentagon.17 in the armyõs vision for the digitizedbattlefield of the future, bandwidth is allocated not only up and down thecommand hierarchy but also horizontally to cooperating formations.3.4.1.3 source codingin current voice coding technology, speech is compressed with manydifferent compression algorithms to bit rates ranging from 300 to 64,000bps. voice quality and compression factors have improved over twodecades of research to the point that, in moving voice traffic, linear predictive coding (lpc) and other voice coding technologies enable compression ratios of 26 to 1. even greater compression is possible to provideadditional lpi and aj advantages but at the cost of reduced speech quality and increased delay. encoding of data has also been reduced to awellknown process, thereby providing a standardized method (e.g., using the lempelziv algorithm [ziv and lempel, 1978]) for both commercial and defense applications.there is now great interest in coding of not only voice but also sound,images, and video. reasonablequality compressed video suitable forconferencing applications can be achieved with video encoders and decoders operating at 64 to 128 kbps, the equivalent of a dozen digital voicechannels in commercial cellular systems. videoconferencing will requiresubstantially higher bandwidth and will need to demonstrate operationalthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132the evolution of untethered communicationseffectiveness if it is to be used extensively on the battlefield. similarly,highresolution still or sensor images (e.g., a small image of 480  640pixels at 30 bits per pixel) will require representations of well over amegabyte, far exceeding the capabilities of existing tactical radios such assincgars, which transmits data at about 2.4 kbps (requiring an hour totransmit the image just described).standards are under development and chip sets for standardized implementation have recently become available for defense and commercial purposes. the most notable standards are the joint picture experts group(jpeg) and motion picture experts group (mpeg), which encode images,including the highenergy, lowfrequency components. image coding wasdeveloped for military reconnaissance but is also used in fullscale videoteleconferencing; many military users are mobile and communicate throughwireless links, whereas commercial users are stationary and connected byfixed, highquality transmission systems. (commercialdefense synergy isa tradition in source coding, as described in box 33.) image coding andvideo source coding technologies can compress a typical still image by aratio of up to 100 to 1; newer technologies offer up to four times the compression of deployed systems.box 33commercialdefense synergy in source codingsource coding technologies have often been shared by the commercial and defense sectors. an early example was sigsaly, a world war ii voice communicationssystem that relied on a tractor trailer full of security equipment (which today wouldbe referred to as a channel bank òvocoderó). after the war, at&t explored manycommercial spinoffs of this technology, leading to the spectrograph and severaltechnologies for voice coding. source coding became more sophisticated as semiconductor technology replaced vacuum tubes and greater functionality was achievedin a smaller package and at lower cost. one result was continuously variable slopedelta modulation, widely adopted in defense and civil government applications forsecure communications. the next major step was the development of linear predictive coding (lpc), which uses a mathematical model of a voice signal and enablesspeech to be represented at 2,400 bps, a rate low enough to be combined withavailable modems to provide realtime, secure voice communications over dialuptelephone lines. this discovery was widely used in secure defense communicationin the form of the stu iii telephone, which continues to feature this data rate. extensions to the lpc source coding technology developed to the point that the speechquality at low bit rates was acceptable for commercial purposes. these approacheswere adopted in several digital cellular communication standards, combined withmultiple access techniques, and used to develop unique standards.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications133compression ratios and image quality are likely to improve with time,but the evolution of the commercial technologies has been constrained bythe wide proliferation of the jpeg and mpeg standards and the toolsbuilt around these standards. furthermore, commercial data and videocoding standards have not yet evolved to be robust in the presence of thebit errors introduced by wireless transmissions. continued improvementsin source coding technologies are needed so that the bit rate required forfaithful reproduction of information can be limited and the dod cancontrol the growth of its bandwidth requirements. an additional concernis the vulnerability of commercial source codes to jamming, an issue thatcould be addressed by research on adaptive waveforms.the extent to which the dod will use compression and decompression techniques to reduce its bandwidth requirements is unknown, and soit is difficult to predict the impact of advanced data file compression.however, because imagery represents a large component of the data traffic supporting defense activities, at least some benefits are likely. therewould be some costs involved: new software would be needed for workstations, and new compression technology would need to be deployedinto sensor assets.18 but as the use of advanced collaborative planningand intelligent databases grows, specialized or localized compressionstrategies on database file transfers will help control the pressure for additional communications bandwidth.3.4.1.4 highly adaptive systemsadvanced modulation and smart radio technologies offer the promise of flexible, dynamically changing communications systems that canadapt to almost any conditions. such systems will be able to select modulation, spreading code, and fec and interleaving algorithms that willperform optimally in any environmentñeven in the presence of noise,jamming, or interferenceñwhile also meeting qos requirements for delay as well as data rate requirements. when applications can detect prevailing channel conditions and the radio system and external networkingoptions can support adaptation, the user can gain at least an orderofmagnitude improvement in range, bandwidth, and aj or lpi capabilities.ongoing research in this area has several shortcomings from the military perspective. the commercial sector is pursuing extensive r&d butits interest in adaptive systems is motivated by profit (e.g., accommodating more users per hertz), whereas the military seeks functional advantages such as increased interoperability and aj capabilities. the dodalso supports research on adaptive systems, in part through the glomoprogram, but the technologies are generally not demonstrated and testedunder military conditions.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134the evolution of untethered communicationsfor example, existing network protocols are generally designed forstatic configurations and highquality broadband links. in packet radionetworks, discovery algorithms (which identify neighbors as each radiomoves about on a network) determine the proper storeandforward sequence for moving communications traffic toward specific destinations.these algorithms are now being developed, assessed, and standardized.to minimize overhead and streamline the discovery process, routing information servers are provided by the network that mobile units canquery to determine who is connected and select the latest optimized routing paths to a specific destination. these algorithms have not been testedin military networks where mobility and network survivability underdegraded channel conditions are of primary importance. the relativeamount of overhead in a highly dynamic environmentñincluding degraded channelsñneeds to be modeled in more detail.military systems will benefit further if source coding, cryptography,and antenna beam performance can also be adapted to prevailing channelconditions. the tcp/ip suite tries to deliver data without errors. inwireless military applications it is likely to be preferable to trade off biterrors (and the delay tolerated by the application) against the quality ofrepresentation of the original information. in voice applications, for example, users are often willing to tolerate occasional distortions of isolatedwords (but not entire sentences) but are intolerant of delay. reconnaissance systems may require that no transmission errors will be acceptable,whereas other image delivery systems may allow a moderate number oflocalized image distortions, in exchange for more rapid delivery.3.4.2 securitycommunications and network security have attracted attention recently under the umbrella of information warfare issues. enhancementscan be made readily in the wired infrastructure but are more difficult inwireless networks, especially packet radio systems for which protocolsare still in the formative stages. commercial and defense communications networks face different threats. commercial providers are mostconcerned about the fraudulent use (theft) of service, whereas users ofthese systems are most anxious about improper access to and manipulation of their data. the military, which is often both provider and user,seeks to protect all aspects of its communicationsñnot only the messagebut also the source and destination information, the inner workings of itsequipment, and even the existence of a network.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications1353.4.2.1 availability of servicethe commercial and military sectors have different concerns withrespect to service availability. for commercial systems the primary issueis interference among users. this type of interference is well modeled,usually has stationary properties, and can be countered with thoroughlystudied solutions. hostile jamming in a military conflict creates a totallydifferent type of interference, which cannot be mitigated using ordinaryapproaches. hostile jamming can create a situation in which no usable,undistorted parts of a message are received. other forms of jamminginclude intentional disruption of key information bits in messages, playback of old messages that are no longer relevant, or transmission of noisesequences to trigger false receiver actions.a determined electronic attack on a military communications networkcould not be countered by any existing commercial equipment or anysimple modifications to such equipment. furthermore, it is unlikely thatany future commercial system could satisfy military aj requirements to thedegree offered by defenseunique systems. current military systems withaj capability include the sincgars and have quick radios and milstarsatellite system. because equipment used for jamming is becoming easierfor potential adversaries to obtain, there is a growing need for developmentof advanced aj techniques such as nulling and scanning antennas, spreadspectrum modulation, approved securespreading codes, elaborate errordetection and correction, timestamped messages, adaptive jammersensing techniques, and adaptive jammerresponding modems.access to commercial communications networks generally cannot bedenied to segments of the population that have the proper equipmentand, if necessary, are willing to pay for service. this feature is unattractive to military planners, who would prefer that communications systemsoffer normal service to friendly customers while blocking access by adversaries. weather broadcasting, for example, is a vital part of tacticalplanning, yet most standard commercial systems cannot simultaneouslyguarantee the delivery of weather reports to critical commercial serviceswhile denying such reports to the enemy. a variety of technical approaches, similar to those used to control access to directv and direcpc,are available to safeguard broadcast digital data. cryptographic codesand secret information exchanged in advance can enable selective accessto some broadcast information.3.4.2.2 confidentiality and integritydefense systems secure both the message data and, in a separateprocess, the routing information. existing security systems cannot prethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136the evolution of untethered communicationsvent an adversary from detecting the presence of military communications. information about the battlefield, important targets, and plans ofinterest can be inferred based on the volume of communications to andfrom particular locations, and much can be learned about routine militaryactivities from the modeling of communications traffic. as stealth aircraft, ships, and other vehicles are deployed, it is critical to guard againstthe detection of these platforms based on their radio communications.the dod uses lpd/i systems to hide the evidence of radio transmissions. these systems rely on unusual transmission frequencies, spreadspectrum techniques, narrowbeam antennas, lowpower transmission,or very brief messages. by reducing an adversaryõs awareness of transmissions, lpd/i systems also minimize jamming efforts and their impact.communications systems with these features can be of great value inmany military applications because they deprive adversaries of information about deployment of troops, routine versus unusual operations, thecommunications hierarchy, and level of alertness or activity. however,advanced lpd/i communications techniques have not been strongly supported in recent years.commercial systems offer considerably less protection. for example,cellular communications can be easily detected, jammed, or demodulatedand user location can be pinpointed readily. equally vulnerable are commercial cdma systems, which are based on directsequence spread spectrum with published spreading codes and do not provide lpd/i capabilities. current digital wireless standards make provisions for privacy andauthentication to block unauthorized use, but cellular wireless standardsmake no provisions for traffic security, meaning that information aboutthe routing, content, and significance of the data can be intercepted. signaling information is sent in the clear, although the identity of the caller isprotected by an identification number known only to the user and thesystem (or is temporarily assigned by the system if the user is roaming toa new location). in packetswitching protocols, atm, frame relay (aninterface for packet network access), and fiberoptic networks, all addressing and signaling information is left unprotected so that switchingor routing equipment can also read and interpret addressing, routingpriorities, and other information contained in the headers.commercial service providers are not expected to expend significantresources to harden commercial infrastructures against attack, althoughthey want to prevent losses resulting from fraud. careful design strategies will be required to deter both fraudulent use and attacks, threats thatwill be nearly indistinguishable on a mobile packet data network. thegrowing use of such networks will motivate commercial research aimedat solving these problems. yet even if the commercial sector achievessignificant security advances, the dod is likely to prefer at least some ofthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications137its own approaches because cots technologies would be readily available to adversaries.one area where military r&d could be helpful is encryption, whichprotects voice, data, or video in an information frame or packet. a typicalencryption system for realtime communications involves a cipher thatencrypts the relevant bit stream one bit at a time. the decryption processrequires both the relevant decryption key as well as synchronization between the sending and receiving process. (synchronization refers to theassurance that a particular bit being decrypted in fact corresponds to thebit that was originally encrypted and sent to the receiver.) in principle,synchronization requires only knowledge of the starting point of the incoming bit stream, but in practice, establishing and maintaining synchronization throughout the duration of the transmission is complex. currentcryptographic systems are often inefficient because the synchronizationconsumes bandwidth and because synchronization may be performedpacket by packet. (any user of the stuiii secure telephone system canattest to the time it takes to achieve endtoend synchronization.) thedesign of improved synchronization algorithms would streamline the security system and free up bandwidth for other uses.3.4.3 multimode, multiband communicationsinteroperability has long been a goal of military systems. there aremore than 17 different u.s. defense communications networks, and thesharing of messages among them requires the deployment of manyunique information gateways or bridges. furthermore, compatibilityamong u.s., north atlantic treaty organization (nato), european, andunited nations systems is increasingly important to military operations.for example, one report on the bosnia implementation force notes thatclose air support missions can involve british harriers, nato e3a (airborne warning and control system) aircraft, norwegian forward air controllers, and swedishled brigades (allard, 1996). the establishment offully interoperable radio networks will require multimode, multibandcommunications capabilities, which are the focus of several dodfundedresearch and demonstration programs.the military ideal of a multimode, multiband radio implementingmany different waveforms over a broad frequency domain does not havea commercial counterpart, although commercial technology that wouldsupport multiple standards is being explored under the european raceand acts efforts. existing multimode commercial systems have at mostsix different types of waveforms, each one generally restricted to a narrow frequency range, sufficient to access all of the wireless services thatan international traveler is likely to need. the commercial sector is unthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138the evolution of untethered communicationslikely to support additional waveforms because of the costs involved,whereas the military would almost certainly pay for them to gain theadded functional flexibility.3.4.3.1 softwaredefined radiosoftware radios are evolving in both the defense and commercialsectors. the military version is intended to enable interoperability amongdefense networks, reduce logistics support costs, and provide the capability to add new functions to fielded equipment through software updates.19the commercial work is driven by the need to accommodate the largenumber of standards used in mobile telephony. the design of commonhardware for a wide range of applications would offer convenience toconsumers and simplify manufacturing; however, the ultimate popularity of these systems will depend on whether they prove to be cost competitive with multiple dedicated implementations.several dodfunded experimental models have been built. in fielddemonstrations, speakeasy was shown to be capable of receiving communications from the air force and translating them for the receivers andnetworks used by army ground forces. the fourchannel radio is compatible with some legacy waveforms and spans frequencies from 2 mhzto 2 ghz. the ace, jcit, and millennium programs are not yet completed. software radios are also being designed under the glomo program to have adaptive interferencerejection capabilities. it is not yetclear whether any of these systems will offer the performance and costeffectiveness needed to initiate a production program.most commercial dualmode digital cellular and personalcommunications units can implement multiple transmission and reception formatsusing dsp software. information about commercial radios still in development is typically not publicly available. there are undoubtedly plansto make software radios, which will likely be less flexible than are military versions. the commercial radios may contain software that is notintended to be changed after manufacturing. furthermore, they will likelynot offer the frequency range, extent of waveform synthesis, or sophisticated security expected for military applications.meanwhile, the commercial sector has focused intensive r&d effortson various radio components to achieve incremental, practical advances.the dod can expect to take advantage of the rapid commercial progressin many componentsña/d converters, dsp chips, rf amplifiers, displayelements, processors, batteries, and storage devicesñwhich will probablydrop in price over the next several years. however, as discussed in chapter 2 (section 2.4), the dod will likely need to develop its own specializedfilters that can accommodate a broad range of frequencies and bandthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications139widths, as well as antennas that offer both frequency and beamshapeagility.when all the functions of a radio are defined by software, the òintelligenceó and network services offered by the radio can be extended togreatly enhance military applications and perhaps eventually lead to intelligent radio services in commercial applications as well. smart radios(i.e., radios capable of optimizing frequency, modulation, and protocolsfor a given purpose and signal environment) can incorporate the ruleslearned by an experienced communications specialist. many simple rulesdefine how to minimize interference. these rules can be applied in realtime, packetbased communications systems much more effectively thanin traditional voice systems. through realtime evaluation of each communication link and the spectrum in which the system operates, newlevels of intelligence can be achieved to avoid jamming or to optimizetransmissions under a wide variety of conditions (e.g., by minimizingbattery drain, reducing traffic in the vicinity of hostile jamming activities,maximizing bandwidth or network capacity).the introduction of the multimode software radio creates a significant opportunity for the convergence of many different systems and functions. traditional defense platforms have separate systems for communication, navigation, identification, data exchange, signals intelligence,electronic warfare, and other functions. a software radio could be rapidly configured to perform any of these functions in any combinationrequired. this convergence of technology will reduce the numbers ofmilitary systems procured while also increasing the cost effectiveness andutility of equipment. the resulting lightweight, agile platforms will becapable of rapid response to support the small units of fastmoving military forces now evolving. the increased availability, utility, and power ofradio devices will create a new paradigm for military communications(see table 32).3.4.3.2 cosite interferencecosite interference, which is already a problem for military communications platforms, will worsen with the introduction of multimode,multiband radios unless new mitigation approaches are developed. current technology designed to reduce the effects of cosite interference onradio performance is quite limited. power combiners can connect up tofive transmitters to a single antenna, but only if the frequencies are sufficiently separated. receive cosite filters can suppress the carrier of colocated transmitters, but broadband signals are not suppressed adequately, and the broadband noise of transmit power amplifiers is notsuppressed sufficiently at frequencies near the transmitting frequency.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140the evolution of untethered communicationsradios are a precious resource.hardware developed decades agoremains in lowrate production withhigh unit cost. radios are rationed toone or fewer per platoon.legacy radios. radios are standardizedbut there are too many standards, allbased on legacy hardware. fewradios are compatible with otherradios even within the u.s. inventory.the problem is amplified when theallied and multinational radiosystems are considered.manual mode and frequency selection.radio operators select frequencies andmodes based on commandinstructions. radio units are oftenmanually turned off (e.g., òradiosilenceó) and communications cease.communications van complex. all thevarious radios need to be housed inlarge communications vans, which arescarce resources.radio as a communicator. each radiohas one channel for voice ormessaging.development lead time. radioupgrades and developments aremeasured in years.individual radio units. communicationis point to point on a single link thatis limited by output power,sensitivity, and waveformpropagation.closed, proprietary architecture. fullyfunctional òblack box.óradios are a ubiquitous resource. likecomputing, communications willbecome so inexpensive that it will bewidely available. as with computers,new radios are implemented asapplications software running onstandard platforms.interoperability. radio waveforms,bandwidths, channels, modulations,error correction, and cryptography areall implemented in software. evenlegacy systems are implemented insoftware, which might even bedownloaded over the air.connectivity. the radio decides whichmodulation, frequency, and powerlevel is best based on òrf situationawarenessó (the need to remaincovert), the available resources, andthe amount of data that need to betransmitted.òpalm topó communications complex.multibands, multimodes, andmultichannels are on a card;connectivity is achieved byòclevernessó and resource allocation,not bruteforce transmit power andantennas.radio as a sensor. each radio has manychannels. some can be programmedand used in networks for intelligencecollection and emission location bytriangulation.rapid prototyping and deployment.new features and upgrades areimplemented in software, with òfewóhardware changes required.communications network. the full setof protocols, including tcp/ipmessage routing, is implemented.whole groups of units work togetherto achieve connectivity.open architecture. standard interfacesand packaging are the norm, withplugandplay hardware and softwaremodules.table 32current and emerging military communications paradigmscurrent paradigmemerging paradigmxxxthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications141moreover, receive cosite filters become complex when the number of cosite transmitters is three or more, and receiver noise performance is degraded, resulting in reduced transmission range and an increased errorfloor. cosite problems extend to antenna beam shape, which changeswhen antennas are used in close proximity to each other or to metallicstructures. because of the unique conditions on military communicationsplatforms, r&d in this area will likely need to be supported by the dod.3.5 defense technology policy issuesthe government influences privatesector technology developmentin a variety of ways. the instruments of government policy include indirect methods, such as investment tax credits, or direct methods such asfederal funding for r&d and technology testbeds. sometimes these policies are implemented to accelerate the development of strategically important technologies; at other times the motive is to ensure that equipment will be available for procurement by the government in a timelyfashion.government policies supporting the development of appropriate defense technologies have always been a special case. in the past, whendefense requirements generally guided privatesector technology advances (e.g., transistorized components), federal investments in r&d werenot controversial. now that sophisticated consumer and industrial products are developed independent of defense requirements, the need forfederal investments may seem less pressing. however, the dod needs tomaintain a competitive advantage over potential adversaries with respectto warfare capabilities, including communications systems. the technology policy issue for the future is how to encourage innovations in electronics and communications technology that will dominate world markets while also ensuring that the u.s. military retains capabilities thatexceed those of potential adversaries.3.5.1 implications of changes in military tacticsthe gulf war demonstrated the way in which high technology permeates warfare. advanced sensing, imaging, and targeting capabilities inthe patriot missile defense system, stealth aircraft, and other systems provided extensive advantages for u.s. forces. for example, patriot missileswere aimed using surveillance satellites controlled from the united states.liftoffs from iraq were observed by these satellites within seconds, andcritical targeting information was relayed through controllers in colorado to the frontline patriot batteries. this orchestrated activity demonstrated the capabilities of the u.s. militaryõs existing global communications network, which required the support of highbandwidth data linksthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142the evolution of untethered communicationsto move sensor information both to and from the theater of action. but thegulf war experience also suggests that communications advances areneeded to enable rapid infrastructure deployment, logistics enhancements, and increased protection of technologies to prevent their exploitation by adversaries.3.5.2 rapid infrastructure deploymentduring the ground war, the mobile forces moved so quickly that thecommunications infrastructure could not keep up with the front lines.future communications systems will likely need to be rapidly deployable(and redeployable) so that they can keep pace with rapidly developingbattles. because iraq did not react when u.s. troops first began arriving insaudi arabia, the coalition forces were able to build up an overwhelmingcombat strength in the middle east as well as the logistical stockpileneeded to pursue vigorous modern warfare. adversaries in future warsare unlikely to be so accommodating, meaning that forces will need to beprojected rapidly from the u.s mainland. future conflicts are likely to beòcome as you are,ó and communications infrastructures will need to support immediate action.the recognition of this need has heightened interest in òinstant infrastructuresó based on satellite communications and mobile elements. therap has been proposed as a basis for a moveable frontline infrastructurewith sophisticated, onthemove antenna systems able to maintain highbandwidth, pointtopoint links with the reararea infrastructure. toavoid the latencies inherent in satellite communications, hybrid systemsthat consist of dbs downlinks and uav uplinks are being investigated.in general, these systems are viewed as backups to the terrestrial trunklinkages.continued military r&d investments will probably be needed because there seems to be little commercial interest in moveable infrastructures. one example of a commercial system with moveable elements isthe metricom multihop packet radio network, which operates in the unlicensed ism bands in the san francisco bay and washington, d.c., metropolitan areas. although the infrastructure radios are in fixed locations,the multihop architecture makes it possible to add coverage in an incremental fashion through the addition of relay radios within the servicearea; bandwidth can be added also.3.5.3 logisticsfuture military communications systems will need new features corresponding to the reduced size of u.s. forces. current planning providesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications143forces that are only sufficient to fight two regional conflicts at the sametime. instead of stationing so many troops overseas in areas of hightension, a splitbase approach will be used, with advanced echelons overseas and the bulk of the forces on the u.s mainland. this approach willrequire highquality, highbandwidth connectivity worldwide, completewith access extensions that can be rapidly deployed, torn down, and reestablished as troops move.logistics tracking and management will be especially critical, giventhe growing need to transport materiel from the united states to the sceneof the conflict. many commercial systems are available. for example,omnitracs makes it possible to track vehicles continuously as theymove and to plan routes efficiently. package delivery services such asups and federal express have deployed sophisticated logistics systemsfor tagging packages and tracking them en route while also providinguserfriendly online services that enable shippers to find their shipments.wireless lans were originally developed partly for warehousing applications. finally, wireless tagging technology could provide the dodwith automatic inventory and locationidentification capabilities, providing the basis for a complete logistical information system that could trackthe location of every item shipped.3.5.4 preparing for unsophisticated adversariesthere is some uncertainty about the technical requirements for communications during future confrontations with unsophisticated adversaries. recent u.s. actions in haiti and somalia are examples of these types ofoperations, which may become more common as the united states plays anexpanding role in peacekeeping and peacemaking missions. these countries tend to have little modern communications infrastructure, althoughthis situation is changing as worldwide markets evolve for advanced technology. when deployed in lessdeveloped countries, the u.s. military couldbring along stateoftheart commercial infrastructure technology. thesesystems would need to be shipped, installed, and operational within days,with military systems sufficing in the meantime. the commercial systemscould transport the bulk of noncritical traffic, making it accessible to asmaller number of militaryspecific systems in the field.in many ways, peacekeeping and other nontraditional military operations are similar to law enforcement activities, and many of the samecommunications issues need to be addressed. even an unsophisticatedadversary could disrupt service to u.s. forces using commercial systems.for example, cellular infrastructure is difficult to hide and could easily betargeted for sabotage. although stealth and lpd are not always critical todefense communications, steps need to be taken to prevent adversariesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144the evolution of untethered communicationsfrom learning of upcoming operations, performing traffic analyses, andintercepting specific types of communications traffic. the basic securityand authentication mechanisms in the latest commercial systems can reduce interception by the technically unsophisticated; they are sufficientfor nontactical communications traffic such as logistics support. militaryspecific systems will continue to be needed for transmissions that requirecomplete security.the dod might need cooperation and technical information fromu.s. or foreign manufacturers so as to monitor the traffic of adversaries,track specific telephones, or infiltrate existing communications systems inparticular countries. the u.s. military therefore needs to maintain a technical awareness of foreignmade equipment, perhaps as part of the effortto demonstrate, test, and procure cots wireless technology (see sections3.2 and 3.3).3.5.5 preparing for sophisticated adversariessophisticated communications technology is rapidly becoming a commodity. during the gulf war some military specifications and procurement procedures were abandoned in an effort to get new capabilities,such as gps, into the hands of the troops. any adversary could buy thesame sophisticated technologies; the threat is measured by how much theadversary can afford. indeed, one of the implications of the gulf war asa model for future conflicts is that the united states might not preparesufficiently to recognize or defend against sophisticated adversaries.a sophisticated adversary can be defined as one with the technicalcapability to build advanced communications systems or the financialresources to purchase what it needs on the global arms market. thegreatest immediate threats are countries that can buy technologies fromthe countries that make them; for instance, the scud missiles used byiraq in the gulf war were based on the chinese silkworm missile.to maintain a competitive advantage against these adversaries, theu.s. military could add militaryspecific modifications, such as securityor waveform hiding, on top of commercial core systems. the military canleverage many commercial technologies, among them advanced ics, dspchips, and protocols. the advantage gained will depend on how thesecapabilities are integrated into defense systems and the choice and performance of the added militaryspecific capabilities.3.6 summarythe dod has many reasons to use commercial communications products and practices whenever possible, building on a long tradition ofthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications145synergy between the two sectors. many cots technologies offer cost andperformance advantages, and their quality is better than ever. the economies of scale achieved in mass production provide additional benefitsand lessons that can also be exploited by the military. the selective use ofcommercial products and practices in dod systems could help accommodate growing needs for global, untethered communications systems inspite of declining defense budgets.however, the military will continue to have some unique needs thatcannot be met by consumer products, or even future commercial r&dprograms, because the motivations and interests of the two sectors differ.the dod has unusual needs in three fundamental areas: network architecture, which influences all other aspects of a communications system;security, which encompasses confidentiality, data and system integrity,and service availability; and multimode, multiband systems, which canenable interoperability among diverse systems. the dod needs to examine its needs in these areas carefully and probably pursue its own r&d inselected technology areas. all of these issues are addressed further inchapter 4.notes1.for example, advanced coding (cacciamani, 1970, 1971, 1973) has beenused in commercial satellite communications since the early 1970s for both dataand highly compressed digital imaging, enabling the use of antennas on the order of 18 inches in diameter for digitally compressed video signals with linkbers less than 10ð9. the best known of these technologies is probably cdma,which has been widely adopted for cellular and personal communications systems worldwide. encryption, along with data mining and rf fingerprinting, isincreasingly being used to protect against fraudulent use in cellular systems,video entertainment subscription receivers, and business data. finally, onboarddigital processing will be used in the planned mobile telecommunications satellite and highspeed data satellites such as teledesic.2.a short lead time in a growing market can result in a large increase inmarket share. in addition, because prices can fall quickly after a new product isintroduced, the first to market is often the only competitor to make a substantialprofit. yet a release date is often difficult to predict. companies can be punishedby the market if they fail to meet predicted release dates, as often happens, forexample, with software upgrades.3.the internal design cycle may actually be much longer because the basicequipment architecture is more likely to be on a twoyear design cycle paced bythe evolution of new semiconductor components. during the baseline designcycle of up to four years, anywhere from one to four design teams may be working on the next baseline architecture.4.many u.s. commercial wireless communications suppliers include divisions that have historically been involved in defense work. within these compathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146the evolution of untethered communicationsnies, crossfertilization between the defenserelated and commercial units mayprovide a mechanism for meeting military surge needs using the companyõs commercial products. however, this type of crossover is not always straightforwardbecause of the differences between defense and commercial markets.5.for example, current regulations regarding processors, a/d converters,and cryptography appear to reflect technologies that are nearly a decade old.the advent of common highperformance microprocessors enables the widespread development and use of cryptographic algorithms, which are often distributed on the internet. the export of a/d converters is limited to technology ofless than 8 bits, but advanced sigmadelta technology has only 1 bit (noise shaping and dsp techniques are used to increase dynamic range). thus, the numberof bits no longer seems like a useful metric for a/d converters; the metrics usedto evaluate microprocessors seem equally outdated.6.this is a simplified description of the decisionmaking process. moreprecisely, throughout the design, fabrication, and deployment of commercialproducts, tradeoffs are made among performance requirements, standards requirements, cost goals, and design approaches to define a product that would bethe most attractive and competitive in the marketplace. international, national,and regional standards determine many commercial design parameters, including offaxis emission from an antenna, maximum power flux radiated to earthfrom a satellite, the capability of system users to coordinate or coexist with otherusers of a frequency band in the same geographic location, and numerous electrical safety regulations (e.g., related to wiring, batteries, radiation hazards, andchemical exposure).7.customers understand and expect this and are generally not willing to payfor a capacity that sits idle most of the time. even during the busiest hour of theaverage business dayñconditions that the systems are engineered to handleñthereis a measurable probability of blockage that is calculated based on customer willingness to pay. because the cost of a blocked call is usually only the effort requiredto try again shortly, there is little incentive to reduce the probability of blockage tozero. an interesting demonstration of the customerõs acceptance of blockage anddelay is the phenomenal growth of the internet, where service is provided on abesteffort rather than guaranteed basis (although data services continue to comeunder increasing pressure for better service access).8.intel corp., which after marketing its pentium microprocessor found adesign flaw in the precision of certain mathematical operations, uses a test suitecomprising of billions of instructions to validate each possible instruction, register, arithmetic function, interrupt process, and instruction trap as well as sequences of events to prevent any surprises in complex applications. only noware academic researchers considering more sophisticated theoretical techniquesfor dealing with testing processes of such enormous complexity. this research iscritical to the future success of complex systems.9.for example, commercial processes might take place at temperatures ranging from 0 to 50 degrees celsius (c) rather than 55 to 125 c as in militaryprocesses. or, commercial processes might involve 30 g of force rather than1,000 g.10.the nes is an encryption system certified by the national security agencythe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commercialdefense synergy in wireless communications147that enables clusters of defense computer networks to interconnect through theunclassified internet. the nes provides high levels of assurance that a systemcommunicates only with other systems that have comparable security levels.11.several military initiatives, including the multilevel information systemssecurity initiative and the dod goal security architecture, are intended to dealwith various aspects of infrastructure in an effort to enable interoperability amongsystems. however, these programs have yet to field functions that enable communication between independent defense networks.12.the acn is designed to provide hierarchical communications over a broadtheater of operations. crosslinking and networking will enable various networksto communicate and access services through satellite links worldwide. the acnwill also serve as a repeater, picking up signals and rebroadcasting them overand around terrain obstacles, thereby extending the range of lowpower equipment used on the ground.13.in a basestationoriented architecture, a greater investment is ordinarilymade in the base station than in terminals. in such a network, both the transmitand receive link equations can benefit from the improved performance of largerantennas, more powerful transmitters, and more sensitive receivers. in typicalsystems the link advantage relative to the peertopeer design is approximately10 db.14.security is an issue in equipment deployment: the use of systems withcryptographic security requires procedures for securing clearances and equipment controls.15.the tcp/ip protocol suite would need to be supported on top of atmbecause the dod has identified tcp/ip as the means for ensuring interoperability across heterogeneous military networks and because the entire system isunlikely to be constructed from native atm technology.16.an additional drawback is atmõs strong connection orientation, whichmakes it difficult to support mobility because existing connections need to be broken and reconstructed repeatedly. furthermore, the atm cell (i.e., data packet)structure was designed for the extremely low bers of fiberoptic communications,whereas a radio fade can persist for several cell durations, making it difficult to usestandard coding techniques to improve link quality. the loss of even a small number of atm cells in a highly stressed network can dramatically reduce packetthroughput.17.the importance of distilling source information prior to transmission over anetwork is well understood in the commercial sector but remains an issue for themilitary, especially the army, where communications, commandandcontrol, andintelligence functions are separate. there is no financial incentive on the part of thecommandandcontrol and intelligence communities to spend resources to distilldata at the source. often the problem is passed off to the communications community, which is forced to transmit whatever is provided. for example, in situationawareness (sa) reports, positions are reported every 12 seconds regardless of motion. as a result the communications system is overloaded with sa reports. amore efficient approach would be to project positions based on direction and velocity and only send reports when the trajectory or velocity changes. but such anapproach would require the development of software at a cost to the commandthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148the evolution of untethered communicationsandcontrol community. instead the practice has been to blame the communications system for failing to support the traffic load. this situation would neverarise in the commercial cellular industry, where providers take a systems approach and make tradeoffs between bandwidth costs and source compressioncosts.18.mobile code, such as java, might eliminate the need to agree on a compression standard because the delivery of executable code (along with the transmitted data) would allow the receiver to adapt to the senderõs coding scheme.19.an alternative approach would be to implement new functions in asicchips, which offer efficiencies in terms of power consumption. however, thisapproach would not provide an open architecture and might not be adaptable tofuture radio waveforms.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations1491494conclusions and recommendationsthe history and challenges of wireless communications, as outlinedin previous chapters, suggest a variety of strategies that could be pursuedto fulfill the vision for untethered military communications systems. thischapter summarizes and integrates key points made in the precedingchapters to provide a set of 12 recommendations directed to the dod anddarpa. organizational changes are recommended that would providean environment conducive to the development and military applicationof stateoftheart commercial technology. to meet defenseunique needs,specialized r&d and demonstration efforts are recommended that focuson various aspects of wireless technology, from the highest network leveldown to individual components.4.1 history and challenges of wirelesscommunicationsvoracious consumer demand is stimulating many advances in commercial wireless communications technology, particularly cellular andcordless telephones. the portfolio of wireless services now available inthe commercial marketplace includes a wide range of telephony, paging,and data applications delivered over a variety of service offerings rangingfrom land mobile radio to cellular to satellite communications. each service offers a unique combination of coverage region, bandwidth,subscriber equipment properties, and connectivity. in the aggregate, commercial wireless capabilities are considerable, yet many technical chalthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150the evolution of untethered communicationslenges remain. the cost of wireless voice systems needs to be reducedand their quality improved. specialized wireless data networks have nottaken off as yet, perhaps because they are not powerful enough or because mass market applications have yet to emerge. considerable research to address these and other issues is under way, both in the unitedstates and overseas. industry road maps suggest that, by early in thetwentyfirst century, commercial wireless communications will meet thelongterm goal of enabling users to communicate òanytime, anywhere.óthe dod uses a variety of wireless systems that are based on 1970s and1980s technology and designed to serve specific needs. the dod no longerdrives the evolution of stateoftheart communications technology but stillneeds access to it, perhaps more than ever. as threats to peace change fromglobal to regional conflict, a transformation is taking place in military roles,missions, and communications needs. the vision for military communications stresses c4i and the protection of the lives of u.s. personnel, who willbe based principally in the united states but will need to be prepared tomove quickly throughout the world to carry out a variety of missions,including noncombat roles such as peacekeeping and humanitarian response. such missions are nontraditional in the sense that coordinationwith foreign partners may be essential, whereas national survival will notbe at risk as was anticipated during the cold war. in addition, the need foru.s.based logistical support will grow, and new systems will be requiredto counter terrorism. thus the accurate, timely transmission of informationwill be perhaps more essential than ever in meeting military objectives.effective global communications systems will be critical.the civilian and military sectors have a long history of interaction inthe design and deployment of wireless communications technology. inthe gulf war, dod used commercial wireless equipment such as gpsreceivers and found that the performance was comparable to that of equipment designed explicitly to meet military needs. yet current commercialtechnologies and practices cannot meet all military needs. for example,the military cannot tolerate the long lead timesñon the order of monthsto yearsñthat are typical in the building of commercial communicationsinfrastructures. commercial wireless companies carry out elaborate advance planning and measurement operations, whereas the military requires networks that can be organized quickly and can adapt rapidly tochanging operating conditions (including spectrum availability). thesenetworks will also have to be compatible with other military communications systems, both new and old.differences between military and commercial needs also have implications for network architecture. commercial research on integrated (i.e.,multimedia) systems is oriented toward network architectures based onthe basestationoriented model. it is not clear whether that approach orthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations151the peertopeer design will be more appropriate in future military settings. previous darpa research on packet radio networks has encompassed basestationoriented, peertopeer, and multihop networks.the evolution of technology is also influenced by organizational differences between the two sectors that encompass market drivers, acquisition practices, and maintenance and repair arrangements. commercialr&d and manufacturing are oriented toward mass markets of tens ofmillions of units. adding functionality to designs has to be justified byconsumer demand. by contrast, military equipment is designed to provide the functions required to fulfill missions. the number of units produced is tiny relative to commercial markets. commercial customersacquire equipment and subscribe to services as they are ready to usethem, expect effective function within minutes, and rely on equipmentmanufacturers for repairs. the military acquires equipment on a contingency basis, operates its own repair facilities, and is prepared to train itspersonnel to use communications systems.many research efforts are under way to realize the commercial andmilitary visions for wireless communications. fueled by the success ofcellular communications and projections of everexpanding markets forwireless services, the commercial sector is pushing ahead in various areas. one objective is to enable portable devices to communicate at thehigh bit rates needed for advanced information services. another objective is to advance the state of the art for software radios as a means offostering economies of scale in r&d and manufacturing in a world ofdiverse and changing technical standards. by using multiple types ofoperating software, such radios can serve as single hardware platformscapable of transmitting and receiving signals that conform to a variety ofstandards. meanwhile, dod is taking a dual approach to wireless technology development by both conducting its own research, focusing primarily on components, while also relying increasingly on commercialtechnologies to ensure interoperability and systems integration. thedarpa glomo program has initiated a broad range of coordinated r&defforts that will provide enabling technologies for future military systems. among the commercial technologies that the military expects touse are internet protocols and atm.these observations lead to the following general conclusions:¥a large gap remains between public expectations for mobile communications (òanytime, anywhereó) and the available technology.¥over the next 10 years or so, market forces will fill this gap bydeveloping new technologies for commercial wireless communications.¥the military thus has much to gain from positioning itself to usecots communications equipment to the greatest extent possible.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152the evolution of untethered communications¥some military needs for wireless communications technologies willexceed or differ significantly from anticipated commercial developments.for example, the military has unique concerns with respect to networkdesign, security, interoperability, and multimode/multiband systems.¥the commercial sector has its own incentives to produce advancedcommunications devices, components, and subsystems as well as complete systems. to use commercial technologies effectively, the dod willhave to take special measures to promote the development and acquisition of cots products that can be integrated into systems that meet specialized military requirements.these conclusions provide the basis for the recommendations presented in the remainder of this chapter. the 12 recommendations areorganized in a hierarchical order from the general to the specific. the firstthree focus on organizational changes, or metaissues, that need to beaddressed by dod to help align military requirements with commercialproducts and services and provide an environment conducive to the absorption of stateoftheart technologies. the other nine recommendations identify r&d projects that should be carried out by darpa toadvance the synergy between military and commercial systems whilealso meeting specialized military needs that will exceed anticipated commercial developments. the r&d recommendations are presented in order of priority, reflecting the committeeõs view that highlevel systemsissues are of paramount importance. the recommended research excludes subjects that will be adequately covered by the commercial sector.4.2 standards development1.the dod should participate in standardssetting activities forwireless communications technologies and systems.with commercial demand for wireless technology growing worldwide and dod budgets flat or falling, incentives for future commercialmilitary synergy need to be provided by the military side. consequentlythe defense community needs to gain a deep understanding of technology trends so as to obtain advance notice of new concepts and influencethe development of costeffective equipment that meets military needs.although new technologies can originate in diverse settings that includeindustry, academia, and nonmilitary government laboratories, the features of available equipment are determined to a large extent in the process of standards setting.current r&d and standards activities are focused on enhancing wireless communications technology to make it possible to move many typesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations153of information (including data, video, and images) to and from portablewireless devices. although this work is certain to produce new technology, the commercial deployment of these innovations is not assured. theavailability of innovative technology in the marketplace depends on business, social, and government policy factors. military planners need tomaintain a continuing awareness of the difference between what is possible technically and what is available in the market to meet militaryneeds.because military requirements often exceed those of the commercialmarket, opportunities for the dod to use commercial products dependon equipment details, which are reflected in standards. such details mightbe of little initial interest to consumers. yet the defense community isoften ahead of industry in recognizing features that will eventually beimportant to all users; if these needs are not addressed in the standardssetting processes then they might have to be met later in commercialsettings at great cost, both financially and in terms of network performance. an example is the poor state of network security in analog cellular systems, an issue not considered in the initial design process. newerdigital systems help alleviate this problem, but adding security featuresto older equipment remains an expensive and difficult challenge. themilitary, by contrast, always plans for system security in advance.standards also influence whether òhooksó or interfaces are designedinto commercial technologies to enable modifications that would meetspecialized military needs. by participating in the standards process,government agencies will make it possible to embed standard devices inmilitaryspecific system architectures and generally promote a capabilityfor costeffective systems integration.the dod could influence standards setting by participating in activities such as the atm forum, the ietf, and the multimode multibandinformation transfer system forum. effective participation will be constrained by the rules governing standards organizations and by the abilities of dod management and participating individuals to influence technical decisions and political processes. they will need to understand howstandards for wireless communications are established, a complex process that has influenced the very different evolutionary paths of wirelesstechnologies in the united states, europe, and japan. in addition, thedod could benefit from the analysis, simulation, and laboratory testingof candidate technologies to support defense interests in the establishment of specific standards. these activities could reveal the limits ofsome technologies that would not be apparent in more benign commercial settings but are likely to be of longterm significance to consumers.by conducting such tests and sharing the results with the commercialsector, defense agencies will improve the chances that adopted standardsthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154the evolution of untethered communicationswill serve immediate military needs and also benefit the commercial sector in the long run. participation in standards creation could ultimatelyprove to be more costeffective than commissioning equipment explicitlydesigned to meet military needs.4.3 demonstration and testing ratherthan development2.the dod should pursue a vigorous process of technology demonstration and testing prior to development and procurement. in particular, the focus should be on system concepts based on commercialtechnologies and specialized military enhancements.as the defense budget is reduced, less money will be available formajor procurements. nevertheless, an inventory of advanced technologies can be maintained and deployed as needed if military equipment isadapted whenever possible from commercial technologies. examples ofthis strategy include the condor project, in which dod is supporting thedevelopment of a cryptography module on top of the cellular telephonysystem, and the armyõs plans for the digitized battlefield. the condorproject is focusing on core noncommercial technologies such as onthemove, highbandwidth, phasedarray antenna technology. the armyõsdigitized battlefield network will include switches, routers, and hubsbased on commercially available technology. the army is not buildingits own atm switches, which are widely available in the private sector,but instead is developing highspeed encryptors and decryptors that arecompatible with commercial switches.military planners need to understand the thrust of commercial developments and identify critical technologies that are unlikely to emergeñsoon enough or everñfrom the commercial sector. these technologiesneed to be developed by the dod. for all other elements of wirelesssystems, new commercial developments need to be tested and evaluatedon a continuing basis in military exercises to determine and verify theirsuitability for military use. resources available to support this approachinclude the federal defense laboratories, which can provide a criticalbridge between the militaryõs operational needs and private technologydevelopment, and the defense industry, which is well equipped to collaborate in the development of prototype militaryspecific equipment. inaddition, both the dod and industry will continue to rely heavily on u.s.colleges, universities, and technical schools to provide competent engineers, technicians, programmers, operations staff, and scientists as well askey technological breakthroughs and innovative ideas vital to u.s. military and commercial competitiveness.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations155the dodõs technology demonstration and testing efforts need to takeinto account the unique communications needs of each military service.a mechanism is needed to help integrate the requirements of these varying systems and find a common architecture that would costeffectivelysupport the majority of those requirements. this task might be carriedout by an r&d subunit such as darpa or an existing pentagonleveljoint program office. in the past the military has focused on one radiosubsystem at a time, with the result that interoperability has been minimal. the vision of the future calls for the development of an overallsystem concept with a standard set of multimedia protocols and waveforms to assure interoperability at all echelons, with individual radiosspecified and procured to work within this architecture.4.4 procurement3.the dod should plan a new approach to procurement that willidentify how commercial infrastructure systems and subscriber equipment can best be used for military purposes and how to purchase commercial equipment in the most productive way.the dod needs to develop models to analyze how best to use commercial systems and equipment. for example, a planning system couldbe created to keep track of commercial communications infrastructureand service access points within a given geographical region. such asystem needs to be comprehensive, monitoring telephony, data, microwave, satellite, and fiberoptic services. the analysis could suggest themost effective means of information delivery for each sourcedestinationpair, identifying the gateways and networking software required forinteroperability and backup paths. this information could be used forplanning or realtime robust network management, performance optimization, and repair.a system is also needed to evaluate the potential for defense equipment based on commercial technology by comparing the costeffectiveness and performance of legacy hardware to those of cots products. inmany cases cots components may represent improvements for the military in terms of costeffectiveness, power effectiveness, or other important features. the planning system needs to be capable of determininghow to apply these internal components to anticipated defense applications. as part of this process the dod needs to develop the expertisenecessary to translate its operational needs into requirements for commercially available equipment.once the dod identifies how best to use commercial technologies,costefficient acquisition strategies need to be pursued. governmentthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156the evolution of untethered communicationswide purchases might achieve greater economies of scale than wouldpurchases by individual military services. the dod could use this opportunity to become a more effective customer. government acquisitionsoften add specialized requirements that prohibit commercial suppliersfrom offering bulk rates. as an alternative, dod could explore how topurchase bulk quantities of standardized equipment and then separatelyacquire enhancements that align a system with military requirements. itmight also be possible for designated agencies to acquire equipment andthen distribute it to other government users. for example, the armysignal corps could acquire all dod communications equipment and provide for all maintenance and upgrades on the basis of annual agreements.consolidated purchasing might enable costeffective reliance on commercial providers for maintenance, logistics, and training.the dod can also foster commercialdefense synergy by allowingmultiple vendors to build subsystems that meet open hardware and software interface standards and by selecting, from the field of possible vendors, those most capable of creating an ongoing competitive productionover a long, sustained product life. when procurement programs keep atleast three vendors competitive over the course of the system, the competition encourages the evolution of advanced features and improvementsin costeffectiveness. the stu iii is an example of a fully competitiveacquisition in which three vendors competed for production of severalhundred thousand secure telephones. in this controlled market, eachvendor was required to meet open interoperability standards, but eachwas also allowed to implement unique features and functions to attractmarket share and compete on price. each competitorõs model updateskept the other competitors busy matching features and prices, a processthat benefited both the users and the government while also motivatingongoing technology insertion. the speakeasy radio is another exampleof open system architecture. an òopen system forumó allows contractorsto participate in setting hardware and software standards that specifyopen interfaces between system components.4.5 modeling and simulation4.darpa should build on current research in modeling and simulation to incorporate the communications traffic, mobility of networkelements, and radio propagation encountered in mobile military information networks.the performance of wireless communications systems depends onthree phenomena: communications traffic, mobility of network elements,and radio propagation. accurate assumptions about these phenomenathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations157need to be made if the dod is to design, deploy, and operate effectivesystems. modeling and simulation are the best available tools for optimizing system design and predicting performance.various commercial packages are available for simulating communications systems consisting of established components and subsystems.the quality of the results they produce depends on the accuracy of themodels of traffic, mobility, and radio propagation that they incorporate.good models of narrowband radio propagation are available. however,models that incorporate sitespecific characteristics of buildings, terrain,and foliage are not commercially mature, and there are no radio propagation models that incorporate adaptive antennas. furthermore, availableòteletrafficó models apply to only a few simplified conditions, and mobility models are confined to abstract formulations (e.g., fluid flow, brownian motion) that have not been validated with reference to practical conditions. as a consequence, existing tools cannot provide realistic analysesof complex dod systems. much more is needed, especially in the sitespecific channel modeling, traffic, and mobility areas, to provide militaryplanners with the tools necessary to rapidly deploy wireless systems inbattlefield scenarios in a wide range of modern theaters (e.g., builtupurban areas). darpa should stimulate research to derive and validatemodels of wireless channel effects using modern modem and antennatechnology so that appropriate protocols, applications program interfaces,and optimization algorithms can be developed.research leading to techniques for accelerating the runtime of complex wireless system simulations would benefit the military and commercial sectors alike. simulation of communications systems is often performedby signalprocessing workstation tools, which enable programmers to define a complex communication system by connecting icons representingpredefined building blocks. this approach enables programming to beautomated, but the resulting simulation code is often inefficient to run.darpa research in this area could build on the impressive progress already made in the s3 program using parallel processors to simulate communications systems. this program includes a wireless component thatcould be enhanced to simulate the traffic, mobility, and radio propagationconditions of military communications.darpa could also establish libraries of code representing communications waveforms, protocols, source coding techniques, and network interfaces. this research would accelerate system design while also reducing the expense of simulation software maintenance, which typically costs10 times more than software creation because of the longer time frameinvolved and rapid advances in technology. research on system development and maintenance methods will help identify the most effectivestrategy.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158the evolution of untethered communicationsfinally, integrated tools are needed to assess the performance of thesubsystem elements of a software radio operating within a largescalenetwork in motion over a broad geographic area. these tools wouldenable researchers to explore network quality, connectivity, stability withrespect to multiple performance criteria, and unexpected problems. someresearch groups are developing their own tools to investigate specificaspects of performance. darpa could attempt to provide an integratedcapability built on a common application interface that would reveal theeffects of each system component on the performance of the entire system. this capability would enable the optimization of an entire systemrather than just the individual components.4.6 network architecture5.darpa should initiate research to produce network architectures that incorporate commercial products in a manner that meets military requirements.the performance of a wireless communications system depends inlarge part on the coordination of network elements. the architecture of anetwork defines these elements, identifies pairs of network elements thatcommunicate directly, and specifies the protocols for that communication. architectures for wireless systems differ according to how terminalmodems are connected (peertopeer versus basestationoriented design),how infrastructure elements are connected (hierarchical versus distributed), and the nature of communications with other networks. given thespecial needs of military wireless communications networks, designersneed to adopt a system architecture that takes maximum advantage of thecapabilities of commercial devices and subsystems yet also providesunique interfaces and protocols as dictated by military needs. darparesearch in this area is likely to reveal new network architectures that usecommercial products and services in an innovative way to serve militaryaims and make it possible to gracefully absorb new technology at thesubsystem and component level.within a new network architecture, many key issues remain to beresolved with respect to protocols for wideband data services. currentcommercial systems treat each application (e.g., internet, telephony, videodial tone) separately instead of taking an integrated approach. recentdiscussions of nomadicity underscore the importance of considering wireless and mobile components and conditions as part of heterogeneous andinteroperating network contexts. military wideband packet radios, whichare designed from the outset for integrated information services, couldprovide a useful model for future commercial developments. however,the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations159research is needed to determine network topologies and protocols thatmake full use of the capabilities of advanced radios.in creating a new network architecture, protocols and algorithms needto be optimized to meet the objectives of military operations. this is acomplex task. as an example of the complex interdependence of algorithms and architecture, the design of effective routing techniques needsto aim for the following objectives:¥routing to maximize data rate, with minimum transport delay andminimum delay variance;¥lpd/aj routing around vulnerable spots;¥routing for priority assignment and allocation of resources;¥routing for battery power conservation;¥routing for congestion avoidance;¥routing for access to servers for specific realtime applications;and¥routing to avoid anticipated propagation anomalies.the difficulty of achieving all these objectives is compounded by the needto run several different applications on mobile terminals at any giventime. therefore, the routing protocol needs to process each packet individually to meet the qos objective of the transmitting application.in a mobile wireless network it should not be necessary for everyterminal to assume the size, weight, power, or cost burdens associatedwith critical network services such as database servers, image servers,speech recognition and synthesis, transcoding, transcrypting, position location, and health and safety reporting. research on network architecturecan identify the best way to distribute services among network elementswith the aim of minimizing the weight and power consumption of devices carried by personnel.4.7 network security6.darpa should conduct research aimed at understanding andbridging the differences between security needs in commercial andmilitary networks.the commercial sector is developing a variety of data networkingproducts and services that are likely to be integrated into singlehop basestationoriented architectures. however, as noted in chapter 3, the requirements for security in commercial networks are likely to be differentfrom those in defense applications. for example, troops on the ground orships at sea that do not wish to disclose their location require highthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160the evolution of untethered communicationslpd/i performance levels, a requirement not faced by most commercialusers. these differences need to be understood and accommodated if themilitary is to make use of commercial wireless technologies.research is needed to improve the informationprocessing features ofencryption techniques. for example, the endtoend encryption of alltraffic would obviate the need for interfaces or bridges between interacting systems. however, current endtoend encryption algorithms requireconsiderable network overhead to establish the cryptographic synchronization. darpa could seek improved methods of endtoend cryptographic synchronization through multiple networks with lower overheadthan is currently possible. with such methods, the time required to establish cryptographic synchronization between active network memberswould be reduced significantly.darpa also needs to design network protocols that allow for commonality of hardware and software interfaces as well as security differences that meet the needs of all applications. these protocols need toprovide multilevel security, long identified as important for defense communications. the concept entails the shared use of a network by individuals with differing authorization to access information of differinglevels of sensitivity. multilevel security implies the management of access to computing and communications systems and to information transmitted or stored in those systems commensurate with individualsõ authorization. in general, the design and implementation of multilevel securitysystems have been imperfect, and wireless and mobile applications compound the challenge.4.8 highdensity communications platforms7.darpa should conduct research aimed at reducing cosite interference.military ships, combat aircraft, uavs, and mobile battlefield systemsall operate a variety of communications systems in close proximity to oneanother. the placement of numerous radios in the same general locationtypically results in interference and many compromises. current technology designed to reduce the effects of cosite interference on radio performance is quite limited. for example, power combiners can connect up tofive transmitters to a single antenna, but only if the frequencies are sufficiently separated. receive cosite filters can suppress the carrier of colocated transmitters, but broadband signals are not suppressed adequately.darpa needs to catalog the cosite environment of military platforms,identify both common and unusual problems, and design more effectivethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations161solutions that are useful over a broad spectrum, such as 2 mhz to 2 ghz.specific cosite problems that require attention include the following:¥the performance of an antenna changes when it is used near another antenna or metallic structure, and it no longer provides the expected beam shape.¥electronic equipment emits low levels of rf radiation from internal local oscillators and data busesñsignals that represent interference toother radio receivers.¥radio receivers transmit a small amount of the local oscillator frequency used to tune the radio, causing interference that is particularlyproblematic if the local oscillator is dithered, hopped, or modulated.¥radios transmit signals not only on the intended carrier frequencyand modulation but also (in an attenuated fashion) on carrier harmonics,intermodulation distortion products, intermediate frequencies, upconversion local oscillator frequencies, and the broadband noise of eachpower amplifier stage.this r&d would be timely because the full deployment of softwareradios operating in broad frequency ranges will depend on the development of techniques to overcome cosite interference and highpower inband interference. when serving several subscribers in the same bandand mode at the same time, sincgars radios would experience significant interference. significant technical challenges are associated with cosite interference generated within the software radio itself. additionalissues arise in the effort to enhance mobility of forces. for example,consolidating multiple mechanized vehicles will produce a single command track, which now has six sincgars radios and the usual problems associated with multimode radios, regardless of whether the radioarchitecture is analog, digital, or software based.research is also needed to minimize the interference caused by thespurious emissions (spurs) and harmonics of cosite transmitters and receivers. when many radios are colocated or networked, it might bepossible for each transmitterreceiver pair to agree on a common frequency plan to minimize spurs and harmonics or on common filteringplans to minimize cosite degradation. additional research topics couldinclude time and frequency management (to prioritize transmissions) andreception time slots (to minimize the impact of transmissions likely tocause interference to other receive channels). such research would needto take into account the interleaving and coding present in each channeland the likelihood of interference. finally, a new generation of highlylinear filters is needed with improved agility and a wider range of operating frequency than is currently possible.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162the evolution of untethered communications4.9 software radios8.darpa should carry out research and demonstration projectsdesigned to field software radio technology for military applications.software radio is a far more versatile technology than the term òradioó implies. these radios can operate as part of a network and performa vast array of electronic and computational functions (e.g., database management, transcryption) through the downloading of software. a networked radio can function in ways not envisioned when the componentis manufactured. in a military scenario, some radios can function asactive interrogators while others act in a passive manner, undetected butcoordinated by active units. similarly, software radios can perform services that until now were unique to each application.a software radio could be a leading part of the c4i infrastructure:with appropriate software it could be applied to signal intelligence, electronic intelligence, communications navigation and identification, electronic warfare, information warfare, electronic countermeasures, missiletracking, guidance, or commercial paging or telephony. the costeffectiveness of software radios increases with the number of available software functions, the ease of performing new tasks, and the ease of cooperating with other network systems to accomplish larger tasks. the multipleroles that can be played by software radios could have an impact ondodõs organizational structure, as services provided by individual organizations and procurements are combined in one system.commercial software radios are likely to have more limited capabilities (e.g., changing signals and bandwidth on a single frequency) than aremilitary versions, which are being designed to span large frequencyranges and implement many legacy waveforms. however, the commercial sector is achieving rapid advances in many softwareradio components, such as a/d converters, dsp chips, rf amplifiers, displays, batteries, and datastorage devices. the dod can use these cots products togood advantage. at the same time, darpa needs to undertake specialized r&d focusing on antennas (sections 4.10) and filters (section 4.12)for military applications. exploratory research on novel components anddesigns could also be beneficial (section 4.13). in addition, to identify anynecessary improvements and make optimal use of this promising technology, darpa needs to demonstrate software radio technology on defense platforms where density, power, and weight are critical.4.10 smart antennas9.darpa should conduct the research needed to adapt smart antennas for mobile military applications.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations163commercial applications for smart, adaptive antennas are limited torelatively lowcost and unsophisticated singleband units with limitedflexibility in beam pattern. moreover, virtually all existing adaptive antennas for mobile radio applications are designed for use at base stationsrather than mobile units. military applications require antenna functionality for several orders of magnitude of frequency coverage as well aselectronic tuning, the coupling of more than one transmitted and receivedsignal, and a diversity of beam shapes ranging from omnidirectional topencil beams. several technical challenges need to be overcome beforesuch antennas can be produced. darpa research needs to pursue thefollowing objectives, among others:¥achievement of useful antenna performance over a large frequencyrange;¥development of lowcost techniques for implementing beam shaping with affordable companion electronics that implement the phase shifting and weighting (i.e., the electrical process of feeding antenna elements);and¥improvements in the costeffectiveness of frequencyagile couplerswith builtin cosite filtering.4.11 smart waveforms10.darpa should conduct research to produce transmission techniques that adapt to a wide range of operating conditions.commercial communications systems tend to operate under predictable, stable conditions. therefore, commercial waveformsñcharacterizedby frequency band, bit rate, modulation method, and source coding andchannel coding techniquesñare designed for operation over a limited rangeof conditions. for example, hightier systems are designed for one set ofconditions, whereas lowtier systems are designed for a different set ofoperating conditions. the operating environments and transmission conditions encountered by military communications systems are more unpredictable and subject to change. military systems would therefore benefitfrom transmission technologies that adapt to changing conditions.recent research has produced theoretical results on the optimizationof bit rate, modulation method, source coding, and channel coding techniques. new darpa research should be aimed at uniting the theory ofadaptive modulation and coding with the emerging technologies of advanced software radios (section 4.9), which promise a practical means ofimplementing adaptive schemes. the results of the recommended modeling and simulation research (section 4.5) would provide valuable tools forperforming this work. in addition to meeting military needs for adaptablethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164the evolution of untethered communicationssystems, this work could serve the longterm needs of the commercial sector by providing core technologies for integrated personal communicationssystems that combine the advantages of several of todayõs separate systems.one objective should be to develop modulation and coding strategiesthat allow the demodulator to acquire the properties of interference in thetime domain, the frequency domain, or the constellation domain so thatthe interference can be avoided or canceled. these techniques wouldconcentrate energy in the regions of frequency, time, or code space thatprovide the greatest link margin. another objective should be to producetransmission techniques that establish a data rate consistent with interference and fading conditions. these techniques should allow for selectionof a data rate over two or more decades of bit rate. they should also bedesigned for rapid carrier synchronization time, rapid timing synchronization, and minimum training time for learning channel conditions. thechoice of data rate should be consistent with adaptive source coding,which gracefully degrades the perceived quality of the endtoend application as the channel quality declines.in addition, for defense applications new waveforms are needed thatallow for very high spreadspectrum processing gain. typical spreadspectrum techniques require considerable computational power to be detectedby the desired receiver. the high signalprocessing gain required to jointlydiscover frequency offset, baud boundary (or baud boundary offset), andspreading code alignment at these high processing gains is inconsistentwith traditional portable radio design. in addition, new spreadspectrumwaveforms are needed that allow for further reductions in the detectabilityof transmissions, direction, and properties of the spread signal.4.12 filter technology11.darpa should conduct research to overcome the limitations ofcurrent filter technology for use in military software radios and highdensity platforms.both software radios and highdensity platforms require advanced filters. filters currently constitute 25 percent of the volume of a typical software radio and are used in receive preselectors, power amplifier outputfilters, local oscillators, and mixers. to a great extent the radio receiverõssensitivity and dynamic range are determined by the selectivity and thelosses of the preselectors, and the radioõs cosite performance is determinedby the selectivity of output filters and the filters in the local oscillators andupconverters. active and digital filters are not appropriate for these functions because they introduce noise that degrades performance. handheldthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations165software radios would be improved by the miniaturization of filtering functions and improvements in frequency tuning range and selectivity.there is also a need for filters that cover wide frequency ranges. commercial radio equipment spans either a small frequency band or a fewselectable bands. military radios that span wide frequency ranges (suchas 2 mhz to 2 ghz) require lumped filters built of inductors and capacitors to handle the low end of the frequency range and transmissionlinetechniques for filtering at the high end. research is required to identifynew circuit and materials technologies that allow for tunable, highly selective filters that span this entire range, operate at higher power levels,and take up less physical volume. in addition, new processing techniquesare needed to enable the monolithic integration of highly selective filterswith semiconductor devices and to produce multisection filters in moresophisticated shapes.4.13 novel components12.darpa should develop novel components to enhance the flexibility of software radios.software radios have been significantly enabled by novel components,notably dsps and fpgas, which allow new waveforms to be added tofielded systems through the installation of new software and hardware.additional novel components could further enhance the flexibility of software radio architectures. for example, components could be designed toreduce the equipment size, weight, and power needed to accommodatemilitary designs that incorporate a wide range of potential future waveforms and large numbers of legacy waveforms. radio performance couldbe improved through research into new dsp architectures that have adaptive resolution, clock speed, instruction sets, memory architectures, andarithmetic functions designed to the specific signal processing of communications systems.similarly, novel fpgas that either interconnect analog circuit elements or integrate analog and digital operation could be of great value. achip containing analog circuit elements and fpgas could be applied tothe analog frontend functions of many communications systems whilealso providing a broad range of interfaces to other systems. research isrequired to identify the semiconductor processes and circuit topologiesthat provide sufficient isolation between the various analog functions,interconnection with minimal loss, and circuits with sufficient versatilityto be configured for many applications.finally, the monolithic integration of nearly the entire software radiofunction could provide experience in combining analog and digital signalthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166the evolution of untethered communicationsfunctions on a common substrate. it is currently difficult to keep digitalnoise from coupling into analog circuitry and degrading performance. research on how to implement widedynamicrange analog circuitry monolithically with digital circuitry would provide the basis for implementingan entire software radio on a single component. such an effort needs toencompass the monolithic implementation of highperformance filters thatare tunable over large frequency ranges.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography1671674bibliographyabramson, n. 1982. òfundamentals of packet multiple access for satellite networks,óieee journal on selected areas in communications 10(2):309ð316.abramson, n. 1985. òdevelopment of the alohanet,ó invited paper, ieee transactionson information theory 31(2):119ð123.abramson, n., ed. 1993.  multiple access communications: foundations for emerging technologies. ieee press, piscataway, new jersey.abramson, n. 1994. òmultiple access in wireless digital networks,ó ieee proceedings82(9):1360ð1370.abramson, n., and e.r. cacciamani, jr. 1975. òsatellites: not just a big cable in the sky,óieee spectrum 12(9):36ð40.abrishamkar, f., and z. siveski. 1996. òpcs global mobile satellites,ó ieee communications magazine 34(9):132ð136.acampora, a. 1996. òwireless atm: a perspective on issues and prospects,ó ieee personalcommunications magazine 3(4):8ð17.acampora, a., and m. naghshineh. 1994. òcontrol and quality of service provisioningin high speed microcellular networks,ó ieee personal communications magazine1(2):36ð43.allard, k. 1996. information operations in bosnia: a preliminary assessment. strategic forum91. institute for national strategic studies, national defense university press, washington, d.c.anderlohr, g. 1969. òwhat production breaks cost,ó industrial engineering 1(9):34ð36.asta, d. 1991.  recent dynamic range characterization of analogtodigital converters forspectral analysis applications. project report ast14. lincoln laboratory, massachusetts institute of technology, lexington, massachusetts.ayonoglu, e., et al. 1995. òairmail: a link layer protocol for wireless networks,óacm wireless networks 1(1):47ð60.baier, p.w., et al. 1996. òtaking the challenge of multiple access for third generationcellular mobile radio systemsña european view,ó ieee communications magazine34(2):82ð89.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168the evolution of untethered communicationsbalakrishnan, h., et al. 1995. òreliable transport and handoff protocols for cellular wireless networks,ó acm wireless networks journal 1(3):469ð482.balakrishnan, h., et al. 1996. òa comparison of mechanisms for improving tcp performance over wireless links,ó pp. 256269 in proceedings of the acm sigcomm conference on applications, technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communications.  acm press, new york.berrou, c., et al. 1993. ònear shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding:turbocodes,ó proceedings of the ieee international communication conference 44(10):1261ð1271.biggins, j. 1996. the two headed eagle.  st. martinõs press, new york.boozallen & hamilton, inc. 1995. tactical internet systems description for tfxxi. reportfor the u.s. army communications electronics command by boozallen & hamilton,shrewsbury, new jersey.bradley, g. 1996. òmilitary maneuvers: boeing buying mcd; intel, phillips retreat,óelectronics news 42(2148): 1, 36, 38.bray, j. 1995. the communications miracle. plenum publishing, new york.cacciamani, e.r. 1970. òcommunications satellites for the 1970õs,ó pp. 559ð572 in proceedings of the aiaa 3rd communications satellite conference, n. feldman and c. kelly, eds.paper no. 70420. alpine press co., los angeles.cacciamani, e.r. 1971. òa channel unit for digital communications in the spadesystem,ó paper presented at the ieee international conference on communications,montreal, canada, june 14ð16.cacciamani, e.r. 1973. òsynchronization and coding in data communications satellitenetworks,ó pp. 311ð327 in proceedings of the nato advanced study institute on computer communications networks, r.l. grimsdale and f.f. kuo, eds. noordhoff international publishing, the netherlands.caceras, r., and l. iftode. 1995. òimproving the performance of reliable transport protocols in mobile computing environments,ó ieee journal on selected areas in communications 13(5):850ð857.calhoun, g. 1988. digital cellular radio. artech house publishers, norwood, massachusetts.calhoun, g. 1992. wireless access and the local telephone network. artech house publishers, norwood, massachusetts.chuang, j.c.i. 1987. òthe effects of time delay spread on portable radio communications channels with digital modulation,ó ieee journal on selected areas in communications 46(2):375ð380.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1994. realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1996. theunpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000. national academypress, washington, d.c.couch, l.w. 1995. modern communication systems: principles and applications. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.cox, d.c. 1995. òwireless personal communications: what is it?ó ieee personal communications magazine 2(2):20ð35.cox, d.c. 1996. òwireless loops: what are they?ó international journal of wireless information networks 3(3):125ð138.crawford, g.p., and t.g. fiske. 1996. òreflective color lcds based on hpdlc and pscttechnologies,ó proceedings of the society for information display international symposium:digest of technical papers 27:99ð102.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography169crochierre, r., et al. 1983.  multirate digital signal processing. prenticehall, englewoodcliffs, new jersey.crossindustry working team. 1995.  nomadicity in the nii. corporation for nationalresearch initiatives, reston, virginia.davids, n. 1996a. òpersonal digital assistants: part 1,ó ieee computer magazine 29(9):96ð100.davids, n. 1996b. òpersonal digital assistants: part 2,ó ieee computer magazine 29(11):100ð104.defense advanced research projects agency. 1996. home page, http://www.ito.darpa.mil/researchareas/informationsurvivability.html.economist, the. 1997. òfinancial indicators: telecommunications,ó p. 119 in vol. 342, no.8007.evans, t.f. 1997. ócellemetrytelemetry via cellular,ó pp. 1ð11 in wireless personal communications: advances in coverage and capacity, j.h. reed, t.s. rappaport, and b.d.woerner, eds. kluwer academic publishers, norwell, massachusetts.forman, g.h., and j. zahorjan. 1994. òthe challenges of mobile computing,ó ieee computer magazine 27(4):38ð47.gallager, r.g. 1985. òa perspective on multiaccess channels,ó ieee transactions on information theory 31(2):124ð142.garg, v.k., and j.e. wilkes. 1996. wireless and personal communications systems.prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.gavish, b., and s. sridhar. 1995a. òeconomic aspects of configuring cellular networks,ówireless networks 1(1):115ð128.gavish b., and s. sridhar. 1995b. òmodels for configuring cellular networks with mobility,ó pp. 168ð178 in proceedings of the 3rd international conference on telecommunicationsystems. atsma, inc., nashville, tennessee.gerla, m., and j. tsai. 1995. òmulticluster, mobile, multimedia radio network,ó acmwireless networks 1(3):255ð266.gilhousen, k.s., et al. 1991. òon the capacity of a cellular cdma system,ó ieee transactions on vehicular technology 40(2):303ð312.goldsmith, a., and s.g. chua. in press. òvariablerate variablepower mqam for fadingchannels,ó to appear in ieee transactions on communications 2:815ð819.goldsmith, a.j. 1997. òcapacity of downlink fading channels with variable rate andpower,ó ieee transactions on vehicular technology 46(3):569ð580.grant, m. 1996. òsignal processing hardware and software,ó ieee signal processing magazine 13(1):86ð88.gundmundson, b., et al. 1992. òa comparison of cdma and tdma systems,ó pp. 732ð735 in ieee vehicular technology conference record. institute of electrical and electronics engineers, piscataway, new jersey.hafner, k., and m. lyon. 1996. where wizards stay up late: the origins of the internet.simon and schuster, new york.headrick, d.r. 1991. the invisible weapon: telecommunications and international politics 1851ð1945. oxford university press, new york.hill, c.h. 1997. òthe spoils of war,ó the wall street journal, september 11, pp. r1, r4.holzman, g.j., and b. pehrson. 1995. the early history of data networks. ieee press, losalamitos, california.instat/sia information services. 1997. òsemiconductor end use forecast.ó instat/sia information services, scottsdale, arizona.international telecommunications union task group 8/1. 1996. working documents fromthe 10th meeting, mainz, germany, april 15ð26.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170the evolution of untethered communicationsjubin, j., and j.d. tornow. 1987. òthe darpa packet radio network protocols,ó proceedings of the ieee 75(1):21ð32.kahn, r.e., et al. 1978. òadvances in packet radio technology,ó proceedings of the ieee,66(11):1468ð1496.katz, r.h. 1994. òadaptation and mobility in wireless information systems,ó ieee personal communications magazine 1(1):6ð17.katz, r.h., and e.a. brewer. 1996. òa case for wireless overlay networks,ó paper presented at the 1996 spie conference on multimedia and networking, mmcm õ96, sanjose, california, january 27ðfebruary 2.katzela, i., and m. naghshineh. 1996. òchannel assignment schemes for cellular mobiletelecommunication systems: a comprehensive survey,ó ieee personal communications magazine 3(3):10ð31.kelly, k. 1994. out of control.  addisonwesley, reading, massachusetts.lauer, g.s. 1995. òpacketradio networks,ó pp. 355ð358 in routing in communicationsnetworks, m.e. steenstrup, ed. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.leiner, b.m., et al. 1996. ògoals and challenges of the darpa glomo program,ó ieeepersonal communications magazine 3(6):34ð43.leiner, b.m., et al. 1997. òissues in packet radio network design,ó proceedings of the ieee75(1):6ð20.lewis, t. 1993.  empire of the air: the men who made radio. harper perennial, new york.lin, s., and d.j. costello. 1983. error control coding: fundamentals and applications.prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.masini, g. 1996.  marconi. marsilio publishers, new york.mccanne, s., and v. jacobson. 1993. òthe bsd packet filter: a new architecture for userlevel packet capture,ó pp. 259ð269 in proceedings of the 1993 winter usenix technicalconference. usenix associates, berkeley, california.mooney, e.v. 1997. òmore consolidation yet to come in shrinking paging industry?órcr, may 12. homepage, http://www.rcrnews.com.myles, a., et al. 1995. òa mobile host protocol supporting route optimization and authentication,ó ieee journal on selected areas in communications 13(5):839ð849.naval studies board, national research council. 1997. technology for the united states navyand marine corps, 2000ð2035: becoming a 21stcentury force, 9 volumes, national academy press, washington, d.c.nguyen, g.t., et al. 1996. òa tracebased approach for modeling wireless channel behavior,ó paper presented at winter simulation conference, coronado, california, december 8ð11.norberg, a.l., and j.e. oõneill. 1992. a history of the information processing techniquesoffice of the defense advanced research projects agency. charles babbage institute, minneapolis, minnesota.ogawa, k., et al. 1994. òtoward the personal communication era,ó international journal ofwireless information networks 1(1):17ð27.padgett, j.e., et al. 1995. òoverview of wireless communications,ó ieee communicationsmagazine 33(1):28ð41.pahlavan, k. 1995. òwireless lans,ó in personal communication systems and technologies, j.gardiner and b. west, eds. artech house publishers, norwood, massachusetts.pahlavan, k., and a. levesque. 1994. òwireless data communication,ó invited paper,ieee proceedings 82(9):1398ð1430.pahlavan, k., and a. levesque. 1995. wireless information networks. john wiley and sons,new york.pahlavan, k., et al. 1993. òdecision feedback equalization of the indoor radio channel,óieee transactions on communications 41(1):164ð170.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography171pahlavan, k., et al. 1995. òtrends in local wireless networks,ó ieee communicationsmagazine 33(3):88ð95.pahlavan, k., et al. 1996a. òtransmission techniques for wireless lans,ó ieee journal onselected areas in communications, special issue on wireless local communications 14(3):477ð491.pahlavan, k., et al. 1996b. òtrends in local wireless networks,ó invited paper, proceedingsof the ieee 33(3):88ð95.peterson, l.l., and b.s. davie. 1996. computer networks: a systems approach. morgankaufmann, san francisco.ramsdale, p.a. 1994. òpersonal communications in ukñimplementation of pcn usingdcs1800,ó international journal of wireless information networks 1(1):29ð36.rappaport, t.s. 1989. òindoor radio communications for factories of the future,ó ieeecommunications magazine 27(5):15ð24.rappaport, t.s. 1996. wireless communicationsñprinciples and practice. prenticehall,englewood cliffs, new jersey.rhode, l., and t.t.n. bucher. 1988. communications receivers: principles & design. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.russell, j.e. 1994. òuniversal personal communications: emergence of a paradigm shift inthe communications industry,ó international journal of wireless information networks3(3):149ð164.sari, h., et al. 1995. òtransmission techniques for digital terrestial tv broadcasting,óieee communications magazine 33(2):100ð109.sass, p. 1996. survivable adaptive systems atd final technical report. u.s. armycommunications electronics command, fort monmouth, new jersey.sass, p., and i. eldridge. 1994. òarmy demonstrates wideband on the move communications for digitized battlefields,ó signal 48(7):5455.sass, p., and l. gorr. 1995. òcommunications for the digitized battlefield of the 21stcentury,ó ieee communications magazine 33(10):8695.shannon, c.e. 1949. òcommunication in the presence of noise,ó proceedings of the instituteof radio engineers 37:10ð21.shannon, c.e., and w. weaver. 1949. a mathematical theory of communication. universityof illinois press, urbana.sheng, s., et al. 1992. òa portable multimedia terminal,ó ieee communications magazine30(12):64ð75.spencer, n. 1988. òcomparison of stateoftheart analogtodigital converters,ó p. 75 inproject report ast4. lincoln laboratory, massachusetts institute of technology, lexington, massachusetts.steer, d.g. 1994. òcoexistence and access etiquette in the united states unlicensed pcsband,ó ieee personal communications magazine 1(4):36ð43.tanenbaum, a.s. 1996. computer networks, 3rd ed. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, newjersey.taylor, m.s., et al. internetwork mobility. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, new jersey.turin, g.l. 1980. òintroduction to spread spectrum antimultipath techniques and theirapplication to urban digital radio,ó ieee proceedings 68(3):328ð353.ungerboeck, g. 1982. òchannel coding with multilevel phase signals,ó ieee transactionson information theory 28(1):55ð67.van tuyl, r.l. 1996. òunlicensed millimeter wave communications: a new opportunityfor mmic technology at 60 ghz,ó paper presented at ieee gaas ic symposium, paloalto, california, november 3ð6.viterbi, a.j. 1994. òa vision of the second century of wireless communication,ó international journal of wireless information networks 1(1):3ð6.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172the evolution of untethered communicationswalrand, j., and p. varaiya. 1996. high performance communications networks.  morgankaufmann, san francisco, california.wepman, j.a., and j.r. hoffman. 1996.  rf and if digitization in radio receivers: theory,concepts, and examples. ntia report 96328. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.wickelgren, i.j. 1996. òlocal area networks go wireless,ó ieee spectrum 33(9):34ð40.yacoub, m.d. 1993. foundations of mobile radio engineering. crc press, boca raton, florida.ziemer, r.e., and w.h. tranter. 1995. principles of communications systems, modulation andnoise. john wiley and sons, new york.ziv, j., and a. lempel. 1978. òcompression of individual sequences by variable ratesource coding,ó ieee transactions on information theory it24(5):530ð536.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1734appendixesthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a175175abiographies of committee membersdavid j. goodman, chair, is director of the wireless informationnetwork laboratory at rutgers university, where he is also a professor and former chairman in the department of electrical and computer engineering. previously, he spent 20 years at at&t bell laboratories, where he was a department head in communications systemsresearch. dr. goodman received a b.s. degree from rensselaer polytechnic institute, an m.s. degree from new york university, and aph.d. from imperial college, university of london, all in electricalengineering. he is a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronicsengineers and the institution of electrical engineers.norman abramson is vice president and chief technology officer ofaloha networks, inc. previously, he was director of the alohasystem at the university of hawaii and a professor of electrical engineering at hawaii and at stanford university. dr. abramson hastaught communication theory, computer networks, and satellite communication courses at the university of california at berkeley,harvard university, and massachusetts institute of technology whileon visiting appointments. he is a recipient of the koji kobayashicomputers and communications award given by the institute of electrical and electronics engineers. dr. abramson received an a.b. degree from harvard university and an m.a. degree from the univerthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176appendix asity of california at los angeles, both in physics, and a ph.d. in electrical engineering from stanford university.eugene cacciamani is a senior vice president at hughes networksystems, where he is responsible for business development, advancedsystems engineering, and government business. previously, he waspresident and chief executive officer of ma/comnet and held keymanagement positions at the american satellite company and thecommunications satellite corporation. dr. cacciamani also workedat rca data systems division and served in the u.s. air force. he isa fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers. hereceived a b.s. degree from union college and m.s. and ph.d. degreesfrom the catholic university of america, all in electrical engineering.joel engel, recently retired as vice presidenttechnology at ameritech.previously, he was vice president for research and development atmci and vice president of engineering at satellite business systems.dr. engel also held several positions, including manager for corporateplanning studies, at at&t and bell laboratories and at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit) instrumentation laboratory. he isa member of the national academy of engineering and a fellow of theinstitute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee). he is a recipient of the national medal of technology and the ieee alexandergraham bell medal. dr. engel received a b.s. degree from the citycollege of new york, an m.s. degree from mit, and a ph.d. degreefrom the polytechnic institute of brooklyn.mark epstein is vice president, development, at qualcomm, inc.prior to joining qualcomm, dr. epstein served as deputy for c3i tothe assistant secretary of the u.s. army (rda), and, earlier, as a staffassistant in the office of the secretary of defense. his previous positions include program director at the computer sciences corporationand assistant director, engineering, for northrop page communications. dr. epstein received b.s. and m.s. degrees from the massachusetts institute of technology and a ph.d. from stanford university, allin electrical engineering. he serves as chairman of the telecommunications industry associationõs international standards coordinatingcommittee and as a member of two u.s. delegations to the international telecommunications union radiocommunication sector.bruce fette is chief engineer at motorolaõs government and systemstechnology group communications division. he has been involvedin signal processing analysis for numerous systems, including thethe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a177speakeasy multiband, multimode radio; wideband wireless network;joint special forces operations radio system, integrated team radio;and numerous vocoders and systems in the stuiii family of securetelephone systems. dr. fette received a b.s. degree from the university of cincinnati and m.s. and ph.d. degrees from arizona state university, all in electrical engineering.douglas c. fields is a vice president of united parcel service, wherehe has been involved in developing wireless voice and data communications systems for the worldwide delivery vehicle fleet. previously,he directed telecommunications planning for corning glass works,levi strauss & company, and key services corporation and was aconsultant to the pacific telephone company. mr. fields attendedlos angeles city college and served in the u.s. army signal corps.he is a member of the international telecommunications users group.bezalel gavish is a professor at the owen graduate school of management at vanderbilt university. he previously held positions at thenorwegian school of economics and business administration, navalpostgraduate school, technionisrael institute of technology, and university of rochester. in addition, he was a visiting researcher at belllaboratories and ibm corp. and a department head for the israeldefense forces logistics branch. dr. gavish received a b.sc. degree inindustrial engineering and management science and m.sc. and ph.d.degrees in operations research, all from technion.andrea goldsmith is an assistant professor of electrical engineering at the california institute of technology. she previously workedat at&t bell laboratories and maxim technologies. dr. goldsmithis the recipient of a national science foundation career developmentaward and was an ibm fellow. she is an editor of both ieee transactions on communications and ieee personal communications magazine.dr. goldsmith received b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees from the university of california at berkeley, all in electrical engineering.randy h. katz is a professor of computer science at the university ofcalifornia at berkeley and a principal investigator in the bay areawireless access network project. he has taught at uc berkeley since1983, with the exception of 1993 and 1994, when he was a programmanager and deputy director of the computing systems technologyoffice at the defense advanced research projects agency. dr. katzreceived a b.s. degree from cornell university and m.s. and ph.d.degrees from uc berkeley, all in computer science. he is a fellow ofthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178appendix athe association for computing machinery and of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers.edwin a. kelley is division chief scientist and manager of the digitaltransceiver product line for both commercial and military applicationsat hughes communication products, hughes aircraft company. mr.kelley has been the program manager for the advanced secure digitalradio and the advanced communications engine project supported bythe department of defense. mr. kelley received a b.s. degree in electrical engineering and m.s. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science, all from the university of california at berkeley.kaveh pahlavan is director of the center for wireless informationnetwork studies at the worcester polytechnic institute, where he isalso a professor. previously, he was the director of advanced development at infinit, inc., and taught at northeastern university. he is aconsultant to numerous companies on cellular networks, communications theory, and technical aspects of wireless networks. dr. pahlavanis a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers communication society and the editorinchief of the international journalof wireless information networks. he received an m.s. degree from theuniversity of tehran and a ph.d. degree from worcester polytechnicinstitute, both in electrical engineering.charles e. perkins is a senior staff engineer at sun microsystems.previously, he was a research staff member at the ibm t.j. watsonresearch center. he is the author or coauthor of standardstrackdocuments in the srvloc (service location), dhc (dynamic host configuration), and ipng (ip new generation) working groups of the internetengineering task force. he also serves on the internet architectureboard and recently wrote a book on mobile ip. mr. perkins is anassociate editor of mobile communications and computing review, theofficial publication of acm sigmobile, and serves on the editorialboard of ieee/acm transactions on networking. he received a b.a.degree in mathematics and an m.e.e. degree from rice university,and an m.a. degree in mathematics from columbia university.theodore rappaport is professor and director of the mobile andportable radio research group in the bradley department of electrical engineering at virginia polytechnic institute. previously, he was apostdoctoral research associate at the national science foundation(nsf) engineering research center for intelligent manufacturing systems at purdue university and an engineer at harris corp. dr.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a179rappaport is a fellow of the radio club of america and a recipient ofthe nsf presidential faculty fellow award and the institute of electrical and electronics engineers marconi young scientist award. hereceived b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees from purdue university, all inelectrical engineering.jesse russell, is chief wireless architect and managing director of theat&t wireless communications center of excellence. his previouspositions at at&t include chief technical officer in the wireless systems business unit, vice president of the advanced wireless technology laboratory, director of the cellular transmission laboratory andcellular telecommunications laboratory, and head of several departments. mr. russell is a member of the national academy of engineering and a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers.he has received numerous awards, including u.s. black engineer ofthe year. he received a b.s. degree from tennessee state universityand an m.s. from stanford university, both in electrical engineering.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180appendix b180bbriefers to the committeejuly 29, 1996kevin mills, program manager, defense advanced research projectsagencyeugene famolari, associate director, army communicationselectronicscommand (cecom)paul sass, special projects office, cecomjim freebersyser, army research officejohn graniero, chief scientist for c3, air force rome laboratoryoctober 15, 1996rob ruth, program manager, defense advanced research projectsagencymarlan kvigne, chief engineer, communications and information systems department, nccosc (rdte division)joe macker, network research scientist, center for high assurance computer systems, naval research laboratorydavid wye, technical advisor, wireless telecommunications bureau,federal communications commissiondecember 10, 1996lou dellaverson, manager, wireless atm laboratory, motorolathe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b181nicolas kauser, chief technology officer, at&t wireless serviceswilliam osborn, manager of technology development, cellular phoneresearch and development center, ericsson, inc.joseph a. tarallo, director, wireless base station and radio technologydepartment, lucent technologiesd. raychaudhuri, nec america (via telephone)at the december 1996 session, invited speakers from industry wereasked to address these questions, among others:1.what technologies will the consumer wireless industry likely develop over the next 5 to 15 years, regardless of whether the federal government provides basic r&d?2.are there any critical telecommunications technologies that mustbe funded/developed by the u.s. government because commercial industry cannot justify the risk or exploratory expense?3.what are the most critical technical and nontechnical issues facingthe wireless industry that threaten the competitiveness or growth of individual companies on a global scale?4.what is the potential for synergy between military needs and likelycommercial development? what technology gaps will the military needto fill in order to use commercial products and services?5.which countries are leading in wireless communications, in termsof deployment of technologies? what are examples of good policies thathelp to foster good technological development in these countries? whowill be the future leaders, and why?6.how does industry benefit from wireless research done in academic institutions, universities, and research centers? what are some examples?7.given that the military may have to operate globally in developedand underdeveloped regions, what could be viable wireless technologiesto support military mobile missions?in addition to the guests invited to participate on the panel, therewere seven observers from the federal communications commission:david wye, ron netro, marty liebman, mike marcus, larry petak, stevesharkey, and tom stanley.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182appendix c182cglossaryace (advanced communications engine) is a prototype multiband, multimode software radio capable of emulating both military combat netradios and commercial avionics radio systems.acn (airborne communications node) is an unmanned aerial vehicle designed and equipped to provide hierarchical communications services and crosslinking over a broad theater of operations. see rapand uav.acts (advanced communications technologies and services program)is the european commissionõs latest precompetitive research effortfocusing on advanced communications systems.a/d converter is an analogtodigital converter.aj (antijam) refers to techniques for reducing the effectiveness of attemptsto jam communications channels. see jamming.amps (advanced mobile phone system) is the standard for the analogcellular radio telephones now widely available throughout the unitedstates.arq (automatic repeat request) is a protocol used to retransmit datapackets received in error.asic is an applicationspecific integrated circuit.atm (asynchronous transfer mode) enables voice, data, and video to behandled with a uniform transmission protocol. it breaks up the information to be transmitted into short packets of data and interspersesthem using time division with data from other sources and deliveredover trunk networks.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c183atm cell is an information packet containing 53 bytes of data traffic andadditional òoverheadó defining the virtual circuits and paths overwhich the data are to be transmitted.bandwidth is the part of a frequency band occupied by a communications channel. sometimes the term is used to describe the number ofbits per second transmitted in a channel.bent pipe is a satellite communications system that transmits to an earthstation essentially the same signal it receives from another earth station.ber (biterror rate) is the probability that a bit is received in error.bit is a binary unit of information.bps (bits per second) refers to the speed at which data is generated by asource or transmitted over a communications channel. measurementsare often stated in units of 103 bits per second (kilobits or kbps) or 106bits per second (megabits or mbps).byte is a unit of 8 bits.c4i (command, control, communications, computing, intelligence) is amilitary concept encompassing all the functions and capabilitiessought in an advanced communications system.cdma (code division multiple access) is a technique that allows manyusers to share the same radio spectrum. a sequence of pseudorandom bits, known as a code, spreads the information signal over amuch larger range of frequencies than is occupied by the originalinformation signal. see fdma, tdma, spread spectrum.cdpd (cellular digital packet data) is a packetswitched network thatuses one or more channels in an analog cellular telephone system.cell refers to a geographic region within which cellular telephone subscribers can communicate with a particular base station (site). cellradius ranges from 0.5ð15 kilometers depending on the density of thesubscribers and the extent of topological obstructions.celp (code excited linear prediction) is a technique for encoding voice.cmos (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) is an inexpensive,lowpower integrated circuit technology.condor is a national security agency program designed to developand demonstrate secure voice and secure net broadcast services, using stu iiicompatible units, over the commercial cellular infrastructure.cots (commercial offtheshelf) refers to readily available commercialtechnologies and systems.csma/cd (carriersense multiple access with collision detection) is athe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184appendix cprotocol that regulates the manner in which terminals gain access to ashared communications channel.dama (demandassigned multiple access) is a technique that enablesmany users to share the same radio spectrum. a common signalingchannel is assigned to handle requests from transmitters for networkcapacity.db is decibels, a unit for expressing the relative intensity of acoustic andelectromagnetic waves.dbs (direct broadcast satellite) is a system in which geo satellites broadcast a signal with sufficient power to enable direct reception in ahome, office, or vehicle with an inexpensive receiver.dfe (decision feedback equalizer)is a nonlinear equalization techniquedesigned to reduce the effects of intersymbol interference. see isi.doppler effect is a change in the received signal frequency due to movement of the transmitter or receiver.dsp (digital signal processor/processing) is a specialized integrated circuit used to analyze or alter the characteristics of communicationssignals.erlang is a unit reflecting the traffic intensity on a communication link. itis equivalent to the fraction of time that the link is occupied.etsi is the european telecommunications standards institute.fading refers to changes in the amplitude of received signals due to characteristics of the transmission path and motion of the transmitter andreceiver.fcc is the federal communications commission.fdma (frequency division multiple access) is a technique that enablesmany users to share the same radio spectrum. each user is allocateda different frequency. this is the approach used in amps cellularradio. see cdma, tdma.fec (forward error correction) codes give digital signals a highly specialized redundancy that enables a receiver to recognize and correct occasional errors in the received signal.fh (frequency hopping) is a technique for changing transmit frequency ina way that makes it difficult for an adversary to jam communications.fir (finite impulse response) refers to a signalprocessing operation performed by a dsp.fm (frequency modulation) is a modulation technique in which information is conveyed in the high frequency of a carrier signal.fplmts (future public land mobile telecommunication system) is theoriginal name for the international telecommunications unionõs conthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c185cept for thirdgeneration wireless telephone systems. it is now calledimt2000.frequency reuse refers to the use of the same signal spectrum at differentgeographical locations.gbs (global broadcast system) is an advanced military satellite communications system designed to have very high data rates (100 megabitsper second) and global coverage.geo (geosynchronous orbit) refers to an equatorial satellite orbit approximately 36,000 kilometers from the earth in which the satelliteremains stationary over one position on the earthõs surface.glomo (global mobile information systems) is a research and demonstration program dealing with mobile, wireless communications. it isfunded by the defense advanced research projects agency.gsm (global system for mobile communications) is a combinationtdma/fdma cellular radio system that is the current digital standard in europe. it was originally known as group system mobile.have quick is a military uhf radio designed to provide secure airtoairand airtoground communications with aj capabilities.hf (high frequency) is the frequency band at 3ð30 megahertz.hiperlan is a highperformance radio localarea network designed tooperate at 20 megabits per second.hz (hertz) refers to a unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second.frequencies are often stated in units of 103 hertz (kilohertz or khz),106 hertz (megahertz or mhz), or 109 hertz (gigahertz or ghz).ic is an integrated circuit.ieee is the institute of electrical and electronics engineers.imt2000 (international mobile telecommunications2000) is the international telecommunications unionõs concept for thirdgenerationmobile wireless telephone systems.information warfare refers primarily to recent u.s. initiatives designed toprotect computer network infrastructures against intentional disruptions. the term encompasses many forms of disruption aimed atcommunications networks (both wired and wireless) and the relevantcountermeasures.inmarsat (international maritime satellite) is an organization of 75member countries that has launched several generations of satellitecommunications systems for voice and lowrate data applications.intelsat is an international, governmentchartered organization established in 1964 to coordinate worldwide satellite communications prothe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186appendix cgrams. a series of intelsat communications satellites has beenlaunched.is95 is the north american standard for secondgeneration cdma digital wireless telephone systems.is136 is the north american standard for secondgeneration tdma digital wireless telephone systems.isdn (integrated services digital network) is a set of international standards that specify the manner in which different types of information(e.g., voice, data, video) can be transmitted in the same communications system.isi (intersymbol interference) occurs when multipath reflections corresponding to a given bit transmission arrive at the receiver simultaneously with subsequent data bits.ism (industrial, scientific, and medical) refers to the unlicensed frequencybands available for use by any wireless device that conforms to rulesestablished by the fcc.itu is the international telecommunications union.jamming is a type of transmission designed to disrupt the radio communications of an adversary so as to interfere with military operations.jcit (joint c4i terminal) is a softwaredefined radio under developmentby the naval research laboratory that will implement combat net,intelligence communications, and military datalinks on a single platform.lan is a local area network.leo (low earth orbit) is a satellite communications system deployed in alow orbit (500 to 2,000 kilometers from earth).los (line of sight) refers to a radio communications systems with anunobstructed path between the transmitter and receiver.lpc (linear predictive coding) is a coding technique based on a mathematical model of a voice signal.lpd/i (low probability of detection and interception) refers to the capability to minimize an adversaryõs awareness of transmitted radio energy, ability to measure any properties of a detected signal, or abilityto intercept the transmission.meo (medium earth orbit) is a satellite orbit of intermediate height between leo and geo orbits.message storeforward is a system in which a message is uploaded to asatellite and held there until the satellite is in a position to downloadit to the destination. it is an alternative to bentpipe systems.millennium is a military research effort to design an ultrawidebandthe evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c187radio. one objective is to demonstrate extremely highspeed a/dconverters for military and commercial applications.missi (multilevel information systems security initiative) is a nationalsecurity agency initiative designed to provide a framework for thedevelopment of interoperable, complementary security products.mmits (modular multifunction information transfer system) is an industry forum focusing on technical standards and applications forsoftwaredefined radios, networking radios, and multimode radios.mobile ip (mobile internetworking routing protocol) is designed to support mobile internet users.mse (mobile subscriber equipment) is a military radio that resembles acellular telephone.msrt (mobile subscriber radio terminal) is a military radio.multipath propagation is a phenomenon in which copies of a transmittedsignal arrive at different times at a receiver.nato is the north atlantic treaty organization.nes (network encryption system) is an encryption system certified by thenational security agency that enables clusters of defense computernetworks to interconnect through the unclassified internet.osi (open systems interconnection) refers to a model that describes networks as a series of layers.packet is a collection of information symbols transmitted together on acommunications channel.pacs (personal access communications system) is a u.s. standard forsecondgeneration digital wireless telephone systems serving subscribers moving at pedestrian speeds.pda (personal digital assistant) is a portable, lowpower computing device with a small display used for information storage.peertopeer is a network architecture in which transmissions flow between terminals without passing through a central hub.personal communications services are offered in frequency bands around1900 megahertz allocated for this purpose by the fcc.phs (personal handyphone system) is a japanese standard for mobiledigital telephone services.pstn (public switched telephone network) is a collection of worldwidewired telephone networks.qos (quality of service) refers to endtoend performance guarantees offered by a network.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188appendix crace (research for advanced communications in europe) was a program funded by the european commission to perform precompetitiveresearch on advanced communications systems. it was supersededby the acts program.radio spectrum is a range of radio frequencies required to support one ormore communications channels.ram is randomaccess memory.rap (radio access point) is a wheeled or tracked vehicle that carries extensive communication systems, including an òon the moveó antennasystem. it provides a variety of crossnetworking, repeater, and information services.rf is radio frequency.rms (root mean square) is the standard deviation of a random variable.rsvp (resource reservation protocol) supports the delivery of realtimeinformation over the internet.rtp (realtime protocol) is designed to support delayintolerant datastreams, such as video, transmitted over the internet.s3 (scalable selforganizing simulations) is a research program that usesparallel computers to simulate communications networks. the program is sponsored by the defense advanced research projectsagency and the national science foundation.shf (superhigh frequency) is the frequency band at 3ð30 gigahertz usedfor satellite, radar, and microwave communications.sincgars (singlechannel ground and airborne radio system) is a military radio that hops transmission frequencies within the veryhighfrequency band, a capability that helps prevent jamming.snr (signaltonoise ratio) is the ratio of signal power to noise power.the higher the snr, the clearer the transmission.softwaredefined radio is a radio implemented on dsps with functionsdefined by software, which can be downloaded as needed. suchradios can use many types of modulations.speakeasy is a softwaredefined radio designed and demonstrated withsupport from the defense advanced research projects agency.speakeasy can emulate some legacy military radio systems and operate across a wide frequency range.spectral link efficiency is the data rate (in bits per second) per unit ofbandwidth of a communications channel.spread spectrum is a technique in which a signal is spread over a muchlarger frequency range than the minimum required to deliver themessage. it is often used by the military for antijam purposes. it isused by the commercial sector in cdma mobile telephone systemsand wireless lans.the evolution of untethered communicationscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c189stu iii (secure terminal unit iii) is a standardized voice and data telephone capable of encryption up to topsecret level for defense andcivilian government purposes. stu iii operates over standard dialup telephone lines and has been extended to cellular applications.symbol, as used in this report, refers to a series of encoded bits.tdma (time division multiple access) is a technique that allows manyusers to share the same radio spectrum by transmitting informationin different time slots. see cdma, fdma.throughput, as used in this report, refers to the fraction of time duringwhich a communications channel can be used.uav (unmanned aerial vehicle) is an unmanned aircraft used to relayradio signals between two points on the ground.uhf (ultrahigh frequency) is the frequency band at 0.3ð3 gigahertz usedfor uhf television and radar systems.umts (universal mobile telephone system) is a pending european standard for mobile communications services, scheduled to be deployedbeginning in 2002.usat an ultrasmallaperture terminal.vhf is the frequency band at 30ð300 megahertz used for fm radio andtelevision.vsat (very small aperture terminal) is a satellite communications system in which earth stations do not require large antennas. the smallantenna size (typically less than 1 meter) allows for simplified installation and possibly portability.wan is a wide area network.winforum (wireless information network forum) was formed by several companies in 1992 to obtain frequency bands and set protocolstandards for personal communications data services.wlan is a wireless local area network.