detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/6269fostering research on the economic and social impacts ofinformation technology228 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309060325 | doi 10.17226/6269steering committee on research opportunities relating to economic and socialimpacts of computing and communications, national research councilfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fostering research on theeconomic and social impactsof information technologyreport of a workshopsteering committee on research opportunities relating to economic andsocial impacts of computing and communicationscomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.1998fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of theworkshop steering committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencesand with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by grant no. srs95285584 between the national academy of sciencesand the national science foundation. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendationsexpressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of theorganizations or agencies that provided support for this project.library of congress catalog card number 9886542international standard book number 030906032xadditional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution ave., nwbox 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 1998 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americafostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiisteering committee on research opportunitiesrelating to economic and social impacts ofcomputing and communicationshal varian, university of california at berkeley, chairfrances allen, ibm t.j. watson research centererik brynjolfsson, massachusetts institute of technologyjorge schement, pennsylvania state universityscott shenker, xerox palo alto research centerlee sproull, boston universityrichard sutch, university of california at berkeleystaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorjane bortnick griffith, interim directorpaul semenza, program officer (through july 1997)jon eisenberg, program officerjulie c. lee, administrative assistant (through august 1997)mickelle rodgers, project assistantrita gaskins, project assistantfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivprefaceivcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjames chiddix, time warner cablejeff dozier, university of california at santa barbaraa.g. fraser, at&t corporationsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjames gray, microsoft corporationbarbara j. grosz, harvard universitypatrick m. hanrahan, stanford universityjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscodeborah a. joseph, university of wisconsinbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, interval researchbarbara h. liskov, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn major, qualcomm, inc.david g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeleydonald norman, hewlettpackard companyraymond ozzie, iris associates, inc.donald simborg, knowmed systemsleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationmarjory s. blumenthal, directorjane bortnick griffith, interim director (1998)herbert s. lin, senior staff officerjerry r. sheehan, program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officerjanet briscoe, administrative associatelisa l. shum, project assistantmickelle rodgers, project assistantnicci dowd, project assistantrita gaskins, project assistantfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacevcommission on physical sciences, mathematics,and applicationsrobert j. hermann, united technologies corporation, cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairpeter m. banks, environmental research institute of michiganwilliam browder, princeton universitylawrence d. brown, university of pennsylvaniaronald g. douglas, texas a&m universityjohn e. estes, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universityl. louis hegedus, elf atochem north america, inc.john e. hopcroft, cornell universitycarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotakenneth i. kellermann, national radio astronomy observatorymargaret g. kivelson, university of california at los angelesdaniel kleppner, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin companymarsha i. lester, university of pennsylvanianicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratorychanglin tien, university of california at berkeleynorman metzger, executive directorfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viprefacethe national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection ofits members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibilityfor advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr.william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academyof sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professionsin the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceviiviiprefaceto aid in identifying fruitful approaches to assessment of both the positiveand negative impacts of using information technologies, the national sciencefoundation asked the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb)of the national research council (nrc) to gather perspectives on the problemfrom experts in several relevant disciplinesñin particular, economics, sociology,psychology, and anthropology, as well as computer science and engineering. itwas thought that a sharing of ideas among individuals with pertinent experienceas well as openness to the benefits of interdisciplinary analysis might suggestnew ways of addressing what has proved so far to be a complex and difficultundertakingñassessing the diverse outcomes in a variety of contexts of the growing use of computing and communications technology. the results of this exploration are intended to be useful to the national science foundation in its efforts toassess the impacts of computing and communications technology, to provide examples of successful research and pose interesting questions to the research community, and to inform policy makers about the nature and utility of such research.the context for this project included recent legislation and administrationefforts (e.g., enactment of the government performance and results act, establishment of the federal accounting standards advisory board) as well as ongoing oversight activities aimed at assessing the outcomes and impacts of federalprograms, including research and development programs. it also included thenational science boardõs interest in expanding the body of science and technology indicators to include those relating to impacts on the economy and society ofinformation technologyõs use.in addition, as a result of reductions in federal regulation or elimination offederal programs, a number of conventional federal sources of data have disapfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacepeared (e.g., data on telecommunications from the federal communications commission, data on early internet use from the national science foundation in connection with its operation of the former nsfnet). one result has been to focusmore attention on what can and cannot be measured and on how different disciplines can contribute to better public understanding of the linkages among research and development, computing and communications science and technology, and the larger economy and society.cstb formed the multidisciplinary steering committee on research opportunities relating to economic and social impacts of computing and communications, which met in february 1997 to organize a workshop held on june 30 and july1, 1997 (appendix a gives the agenda and lists participants). the steering committee sought to identify topics amenable to research, especially interdisciplinary efforts calling for collaboration involving computer scientists, economists, and others. the workshop featured discussion of specific kinds of impacts along withexamination of methodological issues, availability of valid data for research, andapproaches relevant to assessing the outcomes of information technologyõs use.an objective of the workshop was to identify and stimulate thinking aboutpotential research topics, as well as to obtain perspectives on how to develop amore systematic understanding of outcomes important to public policy making.to this end, workshop participants considered possible gaps in knowledge, openresearch questions, areas where quantitative and qualitative data as well as newmethodology are needed, and areas that appear to experts to be well covered. theworkshop was also designed to illuminate how and where new research interestcould be stimulated in a range of disciplines. in addition, the steering committeeexplored how to promote and support such interdisciplinary research.to broaden the base of common understanding among the multidisciplinaryparticipants in the workshop, the steering committee requested position papersfrom participants (appendix b includes a selection of these papers) and also commissioned two background papers (presented in appendix c). these papers contributed to discussions at the workshop and to the steering committeeõs efforts tosynthesize workshop participantsõ observations on key impact areas and associated analytical challenges. in addition to meeting physically, the steering committee shared information by electronic mail and through a special world wideweb site, which it used to develop workshop and report materials.given the broad nature of the task addressed by the workshop, and in keeping with the activityõs limited budget and time frame, the steering committeeadopted the approach of selecting and developing for presentation in its report aset of important and instructive examples compiled from the research topics, issues, and research approaches discussed at the workshop, as well as in submittedposition papers. the resulting workshop report thus presents examples of important topics and fruitful approaches within several branches of social science ratherthan attempting to be comprehensive in considering the full range of possibletopics. in the report, the fields of anthropology, demography, education, andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixpolitical science are underrepresented, and the text has little to say about libraryscience, bibliometrics, or information science. omission of a number of interesting or significant topics reflects the exploratory nature of the project rather than avalue judgment on the part of the steering committee. the topics of the creationand growth of the computer industry itself, among the most obvious of the economic and social impacts of computing and telecommunications, have been excluded here because they merit a report in their own right.the bibliography suggests further reading that provides broad coverage ofmany of the issues touched on in this workshop report. many of the references,including a number of review articles, are themselves replete with pointers toother work. where possible the report includes references to significant websites addressing the impacts of computing and communications.the workshop steering committee is grateful to eileen collins, who originatedthe idea of an interdisciplinary exploration of the impacts of computing and communications, and les gasser, both of the national science foundation (nsf), fortheir support of the project and for ongoing guidance. their commitment to theimportance of interdisciplinary interaction was fundamental to the design of theworkshop. funding for the report came from both the nsf division of scienceresources studies and the nsf division of information and intelligent systems.the workshop steering committee acknowledges the contributions of theworkshop participants, both through papers written as part of workshop activitiesand during discussions at the workshop itself. the steering committee also wishesto thank the nrc staff for their assistance with the workshop and the preparationof the final report, including marjory blumenthal, paul semenza, jon eisenberg,julie c. lee, mickelle rodgers, and rita gaskins. finally, the steering committee is grateful to the reviewers for helping to sharpen and improve the reportthrough their comments. responsibility for the report remains with the workshopsteering committee.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by thenational research councilõs (nrcõs) report review committee. the purposeof this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that willassist the authors and the nrc in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the contents of the reviewcomments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of thedeliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:robert mcc. adams, university of california at san diego,michael arbib, university of southern california,anita borg, xerox palo alto research center,yale braunstein, university of california at berkeley,john s. chipman, university of minnesota,david farber, university of pennsylvania,irene greif, lotus development corporation,donna hoffman, vanderbilt university,heather hudson, university of san francisco,james morris, carnegie mellon university,milton mueller, rutgers university,jeanmichael rendu, newmont mining corporation,henry w. riecken, university of pennsylvania school of medicine (emeritus),fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.peter temin, massachusetts institute of technology,timothy van zandt, princeton university, andterry winograd, stanford university.although the individuals listed above provided many constructive comments andsuggestions, responsibility for the final content of this report rests solely with theworkshop steering committee and the nrc.xiiacknowledgment of reviewersfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiiiexecutive summary11introduction71.1growth trends, 91.1.1computing power, 91.1.2demographics of computer ownership, 101.1.3internet use, 121.1.4global connectivity, 131.2some major challenges, 141.2.1productivity and organizational change, 141.2.2information technology and wage inequality, 161.2.3design of technology and standards setting, 161.3role of social science, 182illustrative examples and unansweredquestions212.1households and community, 212.1.1computer use in the home, 222.1.2differential impacts of technology, 242.1.3community, 242.1.4education, 262.2social infrastructure: universal service, 292.3business, labor, and organizational processes, 322.3.1location: internationalization and telecommuting, 322.3.2labor and information technology, 35fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivprefacexivcontents2.3.3organizations and processes, 392.3.4social science and the workplace, 462.4information economy and society, 482.4.1protection of intellectual property, 482.4.2free speech and content, 522.4.3privacy, 532.4.4information use and value, 562.4.5pricing models and content, 602.4.6pricing information, 612.4.7network externalities, 652.4.8auctions, 662.4.9electronic commerce, 672.5illustrative broad topics for ongoing research, 723datañthe basis for new knowledge783.1types and uses of data, 783.1.1data from experiments, 793.1.2panel data, 813.1.3data from timeuse studies, 823.1.4metadata, 833.2availability of and access to data, 843.2.1data collected by the private sector, 853.2.2the need for firmlevel data, 863.2.3data collected by government, 883.3new types of data, 893.3.1documenting the effects of technology deployment, 893.3.2data on social interactions from the internet, 923.3.3the internet as a window into how commercialtransactions are conducted, 933.4time and tools for gathering and interpreting data, 933.4.1the time required to do good social science, 933.4.2appropriate subject pools and instrumentation, 953.5approaches to meeting requirements for data, 954options for fostering interdisciplinaryresearch and improving access to results1014.1encouraging interdisciplinary studies and collaboration, 1024.2funding to strengthen interdisciplinary research, 1034.3making the results of interdisciplinary researchmore accessible, 105fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexvcontentsxvbibliography106appendixesaworkshop agenda and participants127bposition papers submitted by workshopparticipants131research on information technology impactspaul attewell (graduate school and university center,city university of new york), 133what if all information were readily available to all?joseph farrell (department of economics, university of california,berkeley), 138critical issues relating to impacts of information technology: areas forfuture research and discussionalexander j. field (santa clara university), 139computermediated communicationsclaude s. fischer (department of sociology, university ofcalifornia, berkeley), 142impacts of information technology: behaviors and metricsamy friedlander (corporation for national researchinitiatives), 144five critical issues relating to impacts of information technologymichael froomkin (school of law, university of miami), 147cultural influences on the process and impacts of computerizationrob kling (center for social informatics, indiana university), 150questions for researchjeffrey k. mackiemason (department of economics,and school of information, university of michigan), 152electronic interactionspaul resnick (at&t laboratories), 156social impact of information technologyfrank stafford (university of michigan), 158the uncalming effects of digital technologymark weiser (xerox palo alto research center), 160fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ccommissioned papersinfrastructure: the utility of past as prologue?amy friedlander (corporation for national research initiatives,reston, virginia), 165computer and communication technologies: impacts on theorganization of enterprise and the establishment and maintenanceof civil societyjohn leslie king and kenneth l. kraemer(university of california, irvine), 188xvicontentsfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythere has been a revolution in computing and communications in the pastfew decades, and all indications are that technological progress and use of information technology will continue at a rapid pace. these advances present manysignificant opportunities but also pose major challenges. today, innovations ininformation technology are having wideranging effects across numerous domains of society, and policy makers, although currently lacking sufficient understanding and analysis of the consequences of their decisions, are acting on issuesinvolving economic productivity, intellectual property rights, privacy protection,and affordability of and access to information, among other concerns. choicesmade now will have longlasting consequences, and attention must be paid notonly to their technological merit, but also to their social and economic impacts.1despite the significance of these impacts for society, there has been relatively little investment in research to help understand, predict, and shape them.among the reasons for this underinvestment are the rapid emergence of thesephenomena and the difficulties in conducting the interdisciplinary work requiredto understand them. in the crosscutting arena of the information economy,research on how information technology affects organizations and economic productivity can lead to better use of the technology for the benefit of society andindividuals alike. improved knowledge of how people interact with computingand communications technology, the circumstances under which people will benefit from it, and the differential impacts that such technology has on differentcommunities can be incorporated as well into decisions affecting technologydesign and deployment.to explore possibilities for research on the impacts of information technology and ways to assess these impacts, the steering committee on researchfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2fostering research on impacts of information technologyopportunities relating to economic and social impacts of computing and communications held a 2day workshop on june 30 and july 1, 1997, involvingparticipants with expertise in economics, social sciences, and computer scienceand engineering. since this was an endeavor of limited budget and time frame,centered on discussions and interactions among participants at a single workshop,the workshop steering committee focused on identifying and developing examples of some significant research issues and concerns, rather than aiming tocover the full range of relevant topics. the content of this workshop report thusreflects suggestions made and issues raised in workshop activities and in theposition papers submitted by workshop participants.chapter 1 outlines some of the trends in the growth of computing and communications discussed at the workshop and highlights several policy areasñincluding economic productivity, wage inequality, and technology designñinwhich interdisciplinary research involving both information technologists andsocial scientists can contribute to a better understanding of the economic andsocial impacts of information technology. the value of the social science approach, which draws on systematically developed theories of human behavior incombination with sound supporting data, is contrasted with the overreliance onanecdotes, extrapolation, and sloganeering that often characterizes the writing ofpundits.chapter 2 presents examples of crosscutting research that has been conducted to understand information technologyõs influence in personal, community, and business activities and gives suggestions regarding important open research questions. incorporating examples given at the workshop and in positionpapers, it indicates some ways in which use of methodology from economics andthe social sciences might contribute to important advances, and it describes howinterdisciplinary research between social scientists and information technologyresearchers might help to improve knowledge of outcomes affecting private lifeand the household, the community, the social infrastructure, and business and theworkplace. chapter 2 concludes with a list of broad research topics offered bythe steering committee as examples of promising areas for ongoing research.social science research depends on researchers having access to enoughreliable data to establish a basis for reaching valid conclusions. chapter 3 provides a brief overview of the types of data used by social scientists in theirinvestigations and describes some of the problems encountered in data collection,management, and use. according to some workshop participants, researchersworking at the intersection of information technology and socioeconomic issuesconfront a number of challenges related to the availability of data. chapter 3concludes with some suggested approaches to meeting these challenges.based on discussions at the june 1997 workshop and on material in theposition papers submitted by its participants, the steering committee identifiedseveral options for fostering interdisciplinary research and making the results offostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3this research more accessible to the public and policy makers. chapter 4 presentsthese options.the appendixes list the workshop agenda and participants and include aselection of the position papers submitted, as well as two additional backgroundpapers commissioned for the workshop.examples of the applicability ofsocial science researchpresented at the 1997 workshop and in participantsõ position papers was anarray of examples showing applications of the results of social science research toimprove understanding of the economic and social impacts of information technology in different domains, including the following:¥private life and the householdñsocial experiments can be used to measure the impact of computerization on household membersõ behavior.¥communityñsociological studies can illustrate the differential impact oftechnology on user communities and members of organizations.¥social infrastructureñeconomic analysis and historical studies can beused to illustrate some of the policy tradeoffs involved in universal service.2¥business and laborñsocial science methods can be used to examine decisions about organizational structure.ñeconomic analysis of changes in labor markets can contribute to effective economic policy.ñhistorical studies of technological adoption of the electric motor arerelevant to current issues in computer technology.ñsociological studies of technical support communities can contribute tobetter practices within those communities.¥information economy and societyñhistorical analysis of intellectual property disputes can yield insightinto current problems in this area.ñeconomic analysis of networks can lead to greater understanding ofmarket phenomena.ñeconomic analysis of pricing can shed light on how online commercewill be conducted.illustrative broad topics for ongoing researchworkshop discussions and position papers yielded numerous suggestions forresearch topics. the list below was compiled by the steering committee as anillustrative set of promising areas for research.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4fostering research on impacts of information technology¥interdisciplinary study of information indicatorsñresearchers have recognized and begun to analyze the increasing role that information plays in allaspects of society. interdisciplinary study could help to identify and define a setof broadly accepted measures of access to, and the use and impact of, informationand information technology. composite information indicators such as aninterconnectivity index (characterizing the extent to which individuals, organizations, and businesses are linked to each other) and a marginalization index (characterizing the extent to which the benefits of information and information technology are not available to certain segments of society) could be established.¥impacts of information technology on labor market structureñto enableinformed decision making on critical policy issues such as how to respond toincreasing wage inequality (involving, for example, efforts to assess the potentialbenefits of additional investment in training), it is important to understand towhat extent and how the use of computers might affect wage distribution.¥productivity and its relationship to work practices and organizationalstructures for the use of information technologyñgains in productivity come notonly when new technology is introduced but also when new ways are found touse the technologies. compilation of work that has already been done in this areais needed. continued research also could illuminate how better to quantify theeconomic inputs and outputs associated with use of computers.¥intellectual property issuesñpolicy makers considering revisions to intellectual property law or international agreements, as well as firms evaluatingpossible approaches to protecting intellectual property, would benefit from continued theoretical and empirical research.¥social issues addressed at the protocol levelñwidespread use of theinternet has ramifications in such farreaching concerns as intellectual propertyrights, privacy protection, and data filtering. exploring how these concernsmight be addressed at the protocol levelñthrough policies, rules, and conventions for the exchange and use of informationñcould prove to be a promisingapproach to addressing complex social issues arising from the use of new computer and communications technology.approaches to meeting requirements for dataas was noted in workshop discussions and some of the position paperssubmitted by participants, approaches such as the following could contribute tomeeting the requirements for data needed to study the economic and social impacts of information technology:¥making data related to the social and economic impacts of computing andcommunications available to the research community through a clearinghouse;¥exploring ways for researchers to obtain access to privatesector data;¥increasing data collection efforts by government;fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5¥exploring the development of new multipurpose data sets by the researchcommunity;¥establishing stronger ties with industry associations to facilitate collaborative research; and¥exploring in workshop sessions uses of the internet as a source of data onsocial interactions that take into account ethical and privacy issues associatedwith data collection, archiving, and reporting.options for fostering interdisciplinary research andimproving access to the results of researchbased on discussions at the june 1997 workshop and material in participantsõ position papers, the steering committee identified several options for fostering interdisciplinary research and making the results of such research moreaccessible to the public and policy makers.¥encouraging interdisciplinary studies and collaboration between researchers in information technology and researchers in the social sciences and economics through use of the following:ñinterdisciplinary workshops to convene researchers with expertise in arange of fields to explore successful approaches to conducting research onthe impacts of information technology, as well as to foster increased collaborative work;ñinterdisciplinary curricula to help prepare students for collaborativework with researchers in other fields; andñinterdisciplinary fellowships to stimulate intellectual crossfertilizationand development of professional contacts.¥funding to strengthen interdisciplinary research through the use of thefollowing:ñevaluation of large technology system research proposals with attention to their inclusion of interdisciplinary research on behavioral, social,legal, and economic implications;ñsynergistic use of major research programs that build or deploy prototypes of computing and communications systems, so as to improve understanding of impacts and to enhance outcomes; andñcollaboration with private foundations and industry so as to leverageresources.¥making the results of interdisciplinary research more accessible throughthe use of mechanisms such as the following:ña world wide web page containing headlines and abstracts of policyrelevant social science research, pointers to the print and/or online publishedresults, and regularly updated reviews of literature summarizing the state offostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6fostering research on impacts of information technologythe art in various fields as well as directories of specialists in particular areas;andñsupplemental ways of disseminating the results of research, such as byproviding testimony at hearings held by policy makers or organizing specialized briefings for policy makers.notes1.throughout this report, the term òimpactsó is used as a shorthand expression to indicate acomplex set of multicausal, multidimensional outcomes of the use of technology. technologydoes not typically have a single impact, but rather a range of different outcomes depending onthe context or settings. for more discussion, see box 1.1 in chapter 1 and attewellõs andklingõs papers in appendix b of this volume.2.universal service is the practice of making telecommunications and information servicesñsuch as basic telephone serviceñavailable at an affordable price to all people within a specified jurisdictional area.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction771introductionit is becoming increasingly clear that the growth of computing and communications technology is exceeding our understanding of its economic and socialimpacts (box 1.1).1 the processing power of microchips is doubling every 18months. from 1989 to 1995, internet traffic doubled every 12 months, and it isnow doubling every 6 to 9 months. when plots of trends over time require alogarithmic scale on the vertical axis, something interesting must be going on!accompanying and supporting these dramatic increases in the power and use ofnew information technologies has been the declining cost of communications asa result of both technological improvements and increased competition in a sectorlong dominated by monopoly (and in other countries often stateowned) enterprises.at the same time, there has been comparatively little investment in researchto help understand how information technology has affected and will affect oursociety. the united states, and indeed the world, are facing critical policyissuesñinvolving intellectual property rights, privacy, free speech, education,and other crucial concernsñarmed with very little understanding and analysis ofthe consequences of possible choices.for several reasons, too little social science research has been done to date inthis area. certainly the phenomena associated with information technology havedeveloped rapidly in comparison with academic calendars and funding cycles. inaddition, serious investigation of a number of complex technological, economic,and social issues requires interdisciplinary work to which there are currentlymany barriers. it is rare, for example, to see economists and sociologists collaborating, much less sociologists and computer scientists. one of the reasons isfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 1.1òimpactsó and technological determinismone of the most common findings in prior studies of information technologyõs(itõs) impact has been that outcomes are far from uniform across all settings andcontexts. in earlier years we looked for the impact of it on, say, organizationalcentralization, and scholars tended to hew to one end or the other of a bipolarspectrum: centralization versus decentralization, upskilling or deskilling, job destroying versus job creating. what scholars found, in almost every case, was thatthis was an unproductive way to conceptualize the issue. one almost alwaysfound evidence of both extremes of outcomes or impacts as well as many points inbetween (see attewell and rule, 1989). we finally realized that we were askingthe wrong question. we should have asked, in what contexts does outcome atypically predominate, and in what contexts does outcome b tend to prevail, andwhen does one see a and b in equal measure?we found that a technology does not usually have an impact. the context orsetting in which the same technology is used often produces strikingly differentòimpacts.ó this phenomenon has been discussed in terms of òweb modelsó(kling), or òstructural contingency theoryó (attewell) or robeyõs òplus ca changeómodel. all imply that we fully appreciate the role of context in technology outcomes and that we therefore expend sufficient research effort to measure the context, and to delineate its interactions with the technology. if we fail to do this, wereturn to the old òblack boxó paradigm, that is, attempting to measure only the input(say, a particular software program) and the outcome (say, kidsõ test scores) without bothering with the context (the classroom, the kidsõ family backgrounds) or thecausal mechanisms.black box research on impacts often discovered òinconsistentó outcomes acrossstudies but proved unable to show why there was so much variation, because itneglected to measure the contextual variables that were moderating the effects ofthe input on the output. for example, the old paradigm would phrase a researchquestion so as to ask whether or not home pcs would improve kidsõ school performance. in contrast, research within the current contextual paradigm would ask under what conditions having pcs at home affects studentsõ school outcomes. a pieceof my own work has indicated, for example, that having a home pc currently has aminimal effect on the school performance scores of poor and minority kids but isassociated with substantial positive effects on the school performance of kids withhigh socioeconomic status (ses), when other factors are controlled for (attewell andbattle, 1997). race and class/ses, in this example, prove to be very importantcontextual features moderating the impact of home pcs on school performance.it is important to understand that because of the last three decades of researchand the importance of context as discussed above, many distinguished scholars oftechnology avoid the term òtechnology impact.ó using this term in framing thequestion would be viewed by some of them as indicating an ignorance of the bodyof scholarship in technology studies. for them, the term òimpactó connotes a kindof technological determinism that is very dated and widely discredited. personally,i am not so averse to the term òimpact,ó but i do agree with their larger point aboutavoiding models based on simple technological determinism.ñpaul attewell, òresearch on information technology impactsó(see appendix b of this volume)fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9the investment of time and energy required by both technologists and socialscientists to understand enough of an unfamiliar discipline area to enable seriousprogress in joint efforts. also, research funding agencies and programs aregenerally not organized to exploit interdisciplinary opportunities.to aid in identifying fruitful approaches to assessment of both the positiveand negative impacts of using information technologies, the national sciencefoundation asked the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb)of the national research council to gather perspectives on the problem fromexperts in several relevant disciplines, such as economics, sociology, and psychology, as well as computer science and engineering. it was thought that agathering of a group with pertinent experience as well as openness to the benefitsof interdisciplinary analysis might suggest new ways of addressing what hasproved so far to be a complex and difficult undertakingñassessing the diverseoutcomes in a variety of contexts of the growing use of computing and communications technology. the results of this exploration are intended to be useful to thenational science foundation in its efforts to assess the impacts of computing andcommunications technology, to provide examples of successful research andpose interesting questions to the research community, and to inform policy makers about the nature and utility of such research.the steering committee on research opportunities relating to economicand social impacts of computing and communications organized a workshop toexplore opportunities for research on the impacts of information technology andways to assess these impacts. since this was an endeavor of limited budget andtime frame, and to be based in large part on input received at a single workshop,the committee adopted the approach of identifying and developing some significant examples and issues, rather than performing a more comprehensive study ofthe full range of relevant topics. the content of this report reflects areas ofinterest and issues raised in the workshop and the position papers submitted byworkshop participants and subsequent work by the steering committee.this chapter illustrates the dramatic increases in computing power and thepenetration of new communications technology, and it highlights several keyareas where impacts of these trends are being felt. it concludes by discussing therole of social science in characterizing these impacts.1.1growth trends1.1.1computing powercomputers have become so affordable and ubiquitous in part because of theremarkable improvements in semiconductors. since the 1960s, semiconductorchip makers have increased the density of transistor circuits at a rate of about 10percent a year. combined with numerous other technological advances, thiscapability has led to a doubling of microprocessor power every 18 months (figfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10fostering research on impacts of information technologyure 1.1), a trend known in the computer industry as òmooreõs lawó after a 1964prediction by gordon moore, a founder of intel corporation. improvements insemiconductors and other components account for the annual 20 to 30 percentdecline in the qualityadjusted price for computers (berndt and griliches, 1993;gordon, 1990), even as the costs of other industrial equipment have been increasingsteadily (figure 1.2). at the same time, businesses and consumers have chosen toincrease their spending on computers, suggesting that they find new uses of computers worthwhile. as a result, the real quantity of computer power deployed,which reflects both increased spending and increased computer power per dollarspent, has grown tremendously over the past several decades (figure 1.3).1.1.2demographics of computer ownershipa recent survey of more than 50,000 households found that more than 40million u.s. households now own pcs 2 (computer intelligence, 1997). ownerp6p7pentium80486803868028680488085808040048008808616m1g256m64m4m1m256k64k16k4k1k1001,00010,000100,0001,000,00010,000,000100,000,0001,000,000,00010,000,000,00019701975198019851990199520002005yeartransistors/diemicroprocessordramfigure 1.1mooreõs law: the number of transistors per chip has grown exponentiallyfor several decades and is projected to continue to do so for some time to come. source:brynjolfsson and yang (1996), using data from the u.s. bureau of economic analysisand from intel corporation.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction11figure 1.2real computer prices. the price of computers has declined relative to thecosts of other types of producersõ durable equipment (pde). source: brynjolfssonand yang (1997), using data from the u.s. department of commerce.ship patterns correlate strongly with age and income. about 20 percent of households with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000, but more than 60 percent ofhouseholds with incomes of $60,000 to $75,000, have computers. some of thelargest annual gains in computer ownership were found in middleincome groups.for example, households in the $40,000 to $50,000 income group reached the 50percent level, and there was a nearly 5 percent increase in penetration in the$20,000 to $30,000 income group. almost 60 percent of households with children own a computer today.an earlier rand analysis by anderson et al. (1995) examined computerownership data from the 1993 current population survey conducted by the bureau of the census. they categorized computer ownership according to income,education, race/ethnicity, age, sex, and location of residence. this study foundthat income and educational status were associated with significant differences infostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12fostering research on impacts of information technologycomputer ownership. for example, about 7 percent of the lowestincome quartileof households had computers at home, whereas nearly 55 percent of the highestearning quartile had computers at home.3 in 1993, about 13 percent of individuals over the age of 15 who did not have a high school diploma had a homecomputer, whereas 49 percent of college graduates had a home computer.1.1.3internet usethe most reliable figure on internet use is the number of computer andnetwork domains connected directly to the internet, all of which must have apublic internet address. according to conservative estimates from a recentlyconducted internet domain survey (network wizards, 1998), the number ofinternet host computers grew from 1.313 million in january 1993 to almost 30million in january 1998.4figure 1.3 nominal and real computer investment. source: brynjolfsson and yang(1997) using data from the u.s. bureau of economic analysis.01020304050607080195519601965197019751980198519901995yearbillion dollarsreal investmentnominal investmentfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction13the number of individuals who use the internet is very difficult to measure,in part because the definition of users is somewhat fuzzy. users might be subscribers to a consumer internet service or other computer service that includes theinternet as a component, or they might be potential users with access to the internetat their workplace. matrix information and directory services (quarterman, 1997)estimated that as of january 1997 about 71 million people worldwide had access toemail. when access to information by file transfer protocol (ftp) or the worldwide web (www) was the criterion used, the figure was about 57 million peopleworldwide.project 20005 at vanderbilt university has conducted several carefully designed surveys of internet and web use. one study (hoffman et al., 1996)examined internet use by age, education, and sex using a telephone sample of3,785 respondents. it found significant differences in usage patterns across thesedemographic groups. for example, only 13.5 percent of those with a high schooldiploma or less reported using the web once or more per week, whereas nearly 56percent of those with a college degree reported weekly use. hoffman and novakõsmost recent estimates, based on nielson media researchõs spring 1997 internetdemographic study, showed that 45 million people in the united states 16 yearsof age and older, or about 22 percent of the population, had accessed the web atleast once (hoffman et al., 1997a).another study (commercenet/nielsen media research, 1997), in which 9,000people were interviewed, estimated that 58 million adults in the united states andcanada used the internet on a regular basis. more than half of the respondents saidthat they had been online within 24 hours of the interview.although email appears to be the most widely used internet service, theworld wide web is one of the fastest growing services. a baruch collegeharris poll (1997) survey of 1,000 u.s. households conducted in the spring of1997 indicated that the number of adult web users had nearly doubledñto 40million people, or 21 percent of adultsñfrom the previous year. about a quarterof these were people in their forties.according to matrix information and directory services (quarterman, 1997),about 36 million individuals worldwide have the technical capability to distributeor publish information via ftp or www. the netcraft web server surveyfound 525,915 publicly accessible web servers in an exhaustive search in november 1996; by december 1997 the number had risen to more than 1.6 million(netcraft, 1996, 1997).1.1.4global connectivityaccording to a study by the international data corporation, the surge ininternet use is a global phenomenon (international data corporation, 1997a).the study estimated a worldwide total of 91 million users as of november 1997,fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14fostering research on impacts of information technologywith 14 million users in the asia/pacific region, 20 million in europe, and around1 million in both africa and south america.1.2some major challengesthe studies cited above are, of course, based on particular samples andresearch methodologies; it is hard to appraise their accuracy without more detailed investigation. moreover, among the variables that make measurementdifficult and contribute to inconsistent results are disparate definitions of òuseóand òaccess.ó however, these studies clearly indicate that computer and internetgrowth is a significant, widespread, and global phenomenon. although use ofinformation technology is most prevalent among businesses and highly educated,highincome, north american households, all demographic groups in the developed world show a pattern of significantly increasing use.a phenomenon this ubiquitous and growing this rapidly is clearly important.as the three examples below illustrate, social science research can help policymakers and others to better understand and shape the interactions between technology and society.1.2.1productivity and organizational changein the long run productivity is the primary determinant of our standard ofliving and the economic resources available to address societal challenges andproblems. understanding whether and how computers affect economic productivity is a critical issue for policy makers as well as business leaders. in 1987, theeconomist robert solow quipped, òwe see the computer age everywhere exceptin the productivity statisticsó (solow, 1987). solowõs comment reflects the factthat, despite the tremendous advances in computer power and affordability shownin figures 1.1 to 1.3, the aggregate statistics suggest that economic productivityhas grown more slowly since about 1973 than it did in the period from 1950 to1973.there are many possible explanations for the apparent slowdown in productivity despite the advances made possible by computerization.6 analysis is complicated by the fact that many of the benefits of the computer age are not reflectedin the official statistics on output and productivity. managers typically citeimproved quality, variety, timeliness, and customer service as important reasonsfor their investments in computers, yet these aspects of output go largely unmeasured.7 furthermore, the growth of productivity in the service sector is difficultif not impossible to measure. zvi griliches, for example, has estimated that theòunmeasurableó sectors of the economy grew from 53 percent of the total in 1948to about 74 percent in 1994 (griliches, 1994). ironically, there is apparently lessinformation in the information age about the value of output than there was in thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction15industrial era. new and better metrics clearly are needed to help in understanding how productivity in the information age should be gauged and evaluated.8another aspect of the productivity paradox may be unrealistically high expectations about the potential of computers to affect output. investment in computerization is still a relatively small share of the total economy, and so thepossible impact of computerization on the whole may be limited. based on thequantity of computer power purchased each year, it is possible to calculate theexpected contribution computers òshouldó be making to economic growth underthe assumption that capital investment in computers is earning a ònormaló rate ofreturn. various researchers have undertaken such an exercise, and the estimatescluster around 0.3 to 4 percent of additional growth in the economy owing totechnological advances in computers each year.9 perhaps, then, the measuredslowdown in productivity would have been even more pronounced had it notbeen for the contributions made by computers.a constant stream of new discoveries and advances is required just to keepproductivity growth from falling to zero, and part of the promise of computers istheir ability to engender such new discoveries. in earlier decades, growth inproductivity was the result of innovations such as electricity, automobiles, theradio, jet engines, plastics, and even corrugated cardboard (denison, 1985). today, new products and services, innovative business processes and organizationalforms, and even new industries can be traced to advances in information technology. moreover, like earlier generalpurpose technologies such as the steam engine and electricity, computers have changed the nature of work in myriad minorand major ways, thus magnifying their economic and social impact.david (1989, 1990) found that the electrification of factories had its greatesteffect after factories had been radically reorganized (see section 2.3.3 for moredetails). similarly, case studies suggest that realizing the full benefit of computertechnologies also often requires a significant rethinking of how business works.as a result, the ways in which computers are used may be more important thanthe quantity of investment. in one instance, a large medical products manufacturer found that effective use of computerization required changes in two dozenwork practices and policies, including those related to inventory, incentive systems, worker training, job responsibilities, and hiring criteria. initially, productivity fell because the new system did not work smoothly. however, by focusingon the interactions among the work practices, the company was able eventually toreap substantial rewards from use of the technology (brynjolfsson et al., 1997).understanding exactly which work policies and practices need to be changedand which changes are most important in various contextsñfor example, whatfrequency and amount of training are required for workers to adapt to new technologiesñare critical research issues. collection of further case studies can help,but there is a particular need for analysis leading to broader insights that can begeneralized across numerous companies and situations. here again, lack of goodfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16fostering research on impacts of information technologydata on how businesses are changing has hampered progress. section 2.3.3,òorganizations and processes,ó discusses these issues in more detail.1.2.2information technology and wage inequalityfor more than 20 years, the gap separating highwage earners from lowwage earners has continued to increase in the united states. for example, theratio of the wages earned by males at the 75th percentile of the distribution tothose at the 25th percentile has grown from 1.75 to 1 in the 1970s to 2.25 to 1 inthe early 1990s, and the wages of those at the more extreme percentiles havemoved farther from the median (murphy and welch, 1993). by some measures,the poorest members of society are worse off than they were a generation ago.most economists attribute much of the increase in inequality to an increase in thedemand for skilled labor and also link that shift in demand to technical change.for example, autor et al. (1997) showed that the increase in inequality waslargest in those industries that were the heaviest users of information technology.however, it remains unclear how use of it changes labor markets. thus, it isdifficult to predict whether the growth in wage inequality will continue and whatpolicy makers can do about it. is the growth of inequality a temporary phenomenon that will correct itself?should society invest more heavily in education to dampen the negative effects oftechnological change? what is the role of corporate reorganization in changingthe demand for different types of workers? these are some of the importantquestions that can be addressed only by further research on the economic andsocial impacts of computing and communications. section 2.3.2, òlabor andinformation technology,ó discusses this subject in more detail.1.2.3design of technology and standards settingsocial science has much to contribute to the design of appropriate technology. today the question facing many technologists is not, how do we do it? but,what should we do? as determinants of technology development, design issuesinvolving humancomputer interfaces (see box 1.2), pricing and òversioningó(the provision of different qualities or versions of a good that sell at differentprices), evaluation, and product life cycles have become more important than thetraditional engineering concerns. social scientists can help to design the questionnaires, marketing studies, pricing policies, and interfaces necessary to develop successful information technology.standards development is another aspect of technology design in whichsocial science can play a very useful role. technical standards are the basis forinterconnection and communication among information technology systems.however, an important aspect of standards is that once adopted, they can be verydifficult to change because of their highly distributed nature and the consequentfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction17need for broadrange, costly alternations of user behavior and infrastructure. forexample, technical standards developed and adopted now for electronic paymentñsuch as the proposed secure transactions (set) standard for credit cardtransactions over the internetñmay be in use for some time, and careful thoughtshould be given to their implications.thus far, information technology standards setting has been successful in nothindering the dramatic growth just described. however, technical standards areplaying an increasing role in policy considerations, and some current issues rebox 1.2humancomputer interface designas a result of technology advances, interface designers can now attempt tomake humancomputer interfaces more personable by incorporating humanlikeattributes such as speech or representations of human faces using pictures, simulations, or animation. when technologists introduce humanlike attributes into interfaces, they change the userõs experience from one of humanmachine interaction to one that approximates some features of human social interaction. eventhough such interfaces only partially represent human attributes and clearly arenot òreal,ó users still respond somewhat as though they were interacting with aperson rather than a machine.social science research has explored how people react to more humanlikeinterfaces. for example, clifford nass and his colleagues demonstrated that whenpeople interacted with computers that had humanlike attributes, they applied suchrules as òbe polite when delivering evaluationsó and òpraise of others is moreaccurate than praise of selfó when they assessed computer software (nass et al.,1994).lee sproull and her colleagues demonstrated that people made their own behavior more social when they interacted with humanlike interface agents. forexample, people reported that they were more altruistic when they answered standard personalitytest questions asked by a talking face displayed on a screen thanwhen they answered the same questions displayed in a text window (sproull et al.,1996).in neither case did the researchers ask the conventional questions about easeof use: was the audio easy to hear and understand? were the visual images sharpand clear? were the instructions easy to understand? instead the researchersasked, did users respond to these computer programs in ways reminiscent ofways they would respond to a human being?trying to introduce human attributes into interfaces is not necessarily the rightapproach.1 however, if technologists do attempt to make computer interfacesmore humanlike, then social scientists can use theories of social interaction tohelp technologists understand and predict how people will react to these interfaces, thus increasing the acceptance and utility of the computing technology.1a recent computer science and telecommunications board report (cstb, 1997b) discusses promisingresearch in interface design.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18fostering research on impacts of information technologyquire the development of standards that address social, legal, and policy concerns. see sections 2.4.1, òprotection of intellectual property,ó 2.4.3, òprivacy,óand 2.4.9, òelectronic commerce,ó for further discussion.1.3role of social sciencethere is no shortage of pundits who will forecast the future of the information society. much of their writing is based on extrapolation or slogans, neitherof which is an effective guide to crafting public policy and designing technology.one month everyone is talking about òinformation ôhavesõ and ôhavenotsõó; thenext month it is òagentbased commerce.ó rarely do articles in the mass mediarefer to social science research, such as studies of differential access to computersor economic studies of a variety of mechanisms for automated trading, that wouldbe highly relevant to these issues.for the purposes of this report, the core social sciences are taken to beanthropology, economics, history,10 political science, sociology, and social psychology. closely allied are the fields of demography, information science, law,and organizational studiesñareas that have a significant social science component and are also highly relevant to research on the impacts of information technology. these disciplines use dramatically different methods. economics, forexample, is highly quantitative, whereas anthropology and history are typicallymuch more descriptive.an advantage offered by social science is that it can help technologists andpolicy makers to understand how people and social institutions behave in response to current technology developments and what the effects of particularchanges might be. changes might be introduced at the microlevel, for example,by technologists who make computer interfaces more personable, or at themacrolevel, for example, by policy makers who put in place new intellectualproperty protection frameworks. at either end of and along the entire continuum,social science data and theory can help decision makers make betterinformeddecisions.the collection of reliable datañsuch as data on the penetration or use of aparticular technologyñis an endeavor in which the methodology of social science can make an important contribution. for example, as noted in section 1.1.3,measurement of how many people use the internet is complicated by the currentlack of widely accepted, precise definitions of òuse.ó defining terms appropriately and precisely is basic to social science methodology, as are assessing thereliability of survey data and increasing the reliability by using particular techniques for sampling, increasing response rates, and assessing the impact of missing data.the technologyrelated work that has been done by social scientists is notwidely known either to policy makers or to technology designers in part becauseit is published in academic journals, which are relatively inaccessible, and disfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19seminated only to a relatively small audience. the world wide web may allowsuch studies to become more accessible. however, the typical problem is not ingaining access to scholarly journals and other such sources of pertinent studies,but rather in knowing what to search for. also, scholarly work is often inaccessible to the lay reader.much of the data on the computer and communications industry comes frommarket research firms whose data complements that generated by social scientists. both types of data are necessary, and both are worthwhile. one distinctionis that the commercial sources make money by selling their data; nobody makesmoney directly from social science data. but the primary distinction is that socialscientists do not simply count things. when they count (to answer how much,how many, how frequently), a theoretical context, involving systematic theoriesof human behavior, motivates the counts. thus, for example, a sociologist interested in electronic group dynamics might ask about the relationship betweenunpleasant events in the group and a decline in group membership. she mightcount the frequency of òflamesó (hostile messages) or òspamsó (electronic junkmail) or flames about spams, or how much time people spend deleting flames andspams from their mailboxes, as indicators of unpleasant events. in assessing howthose numbers correlate with changes in the size of group membership, the goal isnot to count, but rather to understand how the frequency of one kind of behavioraffects the dynamics of a social institution. such understanding enables morereliable forecasts and more trustworthy inferences about causal relationships.the value of social science research comes not from tracking the frequencyof use of the latest technologies but rather from helping to develop commonsocial and economic principles that can be applied to new circumstances. thosedesigning or relying on technology and those making policy decisions about theuse of technology without reference to systematic theories of human behavior oreconomics will likely find themselves approaching each new issue in ignorance.given the rapid pace of technological change, this approach has both economicand social costs.in summary, the ongoing computing and communications revolution requires serious social science investigation. such work would be valuable for bothsocial policy and technology design. many choices being made now will becostly or difficult to modify in the future. to help answer the challenges introduced above, new areas of research, improved collection of data, and new collaborations are called for. the chapters that follow examine these issues.notes1.throughout this report, the term òimpactsó is used as a shorthand expression to indicate acomplex set of multicausal, multidimensional technology outcomes. technology does nottypically have a single impact, but rather a range of different outcomes depending on thecontext or settings. for more discussion, see box 1.1 as well as attewellõs and klingõs papersin appendix b of this volume.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20fostering research on impacts of information technology2.the computer technology index survey used a sample designed to be representative of allu.s. households and had a 66 percent response rate.3.evidence is emerging that the advent of pcs priced below $1,000 is allowing lowerincomehouseholds to enter the market for personal computers (hoffman and novak, 1998).4.network wizards changed the method used to collect data starting with the january 1998survey and cautioned that care is required in comparing figures derived by using the old andnew methods. the extent of growth is unmistakable, however. the last survey conducted withthe old method found nearly 20 million hosts in july 1997ñwhich would correspond to roughly26 million hosts if the new survey method had been used. see network wizards (1998) for adiscussion of this issue.5.project 2000 publications are available online at <http://www2000.ogsm.vandervilt.edu/>.6.to some, the slowdown in the growth of officially measured productivity seems at odds withthe many examples of how computerization has contributed to advances in the past two decades.automatic teller machines enable banks to handle millions of transactions at all hours of the dayand in numerous locations, a capability made possible by computer networking. volumes oftransactions are handled that would be inconceivable without computers. in addition, manymodern manufacturers operate with a fraction of the labor previously required while handling fargreater product variety. retailing, medicine, transportation and logistics, communications, andvirtually every other industry are in the midst of a computerenabled transformation.7.citing unmeasured improvements in these and other areas, the boskin commission recentlyestimated that the consumer price index overestimates inflation by approximately 1 percent(advisory commission to study the consumer price index, 1996). this implies that growth inproductivity has been underestimated by a comparable amount.8.one tack that several researchers have recently taken is to rely on firmlevel data instead ofnational or industrylevel data. for instance, brynjolfsson and hitt (1996, 1997) and lichtenberg(1995) have found that there is, in fact, a strong positive correlation between it use and productivity at the firm level. see also cstb (1994a).9.see, for instance, brynjolfsson (1996a,b), oliner and sichel (1994), jorgenson and stiroh(1995), and lau and tokutsu (1992).10.although history is not usually classified as a social science, historical analysis can play avaluable role closely allied to that of the social sciences in helping to characterize the impactsof computing and communications.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions21212illustrative examples andunanswered questionsthis chapter discusses a selection of social science studies that have provided useful insights for understanding the impacts of computing and communications and shaping public policy. the aim is to give a flavor of the resultsproduced by earlier studies and to introduce some areas viewed as especiallypromising for future research, including points raised and issues discussed at thejune 1997 workshop and in position papers submitted by the participants. it isnot intended to be comprehensive; the points and issues discussed illustrate therange and value of social science research and provide a basis for framing important research questions. the chapter concludes with an illustrative set of broadtopics for ongoing research drawn from the discussion presented below.since the range of potential impacts associated with information technologyis vast, the examples and issues outlined below are organized according to thedomains in which they are extraordinarily important: private life, includinghouseholds and community; social infrastructure; and business, including laborand organizational process. cutting across all of these are issues integral to life inan information economy and societyñamong them protection of intellectualproperty, pricing of information, and electronic commerce. another significantimpact of computing and communications is the changing boundaries betweenthese domainsñbetween people and organizations, organizations and nations,and the private and public sectors.2.1households and communityamericans are rushing to furnish their homes with a host of devices forsending, receiving, and processing huge quantities of information through difostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22fostering research on impacts of information technologyfigure 2.1penetration of various household devices in the u.s. market over the 20thcentury. source: data from belinfante (1991), electronic industries association (19841990, 1992), television bureau of advertising (1991), and u.s. bureau of the census(1986, 19901992).verse media across multitudes of channels. figure 2.1 shows trends in acquisition of devices such as personal computers compared with ownership of twoconsumer staplesñrefrigerators and automobiles. if one could lift the roof fromthe characteristic u.s. home, one would see that it looks increasingly like amultiplex theater. what once took place in the town square, in the neighborhoodtavern, on market day, or in the library can now occur as easily in the study or inthe bedroom. computers and advanced communications are also playing increasingly significant roles in community organizations and in education.2.1.1computer use in the homecomputer use in the home is a relatively recent phenomenon, and one thathas changed considerably in the past two decades. at first, a majority of use wasworkrelated. today computers are more accepted as a household technology,with an increasing amount of software and other development targeted to thehome. (for further discussion and a model for the interaction of the householdand technology, see venkatesh, 1996.)descriptive studies of computer use in the home are relatively rare andalmost always very òthin,ó that is, based on a small number of survey questions.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions23more intensive and extensive study of computer use in the home is required tounderstand what people use the computer for; how computer use substitutes forother activities; and how it affects family dynamics, childrenõs educationalperformance, adultsõ employment activities, and so forth. but even the bestdescriptive studies inevitably confound household computer use and its effectswith effects stemming from household income and educational status. households with greater resources are much more likely to have and use computers,and they are likely to use them in different ways. in this situation it is difficultto understand how much of any described effect is due to the technology andhow much is due to ancillary resources the household brings to bear on suchchallenges as understanding how to use software, troubleshoot technical problems, select software for children, and incorporate computers into family activities. a good way to untangle the effects of technology from the effects ofother household resources such as income and education is to conduct fieldexperiments in which households are given current technology and welldesigned training and support to compensate at least in part for limited incomeand educational resources.the homenet project (kraut et al., 1996; kiesler et al., 1997), organized bysocial scientists at carnegie mellon university, is a field experiment documenting the use and effects of household computers in more than 100 households inpittsburgh, pennsylvania. families were selected for demographic diversity, anda matched sample of eligible but notselected families was also tracked. eachselected family was given a computer, modem, extra telephone line, full internetaccounts for each family member above age 8 who wanted one, software, training, online support, and access to an evening telephone help desk. in exchangefor receiving technology and technical support, families agreed to participate in avariety of data collection efforts, including surveys, home interviews, and automated logging of software use.data collection and analysis are still under way, but the researchers havealready been able to document important findings:¥even with hardware and software designed for ease of use, personal training, and personal support, people found the technology hard to understand anduse. significantly, many of those who stopped (or never started) use blamedthemselves rather than the technology for their problems. generational effectspersist even when both older and younger generations have the same access to thesame technology. people in the household under the age of 19 use the computermore than people older than 19.¥use of electronic mail is better than use of the web as a predictor of lateremail and web use.¥household income and educational levels are not valid as predictors ofinternet use when all the people compared have adequate technology and support.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24fostering research on impacts of information technology2.1.2differential impacts of technologyit is rhetorically convenient to talk as though technology is used by everyonein the same way and affects everyone similarly, regardless of their life circumstances. thus, such generalizations as òemail flattens organizational hierarchiesó or òpeople who spend time online reduce their facetoface interactionó arecommon.historians of earlier technologies such as the telephone have noted thatpeople use the same technology differently and that it has different effects, depending on a personõs age, gender, income level, geographic location, and othercircumstances (see, e.g., fischer, 1992; mueller and schement, 1996).numerous researchers have reached the same conclusion about computers.attewell and battle (1997) showed that equivalent technological capability inhomes is associated with higher school test scores when family income is higher.the homenet study (kraut et al., 1996; kiesler et al., 1997; described above insection 2.1.1) demonstrates that the same technology in the home is used differently by males and females, and also by teenagers and adults. a rand study ofretirees (bikson et al., 1991) showed that the same technology is used differentlyby recent retirees and sameage counterparts who have continued to work. section 2.3.4 gives examples of the differential impact of email use in scientificcommunities.an important related question is understanding why some people who madeuse of the internet at some time then stopped using it. demographic studies of thepopulations of network users and nonusers are required. the developing population of people who experimented with internet use but did not become longtermusers deserves analysis. one study of this topic, using nielson data from morethan 14,000 households, discovered that internet òdropoutsó were less likelythan those who continue using the internet to have developed social relationshipsand roles online (chung, 1998).research on differential impacts holds a very important message to those,such as policy makers and others, wishing to understand the interactions betweentechnology and society as a single, uniform impact: they will forever be disappointed or deluded. it is vital to recognize that the òsameó technology hasdifferent effects in different social and organizational circumstances. indeed, oneof the most important contributions that social science research can make is inexploring how social and organizational conditionsñsuch as income, age, sex, orwork statusñaffect and are affected by how technology is used.2.1.3communitythe internet offers a new locus for communication and participation. according to a business week/harris poll released april 28, 1997, of the 89 percentof those surveyed who used email, nearly onethird considered themselves partfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions25of an online community. fortytwo percent of those involved in an online community said that it was related to their profession, 35 percent said that their communitywas a social group, and 18 percent said that it revolved around a hobby.the shift away from traditional notions of public space may threaten olderforms of community. polls show, for example, that more new jerseyans knowthe names of the mayors of new york and philadelphia than know the names ofthe mayors in their own towns. although regions vary, this decline in localismseems to be a characteristic of the u.s. political landscape. large media networkscollect audiences by concentrating on stories that appeal to large blocks of viewers and readers. thus suburban and rural citizens are quite likely to recognize thename of a city official for whom they cannot in fact vote. individuals whocommute to distant workplaces and whose personal networks are spread geographically are further disconnected. the possibility that localism may becomeincreasingly irrelevant to increasing numbers of americans signals social andpolitical change of a profound nature. for as long as community has remainedintact, for example, libraries and churches and schools have functioned to bringpeople together, to educate newcomers, and to reinforce the virtues of citizenship.today the number of potential secondary anonymous relationships has increased vastly as individuals seek to accomplish tasks by relying on mediatedinformation received from strangers. homecentered, individualistic, informationheavy approaches to carrying out their personal and professional lives offerpeople opportunities to bypass both the traditional community and the publicsphere.hard evidence on the issue of localism and engagement with the communityis very mixed. for example, americans today change homes and communities atabout half the rate that they did in the mid19th century, and even less than theydid in the 1950s. it is possible to argue that people are less involved on a dailybasis with their neighborsñand more with people elsewhereñthan they were acentury ago, but the degree of that change is as yet unestimated. such changemay also be a result of other phenomena in the early 20th centuryñrural to urbanmigration, the streetcar in cities, and the automobile in rural areasñrather thannew communications.in a sense, the questions first raised by the university of chicago school ofsociology (e.g., park, 1916, 1955) in the early part of this century persist in theirrelevance: how does community form out of the ferment of diverse culturalexperiences? how does democracy emerge from the diverse cultural experiencesof immigrants? at the end of the 20th century such questions are still beingasked; but whereas the chicago school focused on the role of the newspaper as anagent for assimilation and teaching democracy, the question today is under whatconditions new information technology and media will bring americans togetheror pull them apart. box 2.1 illustrates some interesting areas meriting furtherexploration.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 2.1community in the information ageinterface between the household and the community. how does the transformation of household functions enabled by information technologies alter an individualõs expectations of community?political values. does identification with networked communities affect americansõ construction of democratic participation, responsibilities, and obligations?will americans devalue political values associated with geographic community asthey integrate into networked communities?virtual communities. are they communities? in what ways do people enact therights and responsibilities of citizenship in virtual communities?networked communities and the elderly. to what extent does participation innetworked communities enrich the lives of the elderly and/or contribute to alienation from geographic communities?families. does internet use by families contribute to the establishment and maintenance of family networks? how fragile are these networks?friendship. does making friends in cyberspace enrich or fragment emotionallife? does dependence on cyber friends result in lower motivation to developfriendships with those close by?computer networks as social networks. how social are computer networks?what needs do they meet or fail to meet?2.1.4educationincreased use of computing technologies in k12 education is giving rise toimportant new areas for social science research. the internet has penetratedrapidly and extensively into u.s. public schools. a u.s. department of education survey found that as of fall 1996, 65 percent of schools had access to theinternet; penetration had increased by 15 percentage points in each of the prior 2years (heaviside et al., 1997). the office of technology assessment (ota)estimated that in 1995, u.s. schools had 5.8 million computers for use in instructionñabout one for every nine students (office of technology assessment,1995).however, the presence of computers for instruction does not necessarilytranslate into student use of computers for instruction. the ota reported thatdespite the presence of close to 6 million computers for instruction in the nationõsschools (in 1995; presumably there are more now) students spent only about 2fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions27hours a week using them. like factories at the introduction of the electric dynamo or business at the introduction of computing technology, schools and teachers may not yet have learned how to modify work practices and organizationalstructures to take advantage of computing and communications technology.schools have in general not found it easy to use technologies effectively forimproving teaching and learning.1 nevertheless it is important for policy makers,educators, and parents to understand what could be accomplished with computing technology in schools under optimal conditions.although a variety of proposals have been advanced to increase the availability of computers and internet connectivity, and substantial investment madein purchasing technology, relatively little attention has been paid to how they willbe used once they are in place. because of the decentralized nature of u.s.education, it is difficult to understand for the nation as a whole the breadth anddepth of change in educational practice and outcomes associated with the increasing presence of computing and communications technology in schools and classrooms. while many state departments of education and local districts are implementing new programs with a technology component, efforts to design andemploy measures of effectiveness that would allow policy makers and parents tocompare across projects are generally lacking.a recent report of the presidentõs committee of advisors on science andtechnology, panel on educational technology, stresses the importance of experimental research in exploring what educational approaches are most effective(pcast, 1997; see box 2.2). the report notes that research on educationaltechnology has received minimal funding relative to total national spending onk12 education, and it urges increased investment. one of the major researchcategories proposed is the need for rigorous empirical study of which approachesto using information technology in schools are most effective.the starting point for empirical study is descriptive inventories of projectswith comparable measures of effectiveness, which would provide an exceptionally useful knowledge base. such a study can take advantage of natural variationacross states and school districts and would not require active intervention.2this mapping of the range of endeavors under way would lay the foundationfor the second phase, a more intensive study of how best to use computers ineducation. it would be worth considering how to organize, fund, and research asmall number of schools as demonstration sites where work practices and organizational structures are radically redesigned to improve teaching and learningthrough technology. to achieve a fair demonstration, schools would have to bepaired with a second set of schools matched according to student and staff demographics and capabilities. the second set would receive economic resourcescomparable to those of the first set that they could deploy in a range of otherways. although natural variation among schools would be sufficient for thedescriptive phase, this active intervention is required for the second phase inorder to derive useful conclusions in the short run.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28fostering research on impacts of information technologythe politics and economics of designing and running such demonstrationstudies would be enormously complex and contentious. yet, currently, schooldistricts and teachers are making decisions about how to allocate resources ofboth money and time for technologyrelated efforts, without the benefit of goodinformation about the potential consequences of their decisions. a series ofdiscussions is called for that would involve both the public sector and the privatesectorñand would include educators, parents, technologists, and researchersñinexploring the feasibility and usefulness of such demonstration projects.a significant opportunity to study the use of information technology in thepublic schools is presented by the schools and libraries universal service fund,which was established as part of the telecommunications act of 1996. withfunding of up to $2.25 billion per year, the program will provide discounts ontelecommunications services, internet access, and networking, with the largestdiscounts going to rural and innercity communities. by enabling a large numberof schools to acquire new technology, this program in effect creates a largescaleòlaboratoryó where the sorts of research described above could be conducted.box 2.2research recommendations of the presidentõs committee ofadvisors on science and technology,panel on educational technology1. basic research in various learningrelated disciplines (including cognitiveand developmental psychology, neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and the interdisciplinary field of cognitive science) and fundamental work on various educationally relevant technologies (encompassing in particular various subdisciplines ofthe field of computer science).2.earlystage research aimed at developing innovative approaches to the application of technology in education which are unlikely to originate from within theprivate sector, but which could result in the development of new forms of educational software, content, and technologyenabled pedagogy, not only in scienceand mathematics (which have thus far received the most attention), but in thelanguage arts, social studies, creative arts, and other content areas.3. rigorous, wellcontrolled, peerreviewed, largescale (and at least for somestudies, longterm), broadly applicable empirical studies designed to determine notwhether computers can be effectively used within the school, but rather whichapproaches to the use of technology are in fact most effective and costeffective inpractice.source: reprinted from pcast (1997), p. 53.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions292.2social infrastructure: universal serviceformulating public policy on aspects of social infrastructure such as universal access to telephony and other communications services requires decisionmaking about how large amounts of money are allocated and how broad segments of society are served. although the debate about such questions may oftentake on a political cast, both empirical research and the application of socialscience theory offer much to help guide public policy making and the investmentof public resources.since the value of a networkñsuch as the public telephone network or theinternetñdepends on the total number of people connected to it (a phenomenonknown as ònetwork externalitiesó), it is often argued that access to networksshould be universally provided. universal service has long been part of u.s.telecommunications policy, and there are those who argue that universal serviceis an appropriate public policy goal for internet access (see, for example, anderson et al., 1995).3whether or not one agrees that universal service for networks is an appropriate objective of public policy, it is worth pointing out that the historical evidencesuggests that there would be widespread popular support for applying universalservice policies to new networks made possible by advances in technology. historically, in several instances, the political demand for universal service hasrepeatedly induced congress to ensure universal service at uniform rates.for example, a postal service available to all was established by the constitution. initially (in 1792), postal rates for a firstclass letter depended on thedistance it was to be carried: 6 cents for fewer than 30 miles, 8 cents for 31 to 60miles, and so on through nine rate classes to the highest rate of 25 cents for morethan 450 miles. in 1845 the rate structure was collapsed to only two categories,5 cents for not more than 300 miles, and 10 cents for more than 300 miles. in1863 a uniform rate (3 cents) regardless of distance and free intracity deliverywere established (u.s. bureau of the census, 1975). rural free delivery began in1896. subsidized parcel post became effective in 1913, effectively connectingrural residents to the advantages of city department stores through mailorderhouses like searsroebuck and montgomery ward. a premium for airmail delivery was dropped in 1978.for services provided by private businesses, government regulation was often used to ensure universal service and nondiscriminatory rate structures. railroad rates were regulated by the interstate commerce commission (icc) beginning in 1887. interstate telephone rates were regulated by the icc and later thefederal communications commission beginning in 1919. intrastate telephonecalls were made subject to state regulatory authority. telephone companies wererequired to charge a uniform fee for service connection. cable television ratesand access have also been regulated.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30fostering research on impacts of information technologygovernment ownership, government subsidies and loans, and direct government programs have been used to ensure universal network services. land grantsand other government assistance brought railroads to every city in the country.the rural electrification administration was established in 1935 to extend electrical service to areas where high construction costs and low population densityhad made private service unprofitable. the federal highway program and laterthe federal interstate highway system connected every congressional district tothe national transportation network.education can also be thought of as a good with substantial network externalities. in the united states, elementary education has been provided universally (and compulsorily after the 1880s), and secondary education has been provided universally since the mid1940s. college education has been subsidized bythe state and federal governments since the land grant universities were established shortly after the civil war. increasing fractions of the population havebenefited from governmentsubsidized higher education. special programs havebeen introduced to assist the children from low and middleincome families topay the cost of college.two points about these government efforts to foster or mandate universalityfor network goods need to be stressed. first, all of these congressional and stateefforts were designed to accomplish (as much as possible) universal geographicconnectivity. thus letters with 32cent stamps are delivered to remote sites in thealaskan north, in mountainous wilderness, and on small, but inhabited, islands.even hawaii has an interstate highway! rural residents received telephone andelectrical service just as their city cousins did. second, the principle of universality was to extend to people in all income classes, rich and poor alike. this hasoften gone beyond establishing uniform rates for service to the creation of subsidized òlifelineó rates for basic service at prices presumably available to even thepoorest families.the political logic behind these moves is threefold. first, they have beendefended as required by the principle of democracy. individuals cannot effectively participate in the democratic process if they do not have equal and unrestricted access to the main methods of communication and transportation. thusas increasing fractions of the population become connected to a network, thoseleft unconnected become an increasing burden on the democratic principle, andthe cost of subsidizing their inclusion becomes smaller and smaller. sooner orlater the political calculus tips the balance toward a policy of guaranteeing universal service. the second principle that has been applied is the desirability ofequal opportunity. as economic development proceeded, both highincome occupations and lowcost access to the most diverse array of consumer goods beingproduced became concentrated in the urban areas. federal action was seen to berequired to keep rural americans abreast of these advances. farmers, too, it wasargued, should share in the opportunities and wealth created by the new technologies. the third argument used to defend special programs for the poor was thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions31argument that connection to a network was essential or at least very helpful forselfadvancement. basic education is necessary to become employable. moreeducation is probably better. basic telephone and electrical service is probablynecessary to hold a good job and to seek out better opportunities. the politicalfear is that unless government redistributive actions are taken to include the poorin the network, their lack of connectivity will doom them and their children topermanent poverty.although it is certainly true that widespread availability may increase thevalue of a network, it is not necessarily the case that such access will occur onlywith government provision or subsidies. after all, many goods with networkexternalities are provided by the private sector, including our fax machines, videoplayer/cassette market, and so on. indeed, only a couple of years after the anderson et al. (1995) report, forprofit firms such as hotmail4 began offering free email, supported by advertising.basic telephone service has long been regarded as a social good that requireda deliberate policy effort to achieve universal access. however, a close readingof history suggests another possible conclusion. according to mueller (1997),penetration of basic telephone service could easily be comparable to todayõsrates, even if there had been no policies of subsidized access. various commentsto the fcc in its recent docket on universal service reform indicated that thecurrent structure of pricing in telephony is costing the united states billions ofdollars, with very little impact on penetration rates for basic telephone service.these deadweight losses arise because the prices of services such as longdistance calling, for which demand is sensitive to price, are set well above cost, andthe prices of priceinsensitive services, such as basic service, are often belowcost, in direct violation of the economic principles of efficient pricing to coverjoint and common costs (òramsey pricingó; see kahn, 1970).advocates of universal service for the internet or telephony typically maketheir case on grounds of geography or of income. one can well see why interested parties might argue for geographic subsidization: economic theory suggests that most of the benefits of providing services to isolated areas will becaptured by those who own land in those areas. land with electricity, telephone,and road service is certainly more valuable than land with none of these features,and it is, of course, appealing to those who own the land to have someone else payfor such improvements.geographical concerns also flow from the interest in social and economicdevelopment in rural areas. this was a past concern in the united states fortelephony, and it remains an issue for expansion of new broadband services torural areas. rural access to even basic telephony remains a major issue in manydeveloping countries. whether crosssubsidies are the appropriate means to fundthe expansion of rural telecommunications services is an area of ongoing publicpolicy debate.with respect to income arguments for universal service subsidies, it is alsofostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32fostering research on impacts of information technologyimportant to understand clearly that cost may not be the only reason that the poor donot have access to goods such as telephone service. mueller and schement (1996)found that a higher fraction of households below the poverty line in camden, newjersey, had cable tv service than had telephones. the most important reason forpeople choosing not to have telephones was that their friends and relatives wouldmake longdistance calls and leave them liable for paying the bill. according tothis study, the monthly charge for basic access was not a significant factor in theirchoice of whether or not to purchase telephone service.public policy debate surrounding the 1996 telecommunications act raisesnew and unresolved research questions. for example: is special funding forschools and libraries necessary, and if so what is the most efficient means forproviding it? should òcarrieroflastresortó obligations be allocated via auctions(see section 2.4.8, òauctionsó)? some studies that might shed light on this lastquestion include international comparative studies of the effects of various policyapproaches and the impact of subsidies in these policy regimes on consumerbehavior.2.3business, labor, and organizational processes2.3.1location: internationalization and telecommutingone important way in which information technology is affecting work is byreducing the importance of distance.5 in many industries, the geographic distribution of work is changing significantly. for instance, some silicon valley firmshave found that they can overcome the tight local market for software engineersby sending projects to india or other nations where the wages are much lower.furthermore, such arrangements can take advantage of the time differences sothat critical projects can be worked on nearly around the clock. as the day endsin san jose it is just beginning in bangalore, india, and so the teams can hand offtheir work electronically to colleagues thousands of miles away (economist,1996). firms can outsource their manufacturing to other nations and rely ontelecommunications to keep marketing, r&d, and distribution teams in closecontact with the manufacturing groups. thus the technology can enable a finerdivision of labor among countries, which in turn affects the relative demand forvarious skills in each nation.although there are a number of case studies examining this phenomenon,quantitative evidence is desirable. for example, how many programmers arethere in india who are actually working for silicon valley firms? and to whatextent is this phenomenon of redistribution of employment linked specifically toinformation technology as opposed to other factors?while the international redistribution of work is clearly significant, an equallyimportant, if less obvious, effect of the technology is in enabling a redistributionof work within countries such as the united states. this shift began with thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions33advent of inexpensive telephony, nationwide tollfree telephone numbers, and theability to network dispersed call centers to corporate databases (cstb, 1994a).for instance, technology has also enabled many financial services firms to movejobs out of lower manhattan. some of the data entry work is being shifted to newjersey while large call centers are being set up in north dakota and othermidwestern states. other industries are similarly affected. a majority of thelarge national hotel chains have set up their reservations centers in omaha, nebraska, leveraging large computer databases and cheap longdistance telephoneservice.even as it becomes easier to transmit data across both state and internationalborders, tracking or regulating these activities remains very difficult. a givencollection of bits being sent from the united states to india may encode a childõsdrawing being sent to a proud grandmother or the latest version of a milliondollar software program. furthermore, as discussed above, the technology enables various types of work and employment to be decoupled from one another.the net result is that the firms have greater freedom to locate their economicactivities, creating greater competition among regions in infrastructure, labor,capital, and other resource markets. most interestingly, it also opens the door formore òregulatory arbitrageó: firms can increasingly choose which tax authorityand other regulations apply. the emergence of a significant webbased offshoregambling industry is only one example of this phenomenon.that the importance of distance will be reduced by computers and communications technology also has implications for the residence patterns of americansand the demand for transportation services. telecommuting is being touted incalifornia as a way to ease traffic congestion (smart valley, 1994; see alsocstb, 1994c). telecommuting may significantly reduce the need for workers tolocate their residence within automobile or public transit range of their employerõsworkplace.as creative workers of all types and service workers ranging from telephonereceptionists and data entry operators to management consultants, accountants,and lawyers find that they can realistically do most of their work at home ratherthan in a centralized workplace, the demand for homes in climatically and physically attractive regions could increase dramatically. box 2.3 discusses possibleconsequences of such a shift.the ability to do most of oneõs work at home will reduce but not eliminatethe need for facetoface meetings with fellow employees and customers. telecommuters are likely to need to travel more for business meetings than aresimilarly employed office workers. typically these trips will be long distance.this is not just because the favored residential locations of telecommuters arelikely to be remote, but also because the enterprise employing the telecommuteris likely to be less centralized than under the current system. the demand forbusiness travel and accommodations should increase. the location of theseperiodic business meetings will increasingly be urban areas such as boston, newfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34fostering research on impacts of information technologyyork, washington, new orleans, chicago, los angeles, san francisco, andseattle and quite possibly resort business centers. those urban centers shouldthrive, while smaller or less attractive cities will share the fate of the oldersuburbs and struggle with declining populations, jobs, and property values.telecommuting will enable not only shifts of hundreds or thousands of miles,but also shifts of only a few miles within cities. information technology couldalso create employment opportunities for people in the inner city who may lackadequate means of transportation to the outlying areas where new jobs are beingcreated.there is a need for interdisciplinary research to further examine the impactsof widespread telecommuting (see box 2.4). the political, social, and economicconsequences seem likely to be quite significant, and the potential for a suddenrise in telecommuting within the next few years seems high. insights might wellbox 2.3telecommuting scenario: employment shifts to rural areasone can anticipate a shift of population away from the metropolitan areas tobucolic agricultural settings (rural vermont, the california wine country, fishing villages), to resort areas (aspen, monterey, sedona), and to the sunbelt and beachfront. just as the automobile, superhighways, and trucking helped shift populationout of the central city to the suburbs in the 1950s, the computer, the informationsuperhighway, and modems will help shift population from the suburbs to moreremote areas.the consequences of a shift in employment from the suburbs to more remoteareas would be profound. property values would rise in the favored destinationsand fall in the suburbs. individuals and groups interested in preserving the rural, orhistorical, or charming aspects of life and the environment in the newly attractiveareas could face new pressures. since most of those able to relocate with theadvent of realistic telecommuting would be among the better educated and higherpaid, the demand for highincome and highstatus services in these areas shouldsoar. gourmet restaurants, clothing boutiques, highincome grocery stores, officesupply depots, topflight medical services, and venues for artistic and cultural eventsshould thrive. but so, too, would there be an expansion of services of all types.these new magnet areas would need more gas stations, gardeners, churches,housekeepers, construction workers, and postal employees. this would create newand expanding job opportunities for the local population, but more significantly thetelecommuters would bring with them many others from the cities and suburbs whowould not be telecommuting. this economic boom for rural and resort communitieswould be mirrored by a decline in property values and population in the least attractive areas of the central cities and suburbs. the exodus and the resulting decline inthe tax base would reduce local government revenues, perhaps leading to a declinein governmental services, and would exacerbate the economic differences betweenthe mobile segment of the population and those who remain in the older suburbs.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions35be gained by a renewed study of the causes and consequences of urbanization andsuburbanization in our past.it is clear that widespread use of telecommuting, even in its nascent stages,will have a major impact on how organizations function. the evolution of organizational forms in response to increased use of networking needs detailed study.for example, how is work being done at a distance monitored and evaluated?one implication is that work tasks could be designed in such a way that there is anidentifiable output that the home worker or the telecommuter is delivering.2.3.2labor and information technologylabor market and information technologythe popular press is filled with anecdotal evidence about the negative effectsof information technology on employment. however, relatively few attemptshave been made to address these issues scientifically.wolff (1996) conducted a careful analysis of the effect of computerizationon the composition of the labor force during the period from 1950 to 1990 usingu.s. census data.6 the first step in his analysis was to classify the census data intobox 2.4telecommuting scenario: increased employment flexibilityby reducing the fixed cost of employment, widespread telecommuting shouldmake it easier for individuals to work on flexible schedules, to work part time, toshare a job (perhaps with their spouse), or to hold two or more jobs simultaneously. since changing employers would not necessarily require changing oneõs placeof residence, telecommuting should increase job mobility and speed career advancement. some think that this increased flexibility will reduce job stress andincrease job satisfaction. that would be a welcome outcome in itself, and sincejob stress is a major factor governing health there may be additional benefits in theform of reduced health costs and mortality rates. these impacts also seem ripe forresearch by social scientists, particularly demographers, and medical researchers.if the increased flexibility of work schedules is great enough, there may besome profound effects on retirement and saving behavior has well. with a reduced and less stressful work load, the elderly may wish to continue working wellpast the conventional retirement age. if so, they may choose to save less duringtheir peak earning years because their need for asset income in late life would bereduced. those who enter telecommuting early enough to purchase or build residences in remote areas before property values rise in those areas will experiencesubstantial capital gains on their home and for this reason also might feel lessneed to save from current income. the implications of such developments forcompany pension systems and the social security system need study.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36fostering research on impacts of information technology267 occupations and 64 industries, which were then further refined into thecategories òknowledge workers,ó òdata workers,ó and ògoods and service workers.ó òinformation workersó refers to the sum of knowledge and data workers.wolff (1996) found that from 1950 to 1990, employment of knowledgeworkers grew at 3.1 percent a year, while that of data and service workers grew at2.6 percent a year. employment of goods producers increased at a rate of only0.3 percent per year. overall, in 1950, 37 percent of the employed labor forcewas information workers; by 1990, 55 percent of the labor force was informationworkers.what accounts for this dramatic change in labor market structure? wolff(1996) showed that the total growth in employment could be decomposed intothree effects: a òsubstitution effectó that describes the extent to which industrieshave substituted information labor for other types, a òproductivity effectó thataccounts for changes in productivity growth among different industries, and anòoutput effectó that accounts for the change in the composition of final output.7wolff (1996) found that the substitution effect accounted for about half of thegrowth of the share of knowledge workers in employment. almost none was due tooutput effects. in other words, most of the increase in knowledge workers was dueto the fact that employers substituted knowledge workers for other kinds of labor,coupled with the fact that industries that used knowledge workers intensively (e.g.,service industries) had lower rates of growth in labor productivity than did goodsproducing industries. analysis of this sort is very important in understanding laborforce changes and can be a significant input into policy analysis.wage inequality and information technologyone of the most striking changes in the economic landscape of the unitedstates over the past 20 to 30 years has been a dramatic increase in inequality ofearnings. a growing number of researchers suspect that technological change ingeneral, and computerization in particular, may be part of the explanation.although there was relatively little change in the dispersion of wages in the1950s and 1960s, starting in the 1970s wage inequality increased rapidly. percapita income and family income show similar patterns. interestingly, the changesin inequality are evident across virtually every income subgroup: the wages forthose at the 95th percentile increased relative to those at the 90th percentile,which in turn outpaced those at the 85th percentile and so on down to the poorestpeople in the country (see figure 2.2).although the rise in inequality has been well documented in the academicliterature (see levy and murnane, 1992, and gottschalk, 1997, for reviews), thereis not yet a consensus as to its causes. however, much of the increase in inequality seems to be related to a growing premium for skilled workers throughout theeconomy. for instance, the premium paid to collegeeducated workers and thosewith more experience has grown significantly. since skilled workers were alfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions37ready at the top of the wage distribution, any increase in their relative wages willtend to increase overall inequality. furthermore, because the supply of collegeeducated workers has grown over the past several decades, the fact that theirrelative wages have increased indicates that the demand for such workers hasgrown even faster.the increased demand for these workers cannot easily be explained bychanges in the composition of industry output or other observable factors. òtechnical change,ó typically a residual in wage equations, has been left as the bestexplanation. more direct evidence that technical change is behind the growth ininequality was provided by berman et al. (1994). they found that the rate ofinvestment in computers was positively correlated with higher demand for skilledworkers relative to less skilled workers. this finding clearly runs counter to theclaim that computers òdeskilló work, as some have claimed. although this isclearly the case in certain applications, the findings of berman et al. suggest thatit is not true on average.figure 2.2wage inequality in the united states, 1973 to 1994. source: adaptedfrom gottschalk (1997), p. 27.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38fostering research on impacts of information technologythe mechanism by which computers increase the relative demand for skilledwork is still not well understood. there are at least five distinct possibilities:81.computers may be disproportionately automating routine, rote jobs, thusreducing the demand for lowskill workers, but not much affecting highskillworkers. indeed, mark (1987) found that industries with significant changes intechnology typically experienced significant reductions in the number of basicproduction workers but not in the number of more skilled workers.2.computers may complement highly skilled work, making it more valuable. for instance, after controlling for observable characteristics, kreuger (1993)found that workers using a computer were paid, on average, 20 percent higherwages.3.the direction of causality could instead go in the opposite direction, withhighpaid workers getting computers first, as a signal to their colleagues of theirskills. feldman and march (1981) put forth such a thesis years ago.4.computers may facilitate a winnertakeall effect by reducing communications and search costs. as a consequence, the òbestó experts in each field cancompete over broader geographic regions, displacing the local expert and capturing higher earnings in the process. this explanation seems most applicable to thefew òsuperstarsó at the top of the earnings profile.5.computers may enable broader reorganization of work, which may changethe relative demand for various skills. for instance, decentralization of decisionmaking, use of lateral communications, and greater outsourcing of activities mayreduce the need for people who can follow instructions carefully and increase theneed for people who can solve problems independently.existing measures of income inequality do not consider the nonmarket goodsand services that people consume. however, a significant share of an individualõswellbeing may be derived from factors that are not counted in traditional income. for instance, if employees find that work done with computers is more (orless) enjoyable than it was before the work was computerized, then this perception may exacerbate (or mitigate) the increase in inequality. unfortunately, thereis relatively little data on the extent to which people value nonmarket servicesand virtually none on how computerization might affect such services.effects of information technology on labor and skill demandthe evidence on information technology and wage inequality suggests thatcomputers may be partly responsible for the relative increase in the demand forskilled, educated workers. however, thus far, the measures of òskilló and òeducationó are fairly coarse. further research is needed to enhance understanding ofwhat skills information technology complements (levy and murnane, 1997).traditional skills, such as math and reading skills, appear to be important, butfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions39other skills, such as the ability to work well with others, may also be significantfactors.if computers increase the demand for educated workers, then a nationalpolicy of increasing investment in education, especially at the bottom of theeducational scale, will help with two national goals that historically have been inopposition: increasing economic output and decreasing inequality. simply spending more on education or requiring students to spend more time in school mayhelp with these problems, but a major research gap exists in understanding how tomake education more efficient. relatively little is known about what types ofcourses and what methods of instruction are most effective in providing theeducation and skills sought by the marketplace. one does not have to believe thateconomics is the only driver of educational choice by policy makers and studentsto believe that it is one important consideration. (see also the discussion of therole of information technology in education in section 2.1.4.)2.3.3organizations and processesmeasuring productivityas noted in chapter 1, while the rapid pace of technological change incomputing and communications has been astounding, it has been hard (at leastuntil very recently) to find evidence for improvements in productivity as a resultof these dazzling technological innovations.9 a fundamental problem is thatmany of the variables typically measured are becoming less relevant in the emerging information economy. for instance, walter wriston, the former chief executive officer of citibank, has quipped, òwhen i was a kid in the bank, the keyeconomic indicator we looked at was freightcar loadings. who the hell caresabout them now?ó (stewart, 1997).in todayõs economy, technology, knowledge, skills, and organizational competencies are often more important resources than land, labor, and traditionalcapital. economic output is becoming increasingly òunmeasurableó as grossdomestic product shifts from mining, manufacturing, and agriculture to services(griliches, 1994). even in manufacturing, intangible components of value, suchas product variety, customization, timeliness, and quality have become moreimportant. similarly, intangible assets, ranging from software, copyrights, andpatents to worker skills, customer relationships, and organizational knowledge,are increasingly recognized as important inputs.direct measurement of these intangible assets remains elusive, but one indicator is the substantial increase in the ratio of the financial valuation of firms(stock market equity and value of outstanding debt) to the book value of thesefirms (plant, property and equipment, cash, inventories, and other measured assets) over the past decade. apparently, investors in the financial markets believethat an increasingly small fraction of firmsõ true assets are accounted for byfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40fostering research on impacts of information technologytraditional metrics. interestingly, a recent study (brynjolfsson and yang, 1997)found that changes in the value of firmsõ computer assets correlated strongly withchanges in the implied extent of intangible assets.however, there is no reason that the òunmeasurableó outputs and inputs mustremain so. as the benefits to businesses of intangibles such as those mentionedabove have grown, and as the costs of overhead have come to dominate directlabor and materials costs, researchers such as robert kaplan have helped transform managerial accounting to better reflect these realities (kaplan, 1989). asimilar rethinking of our national economic accounts is in order.the issue of unmeasured improvements in qualityñof particular importancein evaluating the output of servicesñhas also received considerable attentionfrom economists. section 1.1.1 describes how improvements in computing technology have reduced the real cost of computing. recently, economists havebegun making the same sorts of adjustments in other cases, such as for pharmaceuticals (berndt et al., 1996), as well as for various particular types of medicalcare such as heart procedures. when patient survival rates and quality of life areconsidered, they typically find that òrealó medical prices have actually beenfalling, or at least not rising as rapidly as previously thought, and that òrealóoutput and productivity have been growing impressively (cutler and mcclellan,1996; cutler et al., 1996). similar work could be done for information technologyña task made easier now that advances in it enable better tracking of qualityimprovements.finally, even as information technologies are helping to make organizationsmore economically efficient than ever before, many people are questioning whetherother important goals and values are being overlooked. for instance, social fragmentation, increased inequality, environmental degradation, and greater emotionalstress are sometimes associated with advances in technology. a singlemindedfocus on economic efficiency, narrowly defined, may come at the expense of othergoals valued by society. indeed, technologies need not serve only as generators ofwealth. they also can serve other societal functions such as increased equity.further compounding the question, technology is giving us new options byrelaxing many longstanding constraints. thus, there is a strong need today forclear thinking about what goals organizations can and should serve. perhaps aportion of research funding should be reserved for work that contemplates notonly how technology can make our lives better, but also what society means byòbetter.óhistorical perspective: the computer and the electric dynamoalthough the various scientific and engineering disciplines excel at producing technological developments, understanding how or whether these developments lead to greater productivity is quite a different matter. replacing oldinformation technology with new while retaining the same work practices andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions41organizational structure may have little impact on productivity. the true measureof the technologyõs worth can be evaluated only when work practices and organizational structures are revamped to best take advantage of the flexibility andpower of todayõs computing and communications technologies.the subtle process of extracting productivity gains out of technological advancements has been the subject of much scrutiny by social scientists. oneparticularly relevant and illuminating study is by david (1990). this historicalanalysis discusses the electric dynamo and its role in an earlier òproductivityparadox.ó at the turn of the century, electrification was seen, much as computersare today, as a transformational technological advance whose impact would soonbe widely felt. however, factory electrification did not have much impact onproductivity growth in manufacturing before the 1920s.the proximate source of the delay in the exploitation of the productivity improvements potential incipient in the dynamo revolution was, in large part, theslow pace of factory electrification. the latter, in turn, was attributable to theunprofitability of replacing still serviceable manufacturing plants embodyingproduction technologies adapted to the old regime of mechanical power derivedfrom water and steam. (david, 1990)the first phase of electrification (from the mid1890s to 1920) mainly utilized the group drive system of power transmission, with one motor poweringmany pieces of equipment. this way of shifting to electric motors entailedminimal changes to the basic factory design, and essentially replaced the oldmechanical power system with an electric one. however, in the 1920s, the òunitdriveó approach, with individual motors powering each piece of equipment, waswidely adopted. the benefits of this approach were not limited to the immediatesavings associated with greater energy efficiency. in fact, the greatest benefitsderived from the ability to build lighter, more modular, singlestory factoriesusing this new technology. learning how best to utilize this flexibility was notimmediate:although all this was clear enough in principle, the relevant point is that itsimplementation on a wide scale required working out the details in the contextof many kinds of new industrial facilities, in many different locales, therebybuilding up a cadre of experienced factory architects and electrical engineersfamiliar with the new approach to manufacturing. (david, 1990)the analog of this story for the computer has yet to be written. while thereare encouraging reports (see cstb, 1994a; brynjolfsson and hitt, 1996, 1997)that perhaps the productivity paradox is no more, there yet remains substantialwork to be done in understanding what work practices and organizational strucfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42fostering research on impacts of information technologytures are optimal in this new computer age. how will the modern counterpart todavidõs òcadre of factory architectsó be developed? that is the challenge facingthe social scientists studying the new industrial frontier.information technology and organizational structureboth firms and markets can be thought of as sophisticated institutions forprocessing information about desires, costs, capabilities, and constraints (galbraith, 1977; hayek, 1945; radner, 1992; sah and stiglitz, 1986). thus, giventhe fact that the cost of computer processing of information has declined byseveral thousandfold over the past three decades, it would be surprising if theseinstitutions did not change. several researchers have developed models thatpredict how changing information processing and communication costs are likelybox 2.5the concept of òorganizationóperhaps the most important potential impact of computers and communications on organizations is a shift in the very concept of òorganizationó as an economicand social entity. once considered to be semipermanent and routinized by definition, ideal organizations increasingly have come to be seen as flexible, changeoriented, and able to shift their boundaries, alliances, and partnerships rapidly tomeet changing conditions. computers and communication technologies increasingly permit anytime, anywhere communication, synchronous and asynchronous collaboration, and tight linkages in operational processes within and between organizations (e.g., manufacturers and their suppliers and distributors, and manufacturersand the direct buying public). the concept of the òadhocracyóña fluid organizationin which members come and go as interests changeñhas emerged as competitionfor the concept of bureaucracy. after many decades of increasing vertical integration of production and growth as a totem of success, many organizations have divested themselves of every function that was not a core competence, and that couldpossibly be òoutsourcedó or bought on the market. small really did become beautiful, at least in principle. young entrepreneurs who started little companies in theirgarages built novel ideas into huge companies and fortunes, capturing the imagination of the world. and the mighty such as at&t, ibm, and gm appeared shakenas the world they had built started to collapse around them.yet, as recent history has shown, organizations such as at&t, ibm, and gmhave by no means been pushed aside by the changes of the information age.they have adopted and adapted the technologies and harnessed them in waysthat have allowed radical downsizing of work forces while retaining and in somecases enhancing top management control over firmsõ performance and profitability. and the startup companies created in garages have found it necessary toadopt timehonored aspects of organizational hierarchy in order to function effecfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions43tively. this lesson from recent history reveals an important but frequently overlooked aspect of the information revolution: that its revolutionary character is being channeled through pathways established by powerful social and institutionalforces that are not necessarily swept aside by the effects of technology, no matterhow powerful those effects are.much of the rhetoric about profound change in organizations has been speculative and undisciplined, based more on idealized views of what organizationsought to be rather than on the practical realities that shape organizational form andfunction. one can construct scenarios of organizational demassing and decentralization, but one also can just as easily construct sound arguments that computerand communication technologies give new life to the traditional bureaucracy.functions normally carried out by middle managersñinformation gathering, decision making within directives, communications with lowerlevel staff, and monitoring and upwardreporting of activities carried on belowñcan be replaced to someextent with technology. the resulting òflatteningó of the organization through theelimination of middle managers has been said to bring greater òempowermentó ofremaining employees. but technological change can just as easily allow significant increases in organizational centralization, tighter monitoring of employee activity, more effective enforcement of compliance with the desires of top management, and the redesign of tasks in ways that make it difficult for employees to actoutside of prescribed patterns.there are reasons to be confident about profound changes under way in thecharacter and concept of organizations as a result of new computer and communications technologies. at the same time, it is important not to let ideological enthusiasm substitute for careful reasoning and empirical research.ñjohn leslie king and kenneth l. kraemer, òcomputer and communicationtechnologies: impacts on the organization of enterprises and theestablishment of civil societyó (see appendix c of this volume)to affect firms and markets (e.g., malone, 1987; brynjolfsson, 1996a; bakos,1997).not only are markets and firms changing, but new structures, some neverbefore feasible or even imagined, may also emerge. research is needed to extendexisting theories about organizations and to learn from the organizational changesand experiments that are already happening (see box 2.5). results of suchresearch would provide a sound basis for corporate òreengineeringó efforts thatseek to make better use of information technology.recent research on the effects of information systems has highlighted theimportance of complementarities. theory (milgrom and roberts, 1980), casestudies (brynjolfsson et al., 1997; orlikowski, 1992), and econometric/statisticalanalyses (brynjolfsson and hitt, 1997) indicate that the effects of informationtechnology depend significantly on other organizational factors such as organizational form, communications practices, and the education and training of thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44fostering research on impacts of information technologywork force. therefore, research on the organizational impacts of it shouldconsider these complementary factors whenever possible. understanding thenature of the complementarities is critical to being able to make predictions aboutthe social and economic impacts of it. for instance, if it is complementary to anorganizational structure for which teams and decentralized decision making byworkers are important, then as it becomes cheaper, one would expect that therewould be increasing demand for people who work well in teams and who havethe skills and education needed to make them effective decision makers.one of the difficulties researchers face is that the data on the organization ofwork are fragmented and disorganized. there is a clear need for a compilation ofwhat data already exist in this area. a project that sought to catalog, or better yet,assemble and make available, the key data sets on this topic could reduce duplication of efforts, speed research, and help settle debates that stem from misunderstandings about the basic evidence.time series data, even short time series, would be especially valuable inclarifying the role of technology in some of the organizational changes that areobserved. for instance, better timebudget studies could help address the ongoing debate as to whether the average worker is spending more hours or fewerhours at work. data gathered from employers indicate that the work week hasshrunk, but employees report that they are working more hours. the discrepancymay be owing to employees working more at home or working for multipleemployers, or it may have some other cause.another possible source of data is exit interviews, during which workerscould be asked how technology has changed the nature of the work they do.firms and social scientists could collaborate on survey design and data collection; results would benefit the participating companies as well as the broaderresearch community.process handbookin recent years, a number of striking examples have emerged of how information technology can be combined with the redesign of organizational processes or the invention of new processes to transform the way organizationswork. although initially uncommon and perceived as radical, ideas such as justintime inventory control and concurrent engineering10 have become accepted asòbest practiceó (carter and baker, 1991). how can the new organizational possibilities enabled by the continuing, dramatic improvements in information technology be developed, understood, and exploited? given time, managers andemployees of companies will certainly develop new ways of working that takeadvantage of these new opportunities. for more rapid progress on these problems, however, it is useful to develop a more systematic foundation for understanding organizational processes. in order to understand successful organizafostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions45tional practices, one must be able to recognize and represent organizational practices that are observed, and imagine alternative ones.while data sets exist on individuals, firms, industries, and nations, there is asubstantial gap in the availability of data at the level of business processes.business processes are a distinct unit of observation from firms or individuals.not only does an individual firm involve numerous business processes, but manybusiness processes also cut across the firmõs boundaries. the creation of adatabase with information on business processes that included numerous examples of how different groups and companies perform similar functions couldenable new research directions. the database should provide a taxonomy forcategorizing business processes, and ideally should be designed in a way thatmultiple researchers could access, add to, and comment on the data.in fact, a prototype for such a databaseña process handbookñhas beencreated by thomas malone and colleagues at the massachusetts institute of technology. the handbook is intended to help people imagine new organizations andorganizational practices, redesign existing organizations, share ideas and òbestpracticesó about organizational processes, and generate or select software tosupport or analyze these processes.one key feature of this representation technique is that it not only breaksdown activities into process subparts (òsubactivitiesó) but also adds the conceptof specializationñdifferentiating a process into various specific ways of doingthe process (òspecializationsó). for example, specializations of the processlabeled òsell somethingó include òsell by retail storeó and òsell by mail order.óthe techniqueõs second key feature is that it characterizes dependencies betweenprocesses and ways of managing these dependencies, also known as òcoordinationó mechanisms (e.g., malone and crowston, 1994). a dependency exists, forexample, when an item produced by one process must be made available toanother at the right time. two alternative coordination approaches to handlingthis dependency would be to produce the good to order or produce the item to beheld in inventory until it is required.the work provides an approach to analyzing processes at various levels ofabstraction, thus capturing both the details of specific processes as well as theòdeep structureó of their similarities. a primary advantage of the approach is thatit allows people to explicitly represent the similarities (and differences) amongrelated processes and to find or generate sensible alternatives for how a givenprocess could be performed.results from this project suggest that such databases are both technicallyfeasible and managerially useful (malone et al., 1997). the process handbookproject has developed a series of software tools for storing and manipulatingprocesses, which have been used to represent more than 2,000 activities of bothgeneric processes and specializations of these processes from specific organizations.because empirical research in this area is often constrained by lack of datafostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46fostering research on impacts of information technologyon organizational processes used by firms, the further development of data setslike the process handbook could engender significant new research on the impacts of information technology that would not otherwise be possible.2.3.4social science and the workplacedifferential impacts within the workplaceand professional communitiessection 2.1.2 discusses the differential impacts of information technology inthe home. not surprisingly, the same phenomenon of differential impacts owingto the use of information technology is also found in the workplace.scientists are one set of information technology users for whom the differential impacts in a professional setting have been studied. in structured interviewswith 67 scientists in 1991 and 1992, walsh and bayma (1997) showed thatscientists in four scientific fieldsñmathematics, experimental biology, chemistry, and particle physicsñused computer networks quite differently. they identified four attributes of scientific disciplines that predicted lesser or greater use:(1) size of disciplineñsmaller disciplines used computer networks more thanlarger ones; (2) market penetrationñdisciplines in which property rights andfinancial rewards to research findings were more closely linked used computernetworks more; (3) locus of informationñdisciplines in which most researchfindings are produced at the laboratory bench used computer networks less; and(4) technical limitationsñdisciplines that rely on photographs and drawings usedcomputer networks less.11even within a single scientific field, email can differentially benefit scientistswho otherwise could be at an information disadvantage. for example, accordingto one study, physical oceanographers who work at inland universities or laboratories derived more benefit from each additional email message sent or received thandid oceanographers who worked at coastal universities or laboratories (hesse et al.,1993), when standard measures of scientific productivity were considered such asnumber of journal articles published.differential impacts have been observed for shift workers as well. shiftworkers in a municipal government derived more benefit from each additionalmessage sent (although not received) than did day workers, as gauged by standard measures of organizational commitment and wellbeing (huff et al., 1989).because email omits direct information about social statusñsuch as age,physical appearance, and genderñthat inevitably accompanies facetoface communication, it can differentially benefit people who otherwise could be sociallymarginalized. younger oceanographers derived more benefit from each additional email message than did older, more established ones (hesse et al., 1993).physically disabled members of a multiyear program of computer communication derived more benefit than did nondisabled members (earls, 1990). membersfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions47of a retirementplanning task force who were themselves recent retirees derivedmore benefit from use of email than did their stillemployed counterparts (biksonet al., 1991).12romm and pliskin (1997) have examined the use of email in the workplace.they suggest that several characteristics of emailñspeed of delivery, ease ofsending to a large number of addressees, ease of adding commentary to messagesand forwarding them on, and ease of control over which versions of messages aresent to which recipientsñmake it a powerful political tool. used deliberately inthis way as a tool for òvirtual politicking,ó email can increase the power ofemployees relative to that of management. the adoption of information technology to improve the performance of organizations will also have significant, differentially distributed impacts on the individuals within those organizations.technical support communitiessocial science methodology associated with the study of communities hasproven useful in improving business performance. in the mid1980s, anthropologist julian orr conducted extensive field work among xerox corporation servicerepair technicians (orr, 1990). one of his findings was that technicians neverrelied exclusively, or sometimes even at all, on the companyprovided servicemanuals when troubleshooting machine problems. often the manuals were outof date or did not address local, idiosyncratic problems. rather than using manuals, or in addition to using them, they relied on war stories passed from technicianto technician in an oral storytelling culture. orr pointed out the value of thesestories to corporate management, noting that they represented an important intellectual resource that the company should capitalize on.partly inspired by orrõs work, a team of xerox developers spent a long timeobserving and talking with service technicians, learning what would be useful tothem from their point of view. based on their fieldwork they built a system toleverage techniciansõ local knowledge through a communityvalidated òtipsó database. a òtipó is a problemcausesolution case that is voluntarily written andsubmitted by anyone in the field service organization and validated by technicalspecialists. when the tip is released to the field, it carries in it the name of boththe submitting technician and the validator. in one field trial of the tips systemwith 1,300 field support people, xerox found that about 15 percent of the employees submitted tips and that the tips database was accessed more than 1,000times a day (bell et al., 1997).the technology per se in this system is not at the forefront of computerscience. both developers and managers attribute the success of this system inpart to the effort to take seriously social science ideas about community. theylearned that local knowledge conveyed in the community vernacular by community members is useful to technicians troubleshooting unfamiliar problems. andso the system was designed to support vernacular content. they learned thatfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48fostering research on impacts of information technologycommunity knowledge could spread much more rapidly than standard corporatepublication or validation cycles. and so the system was designed to includemany human validators in order to ensure very short validation cycles. initially,developers and managers worried that they might have to provide economicincentives for technicians to contribute tips. but they learned that techniciansvalue the social validation that comes from other community members who appreciate their tips. and so the system was designed to ensure that people contributing tips could be maximally visible to others in their community. in the firstdeployment of the tips system, the corporation collected data suggesting that useof the tips database was responsible for a significant improvement in this groupõsservice performance. the corporation has subsequently begun deploying variants of this system in many of its service organizations.2.4information economy and societyadvances in information technology raise a number of research issues involving the economic, social, and cultural aspects of how society accesses, uses,and values information. for example, the ability to store and distribute moreinformation more rapidly is leading to concerns about information overload andraising new questions about how information is evaluated by users. increasingly,information is exceeding the bounds inherent in the written and printed word.new types of media and new technologies for accessing information pose challenges to educators, creators and distributors of information, and policy makers,among others.2.4.1protection of intellectual propertyincreasing representation of a wide variety of content (e.g., text, images,video, audio) in digital form has resulted in markedly easier and cheaper duplication and distribution of informationñwith mixed effects on the provision ofcontent. on the one hand, content can be distributed at a dramatically lower unitcost. on the other hand, distribution of content outside of channels that respectintellectual property rights can reduce the incentives of creators and distributorsto produce and make content available in the first place. information technologyhas raised a host of questions about intellectual property protection, and quite anumber of solutions have been proposed. making appropriate choices requiresattention to a range of considerations and perspectives and can be informed byeconomic and historical analysis.economic analysis of intellectual property rightsthe classic economic study of the tradeoff between innovation and intellectual property protection is that of nordhaus (1969), who examined the optimalfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions49length of a patent. longerlived patents give producers more incentive to innovate but also lead to longer periods of monopolization. using a simulationmodel, nordhaus studied the benefitcost tradeoff between these two effects andconcluded that a patent life of around 20 years was a reasonable middle ground.subsequently, economists have examined other dimensions of patent policy, suchas the scope of patents, the standard for novelty, and so on.whereas patent rights apply to inventions, copyright applies to artistic orliterary expression (be it in print, audio, or visual form) and is the dominant formof intellectual property protection for electronic content. numerous studies havelooked at the economic impact of patents, but far fewer such studies have beendone on copyright, even though there is currently much legal and policy activityin this area. in part this discrepancy reflects differences in data availability:patent data is available electronically in a centralized database, whereas copyright is granted automatically and does not require the copyright holder to registerformally in all instances.13even relatively simple costbenefit examination of some of the issues wouldcontribute to a better understanding of the effects and implications of particularapproaches raised in policy debates about intellectual property rightsñfor example, a new form of copyright protection for data in databases that the europeans are asking the united states to consider.economic considerations are also important in evaluating methods for enforcing requirements attached to the use of copyrighted materials, including technological approaches. one specific approach is the use of secure hardware thatenforces specific terms and conditions (stefik, 1995). however, both theoreticalexamination (shy, 1998) and practical experience with devices that provide protection against unauthorized copying suggest that this strategy is problematic in ahighly competitive environment. if copy protection imposes inconvenience onusers, then new products that do not incorporate copy protection can successfullycompete against those that do. this occurred with spreadsheets during the mid1980s when a rash of new entrants caused lotus to remove its keydisk copyprotection scheme. knowing how intellectual property protection strategies andmarket structure interrelate is clearly important for understanding how securehardware might work in protecting intellectual property rights.among the variety of alternatives for protecting intellectual property arefixed licensing rates, media taxes, and statistical sampling. the costs and benefits of these approaches clearly depend on the costs of monitoring use, but littletheoretical or empirical work has been done that examines this issue in detail.historical perspectives on copyrightthe challenge of setting appropriate intellectual property policy is not new.indeed the history of copyrightõs use is filled with examples that are relevant totodayõs concerns. now, as in the past, there are those who question whetherfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50fostering research on impacts of information technologycopyright is appropriate at all in the information age. some would argue thatòinformation wants to be free.ó but what would be the consequences of allinformation being free? hesse (1991) examined experiences following the elimination of copyright in postrevolutionary france.the french monarchy used copyright as a tool for censorship. just as inengland, the french kings granted monopoly rights to publishers in exchange forthe right to censor publications. one of the first acts of the french revolutionarieswas to eliminate copyright in 1789. the revolutionaries thought that all peoplewould then be free to publish whatever they wanted without government censorslooking over their shoulder.the consequences were disastrous: literature, especially serious literature,disappeared. the only material published was newspapers, pornography, scandalsheets, and seditious tracts. these were printed on cheap paper suitable to be readonly once and then thrown away. in 1789 more than 100 french novels werepublished; in 1794 only 16 were published. the elimination of french culturewas enough to frighten even the revolutionaries, and the government quicklyreinstituted copyright and initiated a program to subsidize the production ofcultural works.but within a few years budget cuts forced the elimination of the subsidies.the french government had set the term of copyright to run for 10 years after theauthorõs death. but given the short life span typical of the period, this termgenerally allowed for only a single edition to be published. publishers thereforegravitated toward works in the public domain, according to a thencontemporaryobserver:modern publishing consists of all the books that are reprinted endlessly, whichare no oneõs property, and which anyone can make use of . . . [the publishers] allprint the same works . . . and end up remaindering them. but the public does noteven profit from the low prices because the editions are abridged, inaccurate, andpoorly produced, which harms the art and the honor of french publishing in theeyes of europe. (pierrecesar briand, 1810, as quoted in hesse, 1991)the treatment of copyright immediately after the french revolution showsthat the absence of copyright protection can be disastrous. but there are alsocases in which information providers have been too conservative in the management of their intellectual property.rise of the novel. the first modern libraries for middleclass readers werecreated in the late 1700s, soon after the invention of the english novel. englishbookstores could not keep up with the demand for novels and romances, and sothey started renting them out. these circulating libraries, as they were called,were denounced by the literate classes as òslop shops of literature.ó they werefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions51also unpopular with publishers and booksellers, but for a different reason. as anobserver put it at the time:. . . when circulating libraries were first opened, the booksellers were muchalarmed; and their rapid increase added to their fears, and led them to think thatthe sale of books would be much diminished by such libraries. (knight, 1854)however, in the long run there is no doubt that the sale of books was notdiminished by the circulating libraries, but rather was much enhanced. before theadvent of the circulating libraries there was no lowcost, entertaining literatureñand so the common folk had little reason to learn to read. in 1800 there were only80,000 readers in england. by 1854, that number had increased more than 60foldto 5 million readers (knight, 1854). the publishers who served the new massmarket for books thrived, while those who sold only to the elite disappeared.14as the market for books grew, people started to buy rather than rent. asknight reported:. . . thousand of books are purchased each year by such as have first borrowedthem at those libraries, and after reading, approving of them, have becomepurchasers. (knight, 1854)the presence of the circulating libraries did kill the old publishing modelñbut at the same time it enabled the creation of the new model of massmarketbooks. the publishers and booksellers who recognized this causality prospered;those that continued to push for the old model went out of business.the forprofit, circulating libraries continued to survive in england well intothe 1950s. what ended them was not a lack of demand for reading material, butrather the paperback bookñan even cheaper way of providing literature to themasses.rise of the video. the pattern seen in the rise of the novel occurred also in themarket for prerecorded videos in the 1980s. initially the video machine was nothreat to the film industry because it was so expensive. in the early 1980s videomachines cost more than $1,000, and video tapes sold for around $100. videoswere a medium only for the richñjust as books were in 1800.the video rental stores changed all that. like the circulating libraries 200years earlier, they brought a new form of entertainment to the masses. the rentalmarket broke out of the lowlevel equilibrium. if an ordinary family could rentthe video machine and rent the cartridge, the industry could get enough cash flowto invest in new production technologies. by the mid1980s the average middleclass family could afford a video machine, and video rental stores were thriving.hollywood did not like the video rental business. studios tried to get aroundthe firstsale doctrine with various leasing arrangements, but these schemes werefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52fostering research on impacts of information technologynot acceptable to the video store owners. but despite hollywoodõs objections tovideo rentals, they ended being very profitable for the movie studios. the availability of inexpensive videos meant that people watched many more movies. bythe 1990s, video machines were selling for less than $200 and 85 percent of u.s.families owned one.eventually the hollywood producers realized that people would actually buya video if the price was right. since 1990, the video rental market has been flat,and all the action is in the sales market. in the last 15 years, video purchase priceshave dropped more than 90 percentñand hollywood is making money like neverbefore.far from killing hollywood, video was hollywoodõs savior. just as in thecase of circulating libraries, video rental created a huge new market for bothrenting and buying the product. the companies that recognized the implicationsof the new technology succeeded beyond their wildest dreams, and those that didnot have vanished.152.4.2free speech and contentmany contentious issues surround free speech and regulation of content onthe internet, and there continue to be calls for mechanisms to control objectionable content. since the communications decency act was struck down by thesupreme court in 1997, many groups have become interested in developing otherways of rating or labeling content. emotions run high on both sides of this issue,but attention to several empirical questions would be of use in finding a sensiblesolution.first, very little objective information is publicly available on the kinds ofcontent accessible on the web, even though contentmonitoring software companies such as surfwatch and cyberpatrol16 are in a position to have such data. littleis known about how much access children have to òobjectionableó sites. certainly some surveys are in order.second, definitions of òunacceptableó content are subjective. dealing withindecent material involves understanding not only the views on such topics butalso their evolution over time. what are institutional and individual attitudestoward filtering? what do parents, schools, libraries, and other institutions want?in the case of the internetñwhere content flows globallyñit is important tounderstand how different localities define objectionable content.there are larger political issues involved as well. the same technology thatallows for content filtering with respect to decency can be used to filter politicalspeech. in some countries (e.g., germany), hate speech and nazi symbols areoutlawed. approaches designed to limit indecent content could be used to restrictaccess to political material as well. how effective would such approaches be?how desirable would they be?since censorship of indecent material does not appear to be an option in thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions53united states, a wellknown policy response is labeling. the idea is that consumers will be better informed in their decisions to avoid (or seek out) objectionablecontent. an interesting question is what constitutes the òbestó form of such labelsfrom the viewpoint of cognition and use. the considerable debate about the typeof labels used for the vchip, for example, encompasses whether they should bebased on age or type of content, whether they should be one dimensional ormultidimensional, whether they should employ three levels of rating or seven,and so on. the debate has been conducted with little in the way of scientificinvestigation of alternatives to inform the participants.one interesting proposal is the platform for internet content selection (pics;resnick and miller, 1996). pics is a set of protocols that defines the communication of òratings.ó the protocol set is very broadly designed so that any site candeclare itself a òrateró and provide ratings to the public.17 pics provides an openstandard that may be very helpful in dealing with the issue of content in a flexibleway, but there are many questions about how this technology might be used.for one thing, some incumbents in the industry already have proprietarylabeling schemes. what are their incentives to move to the pics standard? theliterature on economic considerations in standards setting (see besen and farrell,1994, for a survey) would be useful in stimulating careful thinking about thisissue.what is the cost recovery model for labeling services? is there any reason tobelieve that competitive forces will yield an appropriate social outcome, or are theopportunities for òfree ridingó (enjoying the benefits without incurring the costs) sostrong that a market for labeling cannot be sustainable? how frequently is materialadded to or updated on the internet, so that reexamination is appropriate?2.4.3privacythe rapid increase in computing and communications power has raised considerable concern about privacy (box 2.6 discusses one aspect). privacy issuesarise in the public and private sector as well as in the conduct of social scienceitself.an initial set of questions concerns public attitudes toward privacy. classicstudies of this subject include baker and westin (1972) and westin and louisharris & associates (1981). a recent survey of web users included severalquestions measuring the view of survey respondents on such issues as the needfor new laws to protect privacy on the internet and the rights of content providersto resell information about users (kehoe et al., 1997). kang et al. (1995), whichprovided an overview of issues relating to the internet, also called for betterdata.18 a more recent study looked specifically at the privacy concerns andexperiences of computer users (louis harris & associates and alan f. westin,1997).19 this survey found that while many people are concerned about theconfidentiality and security of personal information online, there are very fewfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54fostering research on impacts of information technologyreports of actual breaches of confidentiality. whereas only 5 percent of internetusers said that they had been a victim of what they regarded as an invasion oftheir privacy, 54 percent of internet users reported that they were concerned thatinformation about which sites they visited would be linked to their email addressand disclosed without their consent or knowledge. the report also found lowertrust in online institutions and communication: computer users had less confidence in online businesses than in other institutions and were more concernedbox 2.6the argus state: technological advances andindividual privacydecreases in the cost of video, audio, and other sensor technology, as well ascheaper data storage and information processing, make it likely that it will becomepracticable for both governments and private datamining enterprises to collectenormously detailed dossiers on all citizens. this prospect raises a host of issuesrequiring research and debate. among them:¥who currently collects what data about individuals? how is it used? how isit shared? what are the trends?¥what are the existing default rules in different jurisdictions relating to thecollection of information? does the nature of default rules meaningfully alter outcomes? do prohibitions on data collection (e.g., data protection laws) affect outcomes? to what extent are existing rules vulnerable to foreign òdata havensó andother regulatory arbitrage? to what extent do/will consumers choose alternativesto the default rules when such an option is available?¥what are the possible political, social, and economic consequences of extensive individual profiling? is extensive profiling likely? is the absence of a greatdeal of the privacy now taken for granted compatible with freedom? what difference does it make if the profiling is undertaken by (or available to) democraticgovernments? nondemocratic governments? private industry? what would theeconomic and social consequences be of making profiling data available to some?to all? at a cost? at no cost? would it be socially valuable to prohibit the creationof individualized dossiers? in an era of distributed databases, would it be technically practical to enforce such a prohibition?¥to what extent do different types of electronic cash and electronic commerce enable or disable profiling? to what extent do concerns about the control ofelectronic money laundering imply the power to restrict free speech or anonymouscommerce? to what extent does the protection of free speech and a private socialand economic space require the protection of anonymous speech and/or anonymous commerce? what are the current national policies regarding anonymousspeech and commerce? in a networked world, what are the external and extraterritorial effects of one nationõs policies regarding anonymous speech and commerce?ñmichael froomkin, òfive critical issues relating to impacts ofinformation technologyó (see appendix b of this volume)fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions55about the confidentiality of email than that of other common means of communication. however, with increasing familiarity comes greater trust: those whoused email regularly were less than 50 percent as likely to be concerned aboutthe confidentiality of this form of communication.absent better understanding of the nature and extent of public concern, thepublic debate appears to rest on assertions by vocal advocates. more data andanalysis would support more effective debate and decision making.the ease of dissemination afforded by new technologies such as the internetis raising privacy issues related to the release of governmentcollected information about individuals. as an illustration of the delicate nature of privacy policy,consider the issue of tax assessments. in most local communities, these arepublicly available in city hall. the public purpose served is that individuals cancompare their own assessment to the assessment of similar properties and file aprotest if they believe that their property has been unfairly valued. victoria,british columbia, put its taxassessment rolls on the internet in order to make iteasier for residents to access this information. however, many residents thoughtthat the assessed value of their property was now too accessible. ultimately,victoria had to close down the web site, under pressure from british columbiaõsinformation commissioner, who believed that the site violated canadian privacylaws (colebourn, 1996).in a related example, a computer consultant in oregon paid the state $222 forthe complete motor vehicles database, which he then posted to a web site. thedatabase allows anyone with knowledge of a particular oregon license plate number to look up the vehicle ownerõs name, address, birth date, driverõs license number, and vehicle title information (mccall, 1996).20 also, state and local governments are themselves finding that their data can be a source of revenue, through thesale either of customized search services or entire databases (chandrasekaran,1998). already, regulations and legislation that address concerns about personaldossiers are emerging at both state and federal levels for the specific case ofmedical records. a recent cstb report (cstb, 1997a) examines trends andissues relating to the protection of medical information.òinformed consentó in surveys and experiments is a dimension of privacythat strikes close to home for social scientists. quite strong safeguards are inplace for social science work involving human subjects, but in some ways it isdifficult to apply some of these practices to the internet. for example, the factthat data is being collected can easily be concealed from subjects. one source ofuseful data comes from retrospective examination of existing records such asserver logs or òusenetó postings where a social science experiment was not theoriginal intent of the data collection. just as in the case of private data, crosstabulation of innocuous data sets can identify seemingly anonymous subjects.certainly, social scientists must develop a code of practices, ethics, and perhapsregulations that will help deal with these issues.another dimension of privacy is òannoyance.ó a recent report on junk efostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56fostering research on impacts of information technologymail by world research, inc. (1997) announced that half of the more than 1,000respondents in a voluntary online survey said that they òhateó junk mail, andanother quarter said that they found it òbothersome.ó threequarters of therespondents felt it should be regulated. the interesting question is what form ofregulation (if any) would be appropriate. a number of congressional bills havebeen introduced to address this issue, such as s.771, which proposed requiringthat advertisements be selflabeled. it would be interesting to investigate howeffective such solutions have been in controlling physical junk mail, magazineads, òinfomercials,ó and so on.there have been suggestions that industry selfregulation could be an effective tool for protecting privacy. a national telecommunications and information administration report contains a number of papers exploring the prospectsfor and limitations of selfregulation (ntia, 1997). one approach, offered bylaudon (1996), proposes a market for personal information in which individualswould have the right to sell or prevent the sale of information about themselves.varian (1996a) has examined some economic aspects of such a market, but muchwork remains to be done.cryptography is a technological approach to protecting privacy. cryptography policy is being widely debated; see cstb (1996b) for a thorough study. theonline information economy page on security, privacy, and encryption21 is alsoa valuable resource. however, there are comparatively few studies of the implications of cryptography policy. one area where social science can contribute isin characterizing the role of encryption in the commission and detection of crime.for example, it has been claimed that use of cryptography presents a seriousbarrier to criminal investigations. yet a study by denning and baugh (1997)found that use of encryption was not currently obstructing a large number ofinvestigations. however, it also found that the use of encryption by criminalelements was growing rapidly and could become a problem in the future, suggesting the need for further study.2.4.4information use and valueinformation overloadit is popular wisdom that people today suffer information overload. if true,overload has implications for those studying such issues as the value of information. characterizing and quantifying overload also can shape the design of newinformation technology tools. several questions need answering to determine thetruth of this assertion. in what particular sense are people dealing with moreinformation than in the past? is digital information more complex, harder toapprehend, less compressible? are there new social or psychological phenomenaemerging?fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions57one issue is whether in fact more information is being produced. a line ofstudies going back through pool (1984) and machlup (1982) looked at productionof information, but there seems to be a shortage of current data on measures ofproduction, particularly in the electronic environment. it would be useful toupdate the pool and machlup studies.second, people may be spending more of their time absorbing information.there is certainly a need for detailed studies of how people spend time withregard to various information sources, and in particular what they are doing withthese sources. are they using them as a basis for decision making or are theycollecting largely irrelevant information just because it is available and they thinkthey should know about it?use of the internet is a prime example of where research into time use is valuable. a 1997 price waterhouse consumer technology survey (price waterhouse,1997) polled 1,010 american consumers via telephone and found that 43 percent ofthe time spent accessing the internet from home was used for obtaining information,and 34 percent was used to send or receive email. this categorization is a start,but clearly it is important to know what kind of information people are accessingon the internet and how it is being used. timeuse diaries (see section 3.1.3) areanother important source of information.there is also the issue of how individual differences, expertise, and intentmay determine how much information is selected and extracted. these questionsneed to be examined in comparative studies of changing uses of information andeffects on productivity within specific contexts and domains. for example, comparative studies to determine the effects of the availability of electronic preprintsin particular scientific disciplines as well as other informationsharing and dissemination practices of various disciplines could yield useful insights.further elucidation of questions concerning information overload can comefrom microlevel studies of technology, information viewing practices, and informationseeking behavior. collecting better information on the use of librarymaterials in the electronic environment could represent an important opportunity.however, it is worth noting that most online systems are not instrumented toallow such data collection, except for a few locally developed systems like theuniversity of california library information system, uc melvyl.22 the paperby amy friedlander, òimpacts of information technology: behaviors andmetrics,ó in appendix b describes additional approaches to the question of library information use.current use is not the only measure of value in a library context. there isalso value associated with future, potential use such as having access to archivalmaterial and preserving the scholarly record. the paper in appendix b byalexander field, òcritical issues relating to impacts of information technologies,ó raises questions about what is needed to ensure retrievability of material inarchives in the information age.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58fostering research on impacts of information technologybranding, credibility, and authoritybranding23 and authorityñthe credibility associated with the name of a publisher or authorñare interrelated in critical ways with the information overloadquestion and with user strategies to manage it. authority is also critical in socialand societal uses of information. little is understood about where authoritycomes from and how it operates in the information context. how do peopleassign credibility, and how is this changing, in an increasingly informationrichand competitive environment? what kinds of credibility systems could be invented or developed? how does branding work in the digital environment, andhow do brand identities transfer from other media? how does the credibilityestablished by peer review conducted prior to publication in scientific journalstranslate to the digital environment where researchers can reach a wide audiencewithout publishing in traditional journals? in a highly competitive environment, the costs for information productionand distribution are sometimes driven to the lowest possible level. to understandhow authority works in this situation requires comparative data on the quality andcost of information. also, research is needed to develop a theory of productionand publishing strategies in the new web environment that includes both òpushóand òpulló technologies,24 micropayments, advertising support, and other alternatives. together, these constitute a much richer set of options than that providedby current media. it is also important to understand interactions affecting howpeople search for information. for example, a commercenet/nielson survey in thespring of 1997 found that 71 percent of frequent users found web sites throughsearch engines, 9.8 percent used friends and relatives, 8.5 percent used newspapersand magazines, and 8.4 percent used links from other sites (commercenet/nielsenmedia research, 1997).on the question of authority, a candidate for case study is legal information,which formerly was a monopolistic market but now is fragmenting as new players become involved. a baseline needs to be established, followed by studies ofhow authority changes with fragmentation into competitive marketplace (seeberring, 1995, which describes authority in legal information). how does themarket structure affect the creation of authority? is it better to have a single,authoritative source (and pay monopoly prices) or to have competing authoritiesand face problems of choice and accuracy? the paper by michael froomkin inappendix b discusses some additional questions about the economics of trust.medicine and finance offer two opportunities to study credibility and how itis established. in both cases, changes in technology and government policy havemade a great deal of data available to the public (via medline25 and edgar26).at the same time many nontraditional sources of information can be found via theweb and other mediañsome very good and some very much outside the mainstream, if not downright fraudulent. how are people using these informationsources, and how do they assign credibility to them? a recent study of credibilityfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions59in usenet groups for the support of people with medical or psychological ailments or disorders found that members relied on predictable strategies to establish the legitimacy of their questions and the authority of their replies. members(or interlopers) who did not use these strategies were either ignored or censuredby the group (galegher et al., 1998).how does technology change relationships with professionals, for example,physicianpatient relationships? what are the costs of errors in judging credibility? one study of the effects of an email òlistserveó support group found thatmembers who reported the greatest benefits were those who were also usingprofessional medical services (cummings et al., 1998).on the internet there is a growing range of sources of information whosecredibility varies. how does this variability change social behavior? does itcontribute to social fragmentation? does this variability when combined with theglobal nature of the internet reinforce fringe beliefs that would not be selfsustaining in an environment determined by geography? are there indicators ofthe current level of common knowledge or experience (beyond viewing of network television) that can be tracked to gain insight into these changes? how willpeople recognize and manage bias in information, such as that which may bepresent in advertisersponsored content?the information gapthe typical formulation of the gap separating information òhavesó and òhavenotsó27 is highly biased toward a definition of literacy as the ability to read andwrite written text, and even somewhat biased toward scholarly communication.vast amounts of audio and video information are becoming available, searchable,and retrievable. currently the enabling technologies for these activities are expensive and are not available as consumer products. however, at some point theinfrastructure necessary to support the transmission of digital multimedia information, such as broadband networks to the home, will be available.it is important to characterize more general forms of literacy and relate theseto the educational process. how is the definition of literacy changing? how isthe value of different forms of literacy (e.g., the ability to facilitate a discussion,or create slides for a presentation) shifting? television has been a pervasivemedium of communication for several decades. what new questions do novel,more interactive media present that television did not? it is probably necessary togo beyond using such terms as òliteracyó or ònumeracyó to indicate a wider set ofskills, and instead characterize the skills specifically.what part can the educational system and universities play in serving theinformation poor? how should this change models of distance learning anddistance education? it would be useful to establish a baseline on current distanceeducation practices and effectiveness by careful studies of the national technological university in the united states, the open university in the united kingfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60fostering research on impacts of information technologydom, and other similar organizations. can distance learning be used to narrowthe gap between the information òhavesó and òhave nots,ó or will it only widenit? what would be some of the characteristics of a system of distance educationtargeted toward the information poor?how are differences in wealth related to possession of needed skills or accessto information? should the focus be on increasing skills or on reducing the needfor skills by providing more accessible technologies and content? for example,what happens if and when people move away from textdominated computingand communication? it is important to understand and establish the validity ofinterrelationships among access to information, the characteristics of the technology used to access the information, and economic opportunities.2.4.5pricing models and contentdifferent approaches to paying for information often involve different incentives for what types of information are created and sold. for instance, spence andowen (1977) showed that when television was paid for by advertising as opposedto payperview fees, there was an incentive to develop more programs thatwould appeal to a wide audience, rather than programs that were intensely valuedby a small group of people. the reason was that advertising rates are based onthe size of the audience and not on how much enjoyment each viewer gets froma show. in contrast, a highly focused show that appeals to a narrow audiencemight be able to recover its costs more easily in a payperview system because itcould charge a higher price per viewer. quite diverse content distributed by cabletelevision, such as the history channel, the cooking channel, and the like, issupported by finely tuned advertising. this line of reasoning helps to explainwhy broadcast television, which until recently depended almost exclusively onadvertising revenues, is often perceived to appeal to the least common denominator. similar tradeoffs are likely to apply in other product markets such as themarket for content on the internet. for example, if online content is supportedprimarily by advertising, one might expect that it will devolve to the lowestcommon denominator. compared with broadcast television, the web offers muchgreater opportunity for niche markets, analogous to specialized cable channels,and perhaps niche advertising. a model to describe the quality and diversity ofpossible content when costrecovery is generated by such niche advertising wouldbe quite interesting.furthermore, even when goods are supported by direct consumer payments,different incentives arise depending on whether the payments are for individualgoods and services or for bundles of goods and services. information goods thatare profitable as part of a bundle may be unprofitable when sold separately, andvice versa.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions612.4.6pricing informationthe emergence of the internet as a way to distribute digital information suchas software, news stories, stock quotes, music, photographs, video clips, andresearch reports has created new opportunities for the pricing of informationgoods. providers of digital information goods are unsure about how to price themand are struggling with a variety of revenue models (cstb, 1996c). becauseperfect copies of these goods can be created and distributed at virtually no cost,some of the old rules, such as òprice should equal marginal cost,ó do not apply, asnoted by varian (1995a,b).the internet has also created new opportunities for repackaging contentthrough bundling, site licensing, subscriptions, rentals, differential pricing, andperuse fees. all of these schemes can be thought of as either aggregating ordisaggregating information goods along some dimension. for instance, aggregation can occur across products, as when software programs are bundled for sale ina software òsuiteó or when access to the full contents of an online service isprovided for a fixed fee. aggregation can also occur across consumers, as whena site license is provided to multiple users for a fixed fee, or over time, as whensubscriptions are made available.many observers have predicted that software and other types of content willbe increasingly disaggregated and metered, as ondemand software òappletsó oras individual news stories and stock quotes. for instance, robert metcalfe haswritten: òwhen the internet finally gets micromoney systems, weõll rent tiny bitsof software for seconds at a time. imagine renting a french spelling checker forone document onceó (metcalfe, 1997). the main rationale for this prediction isthat the current advantage obtained from bundling many goods to save on transaction and distribution costs will no longer apply, given that both of these typesof costs are often much lower on the internet.however, recent theoretical work suggests that in some cases aggregationcan also be a surprisingly effective pricing strategy (bakos and brynjolfsson,1997a,b). not only can it increase the sellerõs profits from a set of digital information goods, but it may also benefit the consumer as well. as a result, insteadof subdividing goods into smaller pieces to be rented separately to individuals, itis sometimes more efficient to bundle many digital goods together. the reason isthat by enabling a form of price discriminationñthe charging of different pricesto different consumers based on their valuation of the quantities they consumeñaggregation can make it easier for the seller to extract value from a given set ofgoods (box 2.7). for the case of bundling, this type of aggregation has beenstudied in a number of articles in the economics literature (e.g., mcafee et al.,1989; schmalensee, 1984). the analysis shows that the benefits of aggregationdepend critically on the low marginal cost of reproducing digital information andthe nature of the correlation in valuations for the goods: aggregation is lessfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 2.7economics of bundling: graphical intuitionthe impact of aggregation on the profitability of selling information goods canbe illustrated by graphically analyzing the effect of bundling on the demand forinformation goods. consumers will choose either 0 or 1 unit of an informationgood, such as a music video or a journal article, depending on how their valuationof the good compares to its price. a possible aggregate demand curve for such agood is depicted in figure 2.3.perfect price discriminationñcharging different prices to different consumers,based on their valuations of a goodñwill maximize the sellerõs profits and willeliminate the deadweight loss shown in figure 2.3 (varian, 1995a). if the sellercannot price discriminate, however, the only single price that will eliminate theinefficiency from the deadweight loss will be a price equal to the marginal cost,which is close to zero. such a low price will not generate sufficient revenues tocover the fixed cost of production and is unlikely to be the profitmaximizing price.aggregation can sometimes overcome this dilemma. consider again a journalarticle and a music video, and suppose that each is valued by consumers at between $0 and $1, generating linear aggregate demand curves like the one in shownfigure 2.3. suppose further that a consumerõs valuation of one good does notcorrelate with his or her valuation of the other, and that access to one good doesnot make the other more or less attractive.what happens if the seller aggregates the two goods and sells them as a bundle? some consumersñthose who valued both goods at $1ñwould be willing topay $2 for the bundle; othersñthose who valued both goods at almost $0ñwouldnot be willing to pay even a penny. the total area under the demand curve for thebundle of the two information goods, and hence the total potential surplus, is exactly equal to the sum of the areas under the separate demand curves. however,most interestingly, bundling changes the shape of the demand curve, making itflatter (more elastic) in the neighborhood of $1 and steeper (less elastic) neareither extreme, as shown in figure 2.4. as more goods are added, this effectbecomes more pronounced. for example, figure 2.5 shows the demand curve fora bundle of 20 information goods, each of which has an independent, linear demand ranging from $0 to $1.a profitmaximizing firm selling a bundle of 20 goods will set the price slightlybelow the bundleõs mean value of $10, and almost all consumers will find it worthwhile to purchase the bundle. in contrast, only half the consumers would havepurchased the goods if they had been sold individually at the profitmaximizingprice of 50 cents each, and so selling the goods as a bundle leads to a smallerdeadweight loss and greater economic efficiency. furthermore, the seller will earnhigher profits by selling a single bundle of 20 goods than by selling each of the 20goods separately. thus, the shape of the bundleõs demand curve is far morefavorable both for the seller and for overall economic efficiency.why does the shape of the demand curve change as goods are added to abundle? the law of large numbers implies that the average valuation for a bundleof goods with valuations drawn from the same distribution will be increasingly concentrated near the mean valuation as more goods are added to the bundle. forexample, some people subscribe to america online for the news, some for stockquotes, and some for horoscopes. it is unlikely that a single person places a veryhigh value on every single good offered; instead most consumers will assign highfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions63values to some goods and low values to other goods, leading to moderate valuesoverall. however, if some consumers tend to have systematically higher valuations for all types of goods, then the moderating effect of bundling will be mutedand, in some cases, unbundling will be preferred. in general, a strategy of mixedbundling, which involves offering both the complete bundle and various subbundles, can be shown to be the dominant strategy.similar effects result in other types of aggregation, such as aggregation acrossconsumers, as in the case of selling a single site license for use by multiple consumers. the law of large numbers, which underlies these aggregation effects, isremarkably general. for instance, it holds for almost any initial distribution with afinite varianceñnot just the linear demand assumed for the examples above. furthermore, the law does not require that the valuations be independent of each otheror even that the valuations be drawn from the same distribution.however, theoretical analysis shows that when marginal costs are high, thendisaggregation may be more profitable than aggregation. because the marginalcosts of reproducing goods are so much lower on the internet than they are in mostother contexts, bundling may become much more attractive as internet commercegrows. the policy implications of such changes, including their potential effects oncompetition and innovation, remain issues for future research.figure 2.3deadweight loss from sales of a zeromarginalcost information good.assume that after the first unit, marginal production costs, denoted by c, are close to zero.at price p, the number of units purchased will be q, resulting in profits of (pc)q. however, as long as p > c, some consumers who value the good at more than its production costsc will not be willing to pay the going price p. as a result, these consumers do not getaccess to the good, creating a deadweight loss for society, denoted by the shaded region.pcqquantitypricemarginal costdeadweight loss (dwl)consumerõs surplus (cs)demandfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64fostering research on impacts of information technologyfigure 2.4demand curve for bundle of two information goods with independentuniform demand.figure 2.5 demand curve for a bundle of 20 information goods with independentlydistributed uniform valuations.51015200.00.250.50.751quantity (for bundle)price21.51.00.50.00.250.50.751quantity (for bundle)pricefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions65attractive when marginal costs are high or when valuations are highly correlated(bakos and brynjolfsson, 1997a,b).thus, strategies involving bundling, site licensing, and subscriptions caneach be understood as responses to the radical decline in costs for the reproduction of information made possible by digitization and distribution through theinternet. increased use of micropayments can be seen as a consequence ofradically lower transaction and distribution costs. information goods that hadpreviously been aggregated to save on transaction or distribution costs may bedisaggregated as predicted by metcalfe (1997), but new aggregations of goodsmay emerge to exploit the potential for price discrimination.experimentation with various approaches continues, and it is premature toconclude that one approach such as microcharging is best, or to try to predicteven in what circumstances it may be preferred. collection of data, analysis, andfurther theoretical work would all be helpful.2.4.7network externalitieseconomists say that a network externality exists when one consumerõs demand for a product or service depends on how many other consumers purchasethat service. for example, consider a consumerõs demand for a fax machine.people want fax machines so that they can communicate with each other. if noone you communicate with has a fax machine, it certainly is not worthwhile foryou to buy one. modems have a similar property: a modem is useful only if thereis another modem somewhere that you can communicate with.network externalities are ubiquitous in computing and communications. thedemand for email depends on how many other users there are; the demand for aweb browser depends on how many servers there are; and even the demand for aword processing package will depend on how many other users of that packagethere are.28network externalities were first modeled by rohlfs (1974) in an attempt tounderstand why at&tõs picture phone was not successful. however, there islittle interest in failures, and rohlfsõs article did not attract wide notice untilalmost 10 years after it appeared. today much more is known about this phenomenon. nicholas economides has studied network economics extensively andmaintains a web site that contains a bibliography of his and other work on thistopic.29 also see katz and shapiro (1994) for a nice overview of network externalities and their implications.in each of the examples above (fax, email, web, word processing), the usegrew slowly at first and then suddenly surged ahead. figure 2.6 shows the priceand number of fax machines shipped over a period of 12 years.this qualitative behavior can be reproduced by some very simple economicmodels whose essential feature is multiple equilibria. if everyone expects aproduct to be a failure, then no one will buy it and the product will fail. but iffostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66fostering research on impacts of information technologyeveryone expects a product to succeed, many people will want to buy it and theproduct will succeed. which of these outcomes occurs depends on whether thenumber of early adopters exceeds a particular critical mass that is a function ofthe parameters of the model. in a stochastic model, the probability that this willhappen depends on the magnitude of the random fluctuations in the number ofadopters.because of the phenomenon of critical mass, it is very important to try tostimulate growth early in the life cycle of a product. today it is quite common tosee producers offering very cheap access to a piece of software or a communications service in order to create a new market where none existed before. acritical question is how big the market has to be before it can take off on its own.theory can provide little guidance here; the appropriate strategy depends on thenature of the good and the costs and benefits that users face in adopting it.2.4.8auctionsauctions, one of the oldest market institutions,30 have played an importantrole in the development of wireless communications. the modern study ofauctions by economists dates back to vickrey (1961), whose work, which waslater awarded a nobel prize, was little read until the early 1970s, when the u.s.department of the interior auctioned off the right to drill for oil in offshore tracts.following the auction, several economists became interested in the optimal strategies associated with such auctions and examined ways that auctions might bedesigned to achieve some given end (e.g., profit maximization, or efficient allocation of resources).in recent years congress has authorized the federal communications commission (fcc) to allocate the radio spectrum via auctionña policy recommendedby economists leo herzl and ronald coase over the period from 1957 to 1959figure 2.6average price of fax machines sold (left) and number of units shipped(right). source: adapted from economides and himmelberg (1995).average pricefor fax machines sold0500100015002000250019761980198419881992yeardollarsfax machines shipped0500100015002000250019761980198419881992yearthousandsfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions67(coase, 1959). these auctions are generally regarded as having being quitesuccessful.31 see mcmillan (1994) for a readable introduction to how the fccauctions were conducted.the economic analysis starts by considering two sorts of auctions: commonvalue auctions and privatevalue auctions. in a commonvalue auction, such asthe auctioning of offshore oil drilling rights, the item that is being bid for is worthsome particular amount, but the bidders may have different opinions about howmuch that amount is. in a privatevalue auction, the item in question is worthdifferent amounts to different people. most auctions of ordinary consumer goodssuch as works of art and antiques are of the privatevalue type. for more on thetheory and practice of auctions, see the survey by milgrom (1989) and the references cited therein. see also the discussion in box 2.8.2.4.9electronic commerceelectronic commerce is different from physical commerce because technology changes the modes of communication, ultimately affecting the flow of information. the reduced cost of communicating, transmitting, and processing information is at the core of these differences. the marginal cost of disseminatinginformation electronically to new or existing customers is lower than with moreconventional methods, since the cost of an additional web query or email message is close to zero. similarly, customers can use the internet to search acrosscompeting sellersñwhich can be done directly by visiting various sellersõ websites and inquiring about prices, products, and availability. increasingly, searchescan also be facilitated by using òintelligent agentsó or intermediaries that cangather and aggregate the necessary information on behalf of the customer. as aresult, geographic and informational barriers that dampen competition amongsellers may become increasingly irrelevant.bakos (1997) has analyzed the implications of reduced search costs forcompetition, efficiency, and the division of surplus between buyers and sellers.his model indicates that when electronic marketplaces reduce the costs to theconsumer of searching for the lowest price, there will be (1) an improvement inoverall economic efficiency and (2) a shift in bargaining power from sellers tobuyers. as a result buyers will be strictly better off, but the effect on sellers isambiguous. a change from very high to moderate search costs will tend to makesellers better off, as new markets emerge. for instance, a market for specialty carparts might be unsustainable without a technology like the internet to lower thetransaction costs involved in finding buyers and sellers. the creation of such amarket provides new opportunities for sellers. however, bakosõs model indicates that if search costs continue to fall, sellers may be made worse off sincebuyers can more easily find the seller that offers the lowest price. since all sellerscharging more than this lowest price will lose business, competition will tend todrive down prices until they reach the marginal cost of the product, leaving nofostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 2.8simple insights learned about auctionscommonvalue auctionsa sensible strategy in a commonvalue auction, it would seem, would be to estimatethe value of the item in question, add on a profit margin, and then bid that amount. however, if everyone uses such a procedure, it follows that the winner will tend to be the bidderwith the highest estimateñwhich then is likely to be an overestimate of the true value.hence the òwinneró will usually end up overbidding, a phenomenon known as the winnerõscurse.avoiding the winnerõs curse involves bidding down from oneõs estimated value, withthe reduction depending on the number of other bidders. if oneõs estimate is higher thanthe estimates of 2 other bidders it may be reasonably close to the true value; but if it topsthe estimates of 100 other bidders, it is almost certainly an overbid!economists have developed a number of statistical and game theoretical models ofbidding behavior in such markets that have been applied successfully in practical contextssuch as auctions of parts of the radio spectrum.privatevalue auctionsthe most common form of privatevalue auction is the english auction, in which bidsare successively raised until only one bidder is left who then claims the item at the lastprice bid. in this kind of auction, the person who is willing to bid the highest gets the item,but the price paid will generally be slightly above the bid of the secondhighest bidder.sealedbid auctionsin a sealed bid auction, each consumer submits a bid sealed in an envelope. the bidsare opened and the item is awarded to the highest bidder at the price he bid. the optimalstrategy in the sealedbid auction is to try to guess the amount the other consumers willbid, and then enter a bid slightly above the highest of these, assuming that the item isattractive to the bidder at that price. thus bidders will not, in general, want to reveal theirtrue valuation for the item being auctioned off. furthermore, the outcome of the sealed bidauction will depend on each bidderõs beliefs about the othersõ valuations. even if thesebeliefs are correct on average, there will be cases in which the bidders guess incorrectlyand the item is not awarded to the person who values it most.vickrey auctionsa variation on the sealedbid auctionñknown as the òvickrey auction,ó after the economist who first analyzed its propertiesñeliminates the need for strategic play. the vickrey auction simply awards the item to the highest bidder, but at the second highest pricethat was bid. it turns out that in such an auction, there is no need to play strategicallyñtheoptimal bid is simply the true value to the bidder.1it is also worth observing that the revenue raised by the vickrey auction will be essentially the same as that raised by the ordinary english auction, since in each case theperson who assigned the highest value gets the item but only has to pay the secondhighest price. (in the english auction, the person willing to bid the highest gets the item,but he or she has to pay only the price bid by the person with the second highest value,plus the minimal bid increment.)1the essence of the argument can be seen in a twobidder example. let v1 be the true value of bidder 1, andlet b1and b2 be the bids of the two bidders. then the expected payoff to consumer 1 isprog b1 > b2v1 b2.if v1 > b2 then bidder 1 would like the probability to be equal to 1ñwhich he can assure by reporting b1 v1.if v1 < b2, bidder 1 would like the probability to be zeroñwhich he can ensure by reporting b1 = v1. either way,it is optimal for bidder 1 to report the true value.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions69surplus for the sellers (bakos, 1997). the dynamics of òfrictionfreeó capitalismare not attractive to sellers of commodity products who had previously dependedon geography or customer ignorance to insulate them from the lowcost seller inthe market. as geography becomes less important, new sources of product differentiation, such as customized features or service or innovation will becomemore important, at least for those sellers who do not have the advantage of thelowest cost of production.is this kind of dynamic already emerging in internet commerce? althoughthere is much speculation about the effect that the internet will have on prices,thus far there has been virtually no systematic evidence obtained or analysisdone. however, one exploratory study by bailey and brynjolfsson (1997) did notfind much evidence that prices on the internet were any lower or less dispersedthan prices for the same goods sold via traditional retail channels. their analysiswas based on data from 52 internet and conventional retailers for 337 distincttitles of books, music compact disks, and software. bailey and brynjolfssonprovided several possible explanations for their unexpected findings, includingthe possibility that search on the internet during the sample period was not aseasy as is sometimes assumed, that the demographics of the typical internet userencouraged a higher price equilibrium, that many of the internet retailers werestill experimenting with pricing strategies, and that internet retailers were differentiating their products (e.g., by offering options for delivery or providing customized recommendations), which added value. because of the rapid pace ofchange in internet commerce, it is not clear whether their findings will apply tocurrent and future periods. however, they have suggested the need for closeexamination of the common assumption that the internet will be simply a òfrictionfreeó version of the traditional retail channels.despite the uncertainties about electronic commerce and relatively few attempts to look at the broad picture, there is a great deal of privatesector interest.electronic commerce is also receiving increasing attention from policy makers.the clinton administrationõs framework for global electronic commerce(1997; available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/wh/new/commerce/index.html>) highlights both the economic potential of electronic commercevia the internet as well as the need for government to avoid undue regulatoryrestrictions and to not subject internet transactions to additional taxation.right now society is in a period of intense speculation and experimentation.experimentation involves a risk owing to pathdependenceñtechnological choicesmade in the past may constrain what technological options will be compatible in thefuture. standards developed now for electronic payment may remain in use wellinto the future, and careful thought should be given to their implications. forexample, some of the architectural design of the visamastercard òsecure electronic transactions (set)ó technical standard was necessitated by the need toconform with current cryptographic export control policies. yet these policies aretoday very much in flux and may be entirely different in a few years. migrating theset standard so that it is consistent with these new policies could be very costly, ifnot impossible.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70fostering research on impacts of information technologyeven if cryptography policy changes, society may be locked into designchoices already made. thus it is critically important that any such standards beexamined by those with expertise in technology, economics, business, and lawñno one discipline suffices to provide the necessary expertise.one important insight about electronic commerce that follows from a legaland economic analysis has to do with assignment of liability, that is, with whoends up bearing the costs of unexpected outcomes. if the goal is to minimizeoverall transaction costs, liability should be assigned most heavily to those whoare best placed to reduce the costs of transactions.consider, for example, the rule in the united states that the consumer isliable for only the first $50 in losses from fraudulent credit card use. thisassignment of liability has led to the development of highly sophisticated statistical profiling of consumer purchases that allows companies to detect fraudulentactivity, thereby reducing the total costs of transactions. if the liability hadinstead rested entirely with consumers, one might have expected to see thembeing more careful in protecting their credit cards, but there would have beenlittle reason for banks to invest in risk management technology. another example is the difference between u.s. and u.k. assignment of liability for automatic teller machine (atm) fraud. in the united states the burden of proof lieswith the bank; in the united kingdom it lies with the customer. this has led u.s.banks to invest in video cameras at atm machines, whereas u.k. banks typicallyhave not made such investments.the issue of liability is critical for electronic commerce. a survey releasedin march 1997 by commercenet/nielson media research (1997) found òa lackof trust in the security of electronic payments as the leading inhibitor preventingpeople from actually purchasing goods and services online.ó this is remarkableconsidering the fact that the standard $50 limit still applies to online credit purchases. one might conjecture that credit card companies are not interested in amarketing effort to educate the public on this issue until they understand theirown potential liabilities for fraud and misuse. there is also a need to understandthe psychological and social dimensions of òtrust,ó since trust is a critical component of any sort of commercial transaction.the information economy calls for new economic institutions such asòcertificate authoritiesó that certify the connection between legal identitiesand possession of cryptographic keysña publickey infrastructure. largecertificate issuers include versign, which has close ties to the credit cardissuer visa, and gte, which has close ties to mastercard. the economics ofthis industry are uncertain and clearly depend critically on the issue of liability assignment.another factor that is potentially delaying the growth of electronic commerce is intellectual property protection. some of the broader issues are dealtwith in section 2.4.1, òprotection of intellectual property,ó but some of the specifically commerceoriented issues are mentioned here.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions71the first such issue is the role of copy protection, which is a technical meansfor making it more difficult to create additional functional copies of software in acompetitive environment. copyprotected massmarket software was effectivelycompeted away during the mid1980s. any copy protection that inconveniencesusers is difficult to maintain in a highly competitive market. see shy (1998) foran economic analysis.more generally, numerous copy protection schemes have been proposed tohelp safeguard intellectual property, suggesting that there will almost certainly bea standards battle for supremacy in this market. besen and farrell (1994) haveprovided a survey of economic analysis with regard to conflicts about standardsthat sets forth the current state of the art in this area. more work in this areawould be valuable.electronic commerce also raises significant antitrust issues. there are largeeconomies of scale in distributionña single generalpurpose online bookstore orcd store can serve a very large market. there are also potential demandsideeconomies of scale in payment mechanisms and software, which leads to a winnertakeall market structure with a single firm (or small set of firms) dominatingthe market.there have been a number of interesting studies of market structure in thiscontext (see, e.g., katz and shapiro, 1994, for a survey); however, much morework is needed. the role of antitrust policy in an industry with strong networkexternalities and standardization issues is especially important to understand. adominant firm brings the benefits of standardization, but presumably also imposes inefficiencies due to its monopoly position. the social tradeoff betweenthese benefits and costs is critically important and is the subject of much currentdebate. some dispassionate analysis would be highly welcome.there has been much speculation about the macroeconomic effects of electronic commerce, such as the loss of economic sovereignty. most economicanalysis has focused on moving from multiple currencies to a single currency (asin the european union context), but the emergence of currencies issued by private companies and barter arrangements is a distinct possibility. economic monetary history would likely shed some light on how an economy functions in thepresence of multiple private currencies, since that circumstance was common upuntil the turn of the last century.there is also the question of who will appropriate the benefits of electroniccommerce. varian (1996a) has argued that price discrimination will become awidely used approach to selling information. (one form of price discriminationis enabled by bundling, discussed in section 2.4.6, òpricing information.ó) hecites earlier studies that suggest that the welfare effects of price discriminationwill be benign from the viewpoint of overall welfare, but price discriminationmay certainly affect the division of economic gains between consumers andfirms. these earlier studies typically assumed a monopolistic market structure,which may or may not be appropriate for electronic commerce. thus extendingfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72fostering research on impacts of information technologythese models to more competitive market structures would enhance understanding of the likely impact of electronic commerce on consumers.2.5illustrative broad topics for ongoing researchworkshop discussions and position papers yielded numerous suggestions forresearch topics, a number of which are discussed above. from these topicsñspanning a wide range of interdisciplinary subjects from economic productivityto communities in the information ageñthe workshop steering committee selected an illustrative set of promising areas for research, listed below.¥interdisciplinary study of information indicators. the idea of developing a method for quantifying certain aspects of society in the united states is as oldas the constitution. over the last two decades, researchers have recognized andbegun to analyze the increasing role that information plays in all aspects of society.these efforts have proved most fruitful when measuring the contribution of information to the economy,32 the size of the information work force,33 and the level ofpenetration of the information infrastructure.34 in most of these analyses, theconclusions drawn have been consistent with the view that society is in the processof a fundamental change through the rapid development and implementation ofinformation technologies and the products and services associated with them.some of these studies raise the indirect question of the value of attempting touse a set of indicators to represent the information activities of society, such aspublic discourse and democratic processes, to improve understanding. this approach was first pioneered by borko and menou (1983). in essence, looking atsociety from an information perspective leads us to perceive society as composedof information structures and communication behaviors. in other words, thoseactivities that lead to the construction of environments for producing, receiving,distributing, and processing information reflect the creation of information structures, while those activities that involve transmission of information reflect communication behaviors. box 2.9 lists some notional indicators.the dramatic informationcentric changes that have occurred across all societies in recent decades suggest that the social forces enabled by the developmentof information structures and the prevalence of communication behaviors bemeasured. more fully developed, a set of quantitative information indicatorsoffers opportunities for comparatively measuring community information assets,public participation, interconnectedness, social capital, information poverty, anduniversal service.it would be useful for the nation to invest in an interdisciplinary study ofinformation indicators. the perspectives of many disciplines come to bear on thequestion of measuring impact. an exploration of how different disciplines do ordo not reach consensus about how to measure impacts, and the extent to whichconsensus is desirable, is called for. from such an exchange can come broadlyfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions73box 2.9a primitive list of information indicatorsinformation structuresbooks produced (general/textbooks)cable tv access/trunk linesnumber of cinema seatsnumber of computer systems/databasesnumber of database subscribersnumber of journal articles/technical reportsnumber of libraries/archivesnumber of modemsnumber of movies releasednumber of newspapersnumber of online subscribersnumber of personal computersnumber of registered computer usersnumber of satellite dishesnumber of telephonesnumber of tvs/radiosnumber of periodicals published (general/scientific)number of public telephonesnumber of radio/tv channelsnumber of telephone access/trunk linescommunication behaviorscirculation of library volumesdomestic/international mail trafficfirstclass letters mailedhours spent accessing the internethours spent listening/viewing radio/tvaccepted measures of access, use, and the impact of information and informationtechnology. one particular outcome could be the aggregation of the kinds ofmicroindicators listed in box 2.9 into broadly accepted macro information indicators such as the following:ñinterconnectivity index. a measure of the facility of electroniccommunication, and an evaluation of the development of this dimension ofthe information infrastructure;ñinformation quality of life index. similar to an index produced bythe organisation for economic cooperation and development, an index thatwould attempt to evaluate the qualitative levels of communication availableto individuals;ñleading information indicators. an index that would attempt topredict the growth of the information infrastructure;fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74fostering research on impacts of information technologyñhome media index. an index of the state of penetration of communications technologies in the home that might qualify as a leading index ofthe potential for future consumption of information; andñmarginalization index. an index that would measure the extent towhich specific populations are excluded from participation in the information infrastructure.were such a set of indicators developed, funding agencies like the nationalscience foundation might have a standardized tool in hand through which toassess the outcomes of the research that they sponsor.¥impacts of information technology on labor market structure. information technology has been linked to wage inequality and other changes inthe structure of the labor market (more detail is provided in section 2.3). understanding the extent to which and the mechanism by which computers mayaffect increased wage inequality is important in determining the nature andextent of public policy responses. this research should acknowledge that computers, by themselves, are not causal agents. rather it is the entire constellationof economic and organizational strategies, managerial perspectives, and workpractices within which computing technology is embedded that affects wageinequality.one possible response is improved training of workers for itrelated jobs.understanding the needs for education and training requires better definition ofthe skills required to make use of it. results from such research would benefitboth policy makers and the private sector as they seek to better match educationand training to workplace skill requirements.¥productivity and its relationship to work practices and organizationalstructures for the use of information technology. extracting the benefits ofnew technologies depends in part on organizational adaptation to them. asdiscussed in more detail above, industrial exploitation of the benefits of theelectric dynamo in the early part of this century required new approaches tomanufacturing. organizations using information technology today are at a similar learning stage.a major impediment to determining optimal work practices and organizational structures has been the lack of a clear picture of what data already exist.developing such a list would help speed up research in this area. there are anumber of places where specific research needs are already apparent, such as thecollection of time series data to help clarify the role of technology in organizational changes.understanding the productivity benefits of information technologyñilluminating the socalled productivity paradoxñalso is worthy of continued research.important questions include how to better quantify what have been consideredfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions75òunmeasurableó economic inputs, such as organizational knowledge, and òunmeasurableó outputs, such as product quality, associated with computers.as recognition grows that productivity gains from information technologyincreasingly depend not just on the introduction of new technology but also onfinding new ways and organizational structures to use it, it is worth noting thatadvances in the technology have owed much to governmentsupported computerscience research. advances in economic productivity would benefit from analogous research on how to better use information technology in the workplace.this is one facet of the broader question of learning how to better use informationtechnology to achieve a host of social and economic goals. there are alreadymoves to increase research in this domain; one example is the national sciencefoundationõs interdisciplinary knowledge and distributed intelligence initiative.¥intellectual property issues. information technology raises many newquestions about optimal protection of intellectual property rights, posing challenges to policy makers revising intellectual property law or international agreements as well as to commercial interests considering particular intellectual protection schemes. many new schemes have been advanced for protection ofintellectual property, and more needs to be known to choose among them. whileconsiderable research has been conducted on the effect of different patent regimes on innovation, little has been studied regarding the consequences of different copyright protection schemes (see section 2.4.1). theoretical work and empirical research on different copyright protection regimes will help inform futureactions to protect intellectual property.¥social issues addressed at the protocol level. the internet has givenrise to many new social issues in intellectual property, privacy, and data filtering.addressing these social issues at the protocol levelñthrough policies, rules, andconventions for the exchange and use of informationñis a promising area forinterdisciplinary research. examples include:ñpics, the platform for internet content selection, which implementsa set of protocols for rating web sites (resnick and miller, 1996);ñp3p,35 a project for specifying privacy practices;ñlanguage specifying the terms and conditions by which intellectualproperty is managed; andñopen profiling standard,36 a method for individual users to selectively release information about themselves under specific conditions.each of these projects involves both technological and social dimensions.for example, pics raises issues not only about how best to encode ratings forweb sites, but also about how to represent them; cognitive issues about howelaborate the rating schemes should be; and economic issues about how ratingbureaus can recover costs. another issue is how users can evaluate the trustworthiness of the labels provided by ratings services.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76fostering research on impacts of information technologynotes1.see tyack and cuban (1995) for an analysis of why earlier technologies for improving teaching and learning never achieved their promise. see also references in cstb (1994b, 1996c).2.òactive interventionó refers to deliberate interventionñsuch as the introduction of new technology or educational practicesñfor the purposes of research.3.while this discussion focuses on this question in a u.s. domestic context, in much of the rest ofthe world, socioeconomic disparities and the gap between urban and rural access are muchgreater.4.see <http://www.hotmail.com>.5.note, however, that not all forms of communication necessarily reduce localness. for example, wiley and rice (1933) postulated that the telephone, a pointtopoint medium, reinforces locality whereas broadcast media tend to diminish the importance of locality.6.this work updated earlier work conducted at a time when computing was less prevalent.7.the òoutput effectó also includes changing tastes or desires, e.g., the changes in preference forcars rather than horses or for word processors rather than typewriters.8.one might expect software development to contribute to increased demand for skilled work,but recent work by brynjolfsson (1997) found that it was not a major factor, at least not in mostindustrial countries. although the u.s. software industry is fairly large and growing, it is stillnot large enough to explain any significant share of the effect.9.see brynjolfsson (1993), attewell (1994), sichel (1997), and cstb (1994a) for empiricalstudies of the productivity paradox. see cstb (1994a), baily and chakrabarti (1988),brynjolfsson (1993), wilson (1995), and brynjolfsson and yang (1996) for reviews.10.concurrent engineering refers to the practice in which personnel from every phase of productdevelopmentñe.g., from design to production engineering, quality control, and serviceñcollaborate in product development beginning at the earliest stages.11.note that improvements in the technology for transmitting and manipulating image data increasingly remove this limitation.12.with the exception of the retirementplanning task force, the studies of differential benefitscited in this section used survey analysis of naturally occurring differential use. statisticaltechniques were used to control for the effects of other variables, but because people were notrandomly assigned to the use (or nonuse) of technology, strict causal claims are not warranted.in the retirementplanning study, stillemployed and recently retired people were randomlyassigned to task forces with and without access to technology. because of the random assignment, causal claims are warranted.13.u.s. copyright office records on documents registered for copyright are available via thelibrary of congress information system (locis) for 1978 onward.14.figures on literacy are not always reliable, in part because the definition of literacy is somewhat vague. the numbers given in this discussion were taken from contemporary accounts.15.early expectations were that interactive cable services providing video on demand (vod) ornearvod would be lucrative and popular. however, early experiments by the cable industryshowed that consumer response to vod was unlikely to generate sufficient revenue to justifyinvestment in interactive cable systems. investment in twoway capabilities in the cable industry today is predicated on a market for broadband data delivery (including internet as well astelephony and video conferencing) to both the home and small businesses, in addition to videoprogramming.16.see <http://www.cyberpatrol.com/>.17.this set of protocols was adopted as a standard by the consortium that sets standards for theworld wide web.18.epic (see <http://www.epic.org/privacy/privacyresourcesfaq.html>) contains an extensivelist of online resources on privacy issues.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.illustrative examples and unanswered questions7719.this study is based on a sample of 1,009 computer users derived from a sample representativeof 2,204 persons, age 18 or over, living in households with telephones and located in the 48contiguous states.20.note that federal legislation passed in 1994 (which did not come into effect until 1997) allowspeople to restrict the release of personal information from state motor vehicle records.21.see <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/resources/infoecon/security.html>.22.see <http://www.melvyl.ucop.edu/>.23.branding is an effort to transform something perceived as generic into something with whichpeople associate a brand name. a recent example is the òinside inteló campaign, which builtup significant brand awareness for cpus, something that the average individual cared littleabout.24.òpushó technologies send information to an intended consumer without that consumer havingrequested it, while òpulló technologies send information only in response to a specific request.radio and television broadcasting and email are examples of push technologies, because theyboth transmit information regardless of whether or not anyone specifically requested it; theworld wide web is an example of pull technology since a page must be requested before it issent. note that push technologies can be used over the internet as well; examples include thepointcast system, which delivers customized news to usersõ computer desktops.25.the national library of medicineõs medline system makes extensive bibliographic information covering the fields of medicine and health care available free of charge to the publicthrough a web site.26.the electronic data gathering, analysis, and retrieval system makes available to the publicthrough a web site much of the information companies are required to submit to the u.s.securities and exchange commission.27.such a gap exists, for example, between various socioeconomic groups, between urban andrural areas, and between industrialized and developing countries.28.also see markus (1987) on the theory of critical mass for interactive media.29.see <http://raven.stern.nyu.edu/networks>.30.herodotus describes the use of auctions in babylon as early as 500 bc. it is remarkable that avenerable economic institution like an auction has found a receptive audience on the internet.the internet auction list (<http://www.usaweb.com>) lists more than 50 sites that have regular online auctions, and more are being added every day. computer equipment, air tickets, andbarbie dolls are being bought and sold daily via internet auctions. even advertising space isbeing sold via auction on adbot (<http://www.adbot.com>).31.there have, however, been problems due to overbidding (the socalled òwinnerõs curseó phenomenon, described in box 2.8) and signaling. signaling can occur in multiround auctionswhen the bid values are used to signal the intent of the bidder, in violation of the rule againstthere being any collaboration or collusion between auction participants. for example, a bid of$1,000,202 might indicate that a bidder has a particular interest in the market with telephonearea code 202.32.see jussawalla et al. (1988); machlup (1962); and porat (1977).33.see bell (1973); katz (1988); machlup (1962); and schement (1990).34.see dordick and wang (1993); ito (1981); and kuo (1989).35.see <http://www.w3.org/privacy/overview.html>.36.see <http://www.w3.org>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78fostering research on impacts of information technology783datañthe basis for new knowledgeas the basis for exploration and rigorous analysis of observed phenomena,systematically collected data are critical to investigations of the economic andsocial impacts of information technology. moreover, more timely data collectionand analysis are likely to be useful in informing future policy decisions. severaldatarelated issues arise for researchers working at the intersection of informationtechnology and socioeconomic issues. as discussion at the workshop madeclear, among the most important is the need for more extensive, more timely, andnew sources of relevant data.3.1types and uses of datasocial scientists collect data from and about a variety of social units, rangingin degree of aggregation from individual human beings to corporations, economies, and nations (box 3.1). their time perspective may be historical or longitudinal (box 3.2). the kinds of data collected and the methods of collection alsodepend on the overall purpose of the study. specialpurpose data sets are generally constructed by researchers to address a particular questionñsuch as theextent to which information technology contributes to economic productivity.multipurpose data sets can be used to study a wide variety of issues in a range ofsocial science disciplines. as such, multipurpose data sets are part of the infrastructure of social science research.1 the scope and range of such data sets areillustrated by the toplevel categories of the data in the archives maintained by theinteruniversity consortium for political and social research (see box 3.3).fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge79box 3.1some major sources of social science data with examples oftypes of data collectedpeople¥as personal observers (e.g., verbal òthinkaloudó responses gathered in studiesof decision making and problem solving; responses to interviews and questionnaires)¥as corporate or community representatives (e.g., descriptions of corporate deployment of information technology elicited in interviews with chief information officers)¥as performers (e.g., scores from educational testing; patterns of participation ingroups)¥as decision makers (e.g., data revealing consumer preferences or choices)documents and recordsñhistorical and contemporary¥diaries (e.g., details of personal situations)¥media content (e.g., indicators of cultural themes)¥commercial records (e.g., data on the diffusion of the telephone)¥public records (e.g., data from birth and death records indicating populationchanges over time)organizations¥performance measures collected from publicly reported data such as earningsreports; other financial measures¥personnel statistics¥product performance datacommunities¥data on voter turnout or library circulation rates as indicators of citizen participationgovernments¥labor market statistics¥national and regional economic statistics3.1.1data from experimentsexperiments involve setting up control and experimental groups that differonly with respect to the presence or absence of the effect being studied and thuspermit researchers to conclude that a difference in outcomes in the two groups isactually due to the difference in treatment. the homenet project is an experiment that examines the impacts of computers in the home (see section 2.1.1,òcomputer use in the homeó). the internet demand experiment (index) atthe university of california, berkeley, is attempting to measure user demand forinternet òquality of serviceó by offering different pricequality combinations andobserving what users choose.2 offering an actual choice is likely to lead to moreaccurate results than is asking hypothetical questions.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 3.2some major study designs for collecting datacase study: indepth study of one social unitña family, a school, an organizational work group, or a political campaign. the researcher uses multiple means ofdata collection (observation, interviews, document analysis) to develop a rich understanding of the interplay of factors operating in a single social setting.crosssectional study: study in which data are collected on a relatively smallnumber of variables from a relatively large number of social units at one point in time,often from questionnaires or existing records. the researcher often uses statisticaltechniques to characterize how variables are associated with one another.panel study: study in which data are collected on the same variables from thesame social units at repeated points in time; supports investigating the impact ofparticular events that occur over the time course selected (e.g., the impact of apresidential candidateõs debate on a panel of voters or the impact of an advertisingcampaign on a panel of consumers) as well as trends over time.experimental study: study in which the researcher uses random assignmenttechniques to allocate social units to different treatment regimes or experiences.experiments establish control groups and experimental groups that differ only withrespect to the presence or absence of the effect being studied. when randomassignment is achieved, and social units have the same experiences in all waysexcept for the experimental treatment, and there is a measured difference in outcomes associated with the different treatments, then the researcher has evidencefor concluding that the difference in treatment actually caused the difference inoutcomes.box 3.3toplevel categories of data in the archives of theinteruniversity consortium for political and social research¥census enumerations¥community, urban studies¥conflict, aggression, violence¥economic behavior, attitudes¥education¥elites and leadership¥geography and environment¥government structures, policies¥health care, facilities¥instructional packages¥international systems¥legal systems¥legislative, deliberative bodies¥mass political behavior, attitudes¥organizational behavior¥social indicators¥social institutions, behaviorfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge813.1.2panel datapanel data is especially valuable because it enables answering questionsabout both crosssectional and timeseries variations. for example, a panel studyof families can address such crosssectional questions as how childrenõs access tocomputers in the home is related to their educational performance in school(holding constant other factors). it also can address such timeseries questions aswhether high school studentsõ educational performance in school is related totheir access to computers in the home (holding constant other factors) and howthis relationship is affected by the age at which students first had home access.panel data also allows application of statistical techniques to control for unobserved effects that vary across a population. for example, the kinds of softwareand hardware available in the home have changed substantially over the past 15years and are continuing to do so. an analysis of how the age at which studentsfirst had home access to computing affects later educational performance inschool must take into account changes over time in the particular computingresources available.a number of these multipurpose sets of panel data are collected by bothprivate research groups and the federal government. federal longitudinal studiesinclude the current employment statistics program3 and the national longitudinal surveys (bureau of labor statistics, 1998).the versatility and potential range of uses of multipurpose longitudinal studies are illustrated by the panel study of income dynamics (psid) administeredby the institute for social research4 at the university of michigan. the originalpurpose of the psid, a longitudinal study begun in 1968 of a representativesample of u.s. individuals and the family units in which they reside, was to studyfactors influencing economic variables such as income, wealth, and earnings.recently the psid undertook five major key initiatives: (1) studies of data quality; (2) a recontact initiative; (3) coding of data on census tract, mortality, andrelationships; (4) supplements on wealth and health; and (5) early file releasethrough the internet. these initiatives have increased the cumulative responserate of the psid; shown its continuing value as representing the u.s. population;added enormously to the stock of knowledge about important areas such as healthand wealth; added detailed information on the residential areas in which respondents live, on mortality, and on relationships among family members; and increased the accessibility of the data to users. as a consequence of low attritionrates and the success of recontact efforts, the sample size grew dramatically overthe period, from about 7,000 core households to almost 8,700.an extension of the psidñthe new parentchild survey component that willinclude timeuse questions covering use of computers by children both at homeand in schoolñillustrates the sort of valuable information on use and impacts ofinformation technology that these extensive surveys can provide (see box 3.4).fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82fostering research on impacts of information technology3.1.3data from timeuse studiesdata obtained from timeuse studies, which can take the form of crosssectional, panel, or experimental studies, can help answer questions such as whatpeople do with computers. current information on that and related topics isbox 3.4computer use by children: the psid parentchild surveythe panel study of income dynamics (psid) is currently supplementing itscore data collection with data on parents and their 0 to 12yearold childrenñthepsid parentchild survey. the objective is to provide researchers with a comprehensive, nationally representative, and longitudinal database of children and theirfamilies that will enable study of the dynamic process of childhood development.the additions to the core data set include the following: (1) reliable, agegraded assessments of the cognitive, behavioral, and health status of 3,500 children(including about 550 immigrant children) in 2,500 families, obtained from the mother, a second caregiver, an absent parent, the teacher, the school administrator,and the child; (2) a comprehensive accounting of parental and caregiver time inputs to children as well as other aspects of the way children and adolescentsspend their time; (3) teacherreported use of time in elementary and preschoolprograms; and (4) measures of use of resources other than timeñfor example, thelearning environment in the home, teacher and administrator reports of schoolresources, and decennial censusbased measurement of neighborhood resources. (the survey questions may be found at the psid web site at <http://www.umich.edu/~psid/>.)the data include those entered in two homebased time diaries for each childage 0 to 12, covering both school and nonschool days. there are also data fromteacherreported schoolday diaries for about 75 percent of the children. thehomebased and schoolday diaries include a special coding for computerrelatedactivities. in the homebased diary children can report time spent with tv, videogames, or computers. in the schoolday diary childrenõs use of time can be reported on in terms of their having had computers as the instructional mode. amongthe parameters considered in the class time segments are the length of time spent;who was present; whether the teacher was with the child; whether the activityinvolved groups, the whole class, or only the individual; and the teacherõs assessment of the level of the childõs involvement. collection and analysis of data on timeuse entered in a diary have been established as a valid method for measuringactual time use. this approach gives more accurate results than do respondentsõreports about their allocation of time to different activities over a week.the parentchild survey data will be released to the public in fall 1998, as soonas they are cleaned (erroneous or nonsensical data eliminated) and documented.the data collection will support studies of the ways in which time, money, technology, and social capital at the family, school, and neighborhood levels, as well asparental psychological resources and sibling characteristics, are linked to the cognitive and behavioral development of children. the researchers plan to reinterviewthe children in 1999, again including time diary measures of computer use.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge83rather limited. one source of such data is a 1997 price waterhouse consumertechnology survey (price waterhouse, 1997), which asked 1,010 consumershow they spent their time using computers. twentyfive percent of the consumers had internet access from the home. on average, 43 percent of their time usingcomputers was spent accessing the internet for research; 34 percent for email; 9percent for game playing; 5 percent for reading online magazines and newspapers; 4 percent for online chat; 2 percent for online banking; and 1 percent eachfor twoway voice communications and online shopping.although these numbers are suggestive of how computers are used by consumers, they certainly are not definitive, given that they describe computer use only byadults at a particular point in time. ongoing studies that examine users of differentages and from different population groups, along the lines of the parentchild timeuse studies referred to above, would be very helpful. it might also prove useful touse cluster analysis to discover patterns of usage that do not emerge from averagesover predetermined income, class, age, or population groups.3.1.4metadataòmetadataó are data about data, such as compendia or collections of data sets.the statistical abstract of the united states (u.s. bureau of the census, 1992) andhistorical statistics of the united states: colonial times to 1970, bicentennialedition (u.s. bureau of the census, 1975) are two wellknown examples. a vitallyimportant part of the research infrastructure, these publications as well as metadatasites on the world wide web such as statusa (<http://www.statusa.gov>) areenormously helpful to researchers, teachers, journalists, and policy makers eventhough they generally do not present new data (box 3.5).metadata are valuable because they are selective and authoritative, and,moreover, they provide a context that assists users in interpreting the data sebox 3.5the enduring value of compilations of datathere are some who suggest that compendia of data will no longer be useful ornecessary in a computerintensive future, when anyone with a computer and amodem will be able to download whatever data series is of interest nearly instantaneously and often without charge. these commentators may be correct aboutthe future ease of access to data in digital format, but they are surely wrong tosuggest the imminent obsolescence of compendia. collections of compiled datawill not become redundant when the entire internet in effect becomes one giganticrepository for statistics. indeed, with the decline in the cost of computer power onecan expect the volume of available data to reach unprecedented levels. this avalanche of alternatives will make research tools like compendia more valuable, notless so.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84fostering research on impacts of information technologylected together with warnings about pitfalls and possible misinterpretations andreferences to the debates and sources containing alternative measures. compilation of metadata requires exacting research, intensive review, and refereeing bythe nationõs and the worldõs best experts.unfortunately, in recent years government statistical agencies, operating under severe financial constraints, often have given the development of new compendia or the maintenance of existing metadata sets a low priority. the historicalstatistics volume, for example, has not been updated or revised for a quartercentury; several years ago the bureau of the census abandoned its plans to take onthis effort. instead, the project has been taken up by a private publisher (cambridgeuniversity press) in collaboration with a team of more than 70 scholars whosevolunteer contributions of time and expertise indicate how important the revisionof historical statistics is to the research community.5both public and private foundations devoted to funding research have tendedto resist underwriting the costs of preparing metadata sets, perhaps because theyview such projects as mere digitizing and collating efforts requiring little or noscholarship or research.6 although the historical statistics project may prove tobe commercially viable, efforts to revise and update other less widely used datacompendia may not be able to attract the aid of a privatesector sponsor. collaboration between government statistical agencies and experts in academia and industry in preparing these resources might be facilitated by direct contracts andgrants or through informal partnerships between the agencies and experts fromthe scholarly and business communities.3.2availability of and access to datain general, researchers must conduct their work within limited budgets andalso face the need to preserve longterm continuity in studies while capturingrapidly changing phenomena. owing partly to constraints on federal data gathering (see section 3.2.3 below), government and academic researchers have beenrelatively slow to refocus their data collection efforts on the emerging social andeconomic impacts of information technology. myriad privatesector groups haveresponded more quickly to businessesõ appetite for timely information about thetechnological challenges they confront. for example, privatesector market research organizations run household or consumer panels that administer monthlysurveys. particularly given the time lag required for careful analysis, investigation of rapid changes in peoplesõ responses to technology requires that socialscientists have better access to data from a variety of sources. social scientistsneed better access to each otherõs data as well as to information that is collectedby the private sector and government.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge853.2.1data collected by the private sectorthe significant privatesector resources devoted to data collection could beof great value to researchers and policy makers if properly leveraged. tradeassociations such as the semiconductor industry association gather detailed dataon industry output, prices, employment practices, demand forecasts, and managersõ key concerns. rather than attempting to duplicate or replace these efforts, itwould be useful to coordinate collection of data for research with the data gathering of industry groups. resources could be pooled and greater cooperationfostered among participants. respondents to surveys are most diligent, for example, when they can expect some return on their efforts. the prospect ofobtaining feedback, typically in the form of aggregate results, is often an important incentive.the fact that a private group is interested in gathering, or already has gathered, certain data suggests that the information is perceived by managers ashaving real value. indeed, in some cases privatesector client groups may beinterested in helping to disseminate the results of research to at least a selectedaudience, thus increasing the overall impact of the research. often a consultingfirm will broadly release at least a summary of a research study in order to bolsterthe firmõs reputation, although the proprietary nature of the results may inhibitwide dissemination in their full form.a major concern associated with the use of data collected by the privatesector is that private firms often lack academic standards of quality control suchas peer review. consultants, trade magazines, and industry groups may be lessthan rigorous about survey design, sample selection, or other biases in the data,and as a result their data may be unreliable or misleading.one approach to improving the reliability of findings is to use data frommultiple independent sources to the extent possible. for instance, in his study ofinformation technology and productivity, lichtenberg (1995) drew on data fromtwo distinct privatesector sources on firmsõ capital investment in informationtechnology. although the correlation was far from perfect, the overall econometric results were quite similar regardless of which data source was used, makingthe results more credible.another possible approach to ensuring quality is to work closely with privatedatacollection firms, although private groups generally want to keep data andresults private and available for the exclusive use of clients. nevertheless, in atleast one instance, a team of researchers struck a bargain with a media group,according to which the research team was to design several annual surveys,supervise the sampling and data collection, and then conduct the analysis itself.the media group paid all the costs of this undertaking and turned the data over tothe research team; in exchange, the researchers wrote a sequence of articlessummarizing the latest publishable findings, which were then presented each yearfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86fostering research on impacts of information technologyin a special issue based on the surveys. such collaboration is currently the exception,as is privatesector commitment to these sorts of longterm research endeavors.indeed a difficulty in working with privatesector groups is that they areoften focused on whatever topic is currently òhot,ó and yesterdayõs news, itseems, is of only academic interest. the practical result is that time series ofmore than a few years are difficult to obtain, which makes it difficult to conductstatistical analysis. another drawback is that privatesector data collectors maywell change the definitions used in surveys and the nature of the groups sampled;again, the focus is often how new data relate to the latest management question,and not how recently collected data relate to past data. in fact, many such firmsdo not even attempt to preserve data for more than a year once it has beencollected, as brynjolfsson and kemerer learned when they sought to estimate thevalue that consumers placed on various software features so that they coulddetermine how the qualityadjusted price of spreadsheets had evolved over time(brynjolfsson and kemerer, 1996).73.2.2the need for firmlevel dataas observed by ronald coase more than 50 years ago, firms are the dominant way of organizing economic activity (coase, 1937). any complete understanding of the economic and social impacts of information technology requiresexamining activities at the level of individual firms. unfortunately, there aresignificant gaps in the available data that describe this level, forcing researchersto make extrapolations from other types of data to try to answer important questions about the effects of technologiesõ use. for instance, one recent researchstudy developed a theory of how companiesõ growth would be affected by newtechnologies but could only test it using industrylevel data. as the authorslamented: òeach industry contains thousands to tens of thousands of firms, so itmay seem odd to take industries as firms. unfortunately, there are no firmleveldata sets that span the economyó (basu et al., 1997).although important insights can be gained from assessing industryleveldata, trends at this level of aggregation may be quite different from trends at thelevel of the firm. for instance, income inequality could be increasing overall inthe economy even if gaps in wage levels within every individual firm were beingreducedñif, for example, firms òoutsourcedó noncore work while specializing innarrower functions. in fact, important questions about causality, learning, andlags in observed effects are best analyzed by studying a cross section of firmsover time. onetime crosssectional studies of firms will not suffice.a few firmlevel longitudinal data sets do exist, such as standard and poorõscompustat databases, which provide extensive financial data on publicly tradedfirms, including their sales, stock prices, and employment statistics. more detailedfirmlevel data sets have been assembled in europe, such as the data set assembledby the industriens utrednings institut (industrial institute for economic and socialfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge87research) in stockholm, sweden, and data sets collected by the institut frwirtschaftsforschung (institute for economic research) in munich, germany.many more finely focused firmlevel data sets also exist for specific industries and purposes in the united states and abroad. one is the data set derivedfrom a minimum wage survey of u.s. firms. each of these data sets has provenuseful for addressing certain research questions. however, very few of the firmlevel panel studies include data on information technology or important organizational variables. in addition, the results of studies that examine smaller, morefocused samples of firms within specific industries cannot be readily generalizedto other industries or the broader economy.an economical approach to assembling a broader firmlevel data set is tobuild on existing data sets and link them together. for instance, to addressquestions about information technology and productivity, brynjolfsson and hitt(1996) combined data from compustat with privatesector data from international data corporation as well as data obtained in their own surveys. thisapproach enabled them to identify a significant correlation between use of information technology and firmlevel productivity that could not be discerned fromconflicting case studies or coarser, economywide data.a number of lessons can be learned from prior work with firmlevel data:¥firms or business units are always changing and reorganizing, thus posing challenges for measurement and data collection parallel to those arising fromchanges in the set of individuals that constitute a household in studies such as thepanel study of income dynamics. of course if they are followed, the spinoffs ofchanges are also potentially very interesting (e.g., in the study of the formation ofnew enterprises).¥firms need feedback. for instance, most firms greatly value informationthat enables benchmarking: knowledge of where oneõs own firm stands in relation to an aggregate of anonymous peers. the opportunity to obtain such information was the main incentive provided for respondents in the case of the institute for economic research study. respondents in such data collection surveyscould even be given access to the database itself, although this approach cansubstantially increase the workload associated with maintaining the data.8¥firms are often very heterogeneous. as a result, for some purposes itmakes sense to focus on firms that have something in common, such as anindustry group. in other cases, it may be best to seek multiple respondents fromthe same firm, each of whom may have a different perspective. even when oneindividual is compiling the data for a firm, it must be understood that the information may derive from a set of individuals with knowledge of different functionalareas of the enterprise.once firmlevel data are compiled, they can often be usefully linked to dataat other levels of aggregation, both higher and lower. for instance, industry andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88fostering research on impacts of information technologyfirmlevel data can be combined to address such questions as whether productiveuse of information technology correlates with one type of organizational structure in retailing and a different one in hightechnology manufacturing.in other cases additional insights may be gained by combining firmleveldata with finerdetail information about individuals in those firms. this approachñconstructing a study covering a sample of firms that also includes dataon a sample of individual employees in those firmsñwas used with remarkablesuccess by greenan and mairesse (1996) to measure the correlation betweencomputerization and productivity in firms. although greenan and mairesse hadcomplete production data for a large sample of french firms that enabled them toestimate a variety of productivity measures, they did not have any direct data onthe extent of computerization at those firms. instead, they combined data from aseparate survey of individuals, which asked whether they used a computer atwork and what the name of their employer was, with the firmlevel productiondata. they found that many of the firms in their first data set matched with one ormore individuals in the second data set. if the sampled employee used a computer at work, this was evidence that the firm was more computerized than itscompetitors. although matching the data in this way was very difficult andprovided a fairly weak indication of the effects of computerization, the researchers were able to establish an overall positive correlation between computerizationand productivity for the french firms.3.2.3data collected by governmentthe federal government collects a vast amount of data, much of which isreadily available via printed or computeraccessible media. among the advantages of federally collected data are its high quality and objectivity, its accessibility for use by the public, and its free availability as material in the public domainthat can be used without raising intellectual property concerns. the fedstatsweb site (<http://www.fedstats.gov>), launched in 1997 by the federal interagency council on statistical policy, is a directory of data collected by the u.s.federal government and available online.nevertheless, the availability of data has been curtailed in recent years due tobudget cuts, government reforms, and policy changes. overall federal government collection of data is restricted by both the statutory goals of the paperworkreduction act of 1995 and administration targets for reducing the burden ofcollecting information. structural and regulatory changes have also reduced theavailability of standardized, public data describing the telecommunications sector. for example, deregulation of the telecommunications industry has reducedthe quantity and availability of data on telephony, and deregulation of terminalequipment (e.g., telephone instruments) led the fcc to stop collecting data onsuch equipment. in addition, following privatization of the internet and the endof government funding for the nsfrun internet backbone, data were no longerfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge89available on the size and characteristics of internet traffic.9 it is ironic that thecommunications industry, an object of intense scrutiny by policy makers, is morepoorly measured now than in the past.in ways that are important to setting communications policy, efforts to reduce the data collection burdens imposed by the federal government and toreduce the role of regulation in telecommunications are at odds with the need forgood data on the telecommunications infrastructure and the changing nature ofconsumer use of new technologies. if social science researchers are to gaininsights into what information technologyrelated changes are taking place withinthe home, how americans invent ways to interconnect, and how access to newcommunications media can affect economic growth and civic participation, thenmore, not less, statistical data on the penetration and uses of media needs to becollected, starting with use of the telephone (box 3.6).3.3new types of data3.3.1documenting the effects of technology deploymentmany social institutionsñschools, libraries, hospitals, municipalitiesñaregoing online. institutions may collect and report basic measures of use, such asthe number of times their online resources are accessed (òhitsó), but often localresources are not devoted to using such information to systematically documentthe dynamics and the social and individual effects of system deployments.individual institutions typically lack the time, expertise, motivation, andperspective to document the dynamics and effects of change resulting from theuse of information technology. indeed even the first step, measuring access toand use of online resources, is a nontrivial problem. since each component of aweb page (a graphic, text, or other item) will result in a separate hit, hits as ameasure of use will give different counts depending on the details of the contentõsdesign. collecting meaningful data on use, especially where crosscomparisonsare to be made, depends on systematically defining such things as visitors, users,and the like.10 externally supported comparative research projects exploring the effects oftechnology deployments could be enormously useful to at least four audiences.policy makers and citizens would be able to understand the benefits (and costs) ofonline access to information and online interactions with social institutions. technologists and managers would be able to understand the effects of different technology configurations and deployment strategies. scholars would be able to test andrevise existing theories of institutional participation with new kinds of data. futuregenerations of scholars and citizens would be able to study this transition period, asinstitutions experiment with different modes of online service.consider a specific example. the gates library foundation, established bymicrosoft chief executive officer bill gates, will provide $200 million, matchedfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90fostering research on impacts of information technologybox 3.6challenges of collecting data on the use of informationtechnology: telephones, the census, and the currentpopulation surveyto understand the difficulties in answering the simplest questions about theuse of information technology, consider basic data on household use of telephony.households that have telephone service constitute the conceptual basis for allmeasures of universal service. the most widely used measure is the percentageof households with telephone serviceñsometimes referred to as telephone òpenetration.ó1 yet this measure, though seemingly straightforward, can harbor multipledefinitions, and studies designed to measure it are subject to errors.prior to the 1980 census, precise calculation of telephone subscribershipñi.e.,one definition of penetrationñwas of little concern. in the days of one phone, onehousehold, one service provider, telephone penetration was traditionally measuredby dividing the number of residential telephone lines by the number of households.as households added second lines and as the number of second homes increased,measurement based on the number of residential lines became subject to a largemargin of error. by 1980, the penetration according to the traditional measure(residential lines divided by the number of households) reached 96 percent in theunited states, whereas the number of households that reported having telephonesin the 1980 census lagged at 92.9 percent.in 1980, the federal communications commission (fcc) requested that thebureau of the census include questions on telephone penetration as part of itscurrent population survey (cps), which monitors demographic trends betweendecennial censuses. for national studies, use of the cps has several advantages: (1) it is conducted every month by an independent and expert agency, (2) thesample is large, and (3) the questions are consistent. thus, changes in the resultscan be compared over time with a great deal of confidence.unfortunately, however, the telephone penetration results of the cps cannotbe directly compared with the figures on telephone penetration obtained in eitherthe 1980 or 1990 census. differences in the sampling and survey methodologiesare a source of discrepancies.although the cps is conducted every month, not all of the questions are included every month. since the sample is staggered, the information that is reported for1according to the bureau of the census, òa household includes the related family members and all the unrelated persons, if any, such as lodgers, foster children, wards, or employees who share the housing unit. aperson living alone in a housing unit, or a group of unrelated persons sharing a housing unit as partners, isalso counted as a household. . . . the figures for number of households are not strictly comparable from yearto year. in general the definitions of household for 1790, 1900, 1930, 1940, 1950, 1960, and 1970 are similar.very minor differences result from the fact that in 1950, 1960, and 1970, housing units with 5 or more lodgerswere excluded from the count of households, whereas in 1930 and 1940, housing units with 11 lodgers ormore were excluded, and in 1790 and in 1900, no precise definition of the maximum allowable number oflodgers was made.ó (u.s. bureau of the census, 1975)according to the cps, òa household consists of all the persons who occupy a house, an apartment, orother group of rooms, or a room, which constitutes a housing unit. a group of rooms or a single room isregarded as a housing unit when it is occupied as separate living quarters; that is, when the occupants do notlive and eat with any other person in the structure, and when there is direct access from the outside througha common hall. the count of households excludes persons living in group quarters, such as rooming houses,military barracks, and institutions. inmates of institutions (mental hospitals, rest homes, correctional institutions, etc.) are not included in the survey.ó (u.s. bureau of the census, 1993)fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge91by $200 million in software provided by microsoft, to connect the nationõs publiclibraries to the internet (lohr, 1997). since not all libraries will go online at thesame time, the program offers the opportunity for a range of comparisons. longitudinal studies could document changes in a variety of social welfare indicators(perhaps, for example, changes in circulation rates, civic participation, and consumer awareness) as a function of internet access and use. more pragmatically,they could document how different deployment strategies (e.g., location of internetstations; access and use policies; tieins with school, civic group, or municipalany given month actually reflects responses over the preceding 4 months. aggregated summaries of the responses are reported to the fcc, based on the surveysconducted through march, july, and november of each year. also, the questionsin the cps were written long before the breakup of at&t and reflect realities of themonopoly era, when having a telephone also meant having service. but in thepostdivestiture era encompassed by the 1990 census, the question, is there atelephone in this house/apartment? inadvertently focuses on the telephone as aninstrument. instead the real issue is the presence of telephone service. therefore, one potential for statistical bias stems from a literal response to this question.in the case of the census, the respondent could truthfully answer yes to the question and confound the results with an upward bias; and since there is no followupto the census, the upward bias would go uncorrected. in the case of the cps,followup questions and surveys may correct for this bias;2 however, they containthe potential for a downward bias. the followup, a telephone call repeated insubsequent months, will catch a household that originally had telephone serviceand lost it, but will not catch a household that did not originally have telephoneservice but subsequently received itñthus, the downward bias.for the researcher, another difficulty is that the census is not strictly comparable with the cps. the differencesñsome correctable, some inherentñresult in agap in the final numbers. according to the 1990 census, 94.8 percent of all households in the united states had telephones. however, cps data showed penetration at 93.3 percent for 1990. this difference, which represents nearly 1.4 millionhouseholds, is statistically significant and appears to indicate that the cps may beon the low side of the actual penetration rate, whereas the census may be on thehigh side.collecting comparable data on the use of the internet, email, or other newinformation technology, and measuring the penetration of telecommunications inan increasingly heterogeneous environment, clearly present a substantial challenge. for example, reliance on cps data would carry with it an inherent biasagainst the use of wireless and mobile services for telecommunications purposes.addressbased measurement excludes the presence of new wireless technologiesif they are used as substitutes for wired service to the home.2 the current population survey includes households in the survey for the same 4 consecutive months in 2consecutive years.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92fostering research on impacts of information technologygovernment programs) were associated with patterns of use and effects. thesefindings would be extremely useful to the laterdeploying libraries.similar longitudinal comparative studies should be designed and conductedto understand the dynamics and effects of increasing numbers of other socialinstitutions going online. projects that deploy new technologies, especially prototypes, should be encouraged to build in the capture of such data. digitallibraries, distance learning, and efforts to use information technology to enhancegovernment services (òdigital governmentó) would all be valuable areas in whichto incorporate study of the sociological and economic impacts of informationtechnology.3.3.2data on social interactions from the interneta great deal of social behavior is visible on the internet. for example, onecan see how many usenet groups or public distribution lists exist on what topics,and what the level of activity is on each. snapshots of publicly accessible socialbehavior could be captured and made available to social scientists studying groupbehavior on the internet.11 it might even be possible to study the completecorpus of communication within a group of usenet news or email òlistserves.óhowever, collecting data from the internet presents technological difficulties andmay also raise legal questions.12in addition to usenet groups and email lists, another source of data isillustrated by kaminer (1997), who has used the unix logs of natural scientiststo obtain data on their use of a variety of internet features (telnet, ftp, and so on).using a multivariate approach, he has shown that increased use of the internetincreases a scholarõs research productivity (publications per year), other thingsbeing held constant.13systematic longitudinal data on group behavior on the internet would be avaluable resource for social scientists studying the formation and diffusion ofelectronic communities. such data are in some measure the electronic equivalentof the town records that historians have used to document and understand 19thcentury community formation and development. but these electronic data oninternet behavior are ephemeral. unless they are collected and archived now,they will disappear, and researchers will have no systematic record of how groupbehavior on the internet is growing and evolving over time. what databasesshould be developed to support research in these areas?tools used to analyze usenet and email data might also be applied to webbased systems and emerging software systems for collaboration. application ofthese approaches to new technologies will in some cases require a new focus ondata collection methodologies. for example, methods are needed to factor outdistorting artifacts such as the use of proxies to access web resources or theactivities of indexing robots.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge933.3.3the internet as a window into how commercialtransactions are conductedin his position paper òelectronic interactionsó in appendix b of this volume,paul resnick suggests that the internet would also permit study of a number ofinteresting topics in how commercial transactions are conducted. for example:¥recommendations and referrals can help people to find interesting information and vendors. there is a need for continued research on techniques forgathering and processing recommendations (this is sometimes called collaborative filtering). compilation of ògrand challengeó data sets of recommendationswould help this field advance.¥the structure of negotiation protocols and the availability of informationabout past behavior of participants will affect the kinds of outcomes that arepossible. economists have theoretical results regarding many simplified negotiation scenarios, but there is a need for interdisciplinary research to apply andextend these results to practical problems of protocol design.¥in the transaction consummation phase, much effort has focused on secure payment systems. some transactions, however, require a physical consummation (mailing of a product, for example) and hence must rely on trust insome form. research can explore the role of reputations in creating trustworthy(though not completely secure) contract consummation. such transactions mayalso have lower transaction costs than secure payment systems, even in therealm of purely electronic transactions.3.4time and tools for gathering andinterpreting data3.4.1the time required to do good social scienceit is important to recognize that systematically gathering and analyzing social science data are very timeintensive tasks. the need for time can lead todifficulties in synchronization of attention to the object of study, informationtechnology effects, and ways of studying information technology. althoughinformation technology is developing at a very rapid pace, the speed at whichsocial science data have been acquired has changed little in the last few decades.analysis of quantitative data, after it has been acquired and prepared, has certainly been speeded up by the widespread use of computers, but analysis ofqualitative data has been much less affected.a few examples illustrate the time required for data collection and analysis.¥as previous research efforts have shown (see, e.g., orr, 1990), it can takesignificant time for a researcher to enter a community, gain the trust of its memfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94fostering research on impacts of information technologybers, and begin to understand how community members interact with one anotherand with technology.¥the homenet field experiment to understand how families use internettechnology was begun in 1994 and is still under way (kraut et al., 1996; kiesleret al., 1997). it has taken significant time to recruit families (both those who willreceive technology and those who will serve as a control group), to acquire anddeploy technology and train people to use it, and to administer questionnaires andconduct interviews and home visits. data collection must be repeated at regularintervals in order to investigate changes over time. the systems that are deployedin the homenet study are not yet obsolete, but they are aging. if researchers giveparticipants newer technology, they compromise their understanding of howpeoplesõ use of a particular technology changes over time. if they do not giveparticipants newer technology, their findings, particularly any negative ones, canbe dismissed because they were based on old technology.¥it takes at least 6 months after an interface is implemented, debugged, andregarded as stable to conduct a laboratory study of peoplesõ social behavior inresponding to that interface (e.g., sproull et al., 1996). thus interface designerscan develop new interfaces more rapidly than researchers can collect data onsocial responses to each particular interface.these observations suggest that some mismatch is unavoidable between technology development and social science research. researchers studying the effects of widespread deployment of a new technology must wait for widespreaddeployment to occur. by that time, however, the technology is no longer new.for example, although electronic mail was invented in the 1960s, the first research on emailõs effects on patterns of organizational communication was notpublished until 20 years later, when noticeable numbers of organizations werebeginning to use it routinely.in addition to lags imposed by the need to wait until technology is widelydeployed, there are the normal delays inherent in social science research. datacollection and careful data set preparation take time, especially for large datasets.sometimes the mismatch between development of technology and researchon its effects can lead to criticism of studies for relying on older data, eventhough more recent data of equivalent quality was not available. examplesinclude the rand corporationõs analysis of home access to computing, whichis based on the 1989 and 1993 current population survey data (anderson et al.,1995), and attewellõs analysis of the effects of home computers on educationalperformance, which is based on data from the 1988 national educational longitudinal study (attewell and battle, 1997). however, in many cases themismatch does not matter. for example, researchers investigating the impactsof alternative models of investment in technology would find data on corporateexpenditures on information technology enormously usefulñsuch data wouldfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge95certainly be treated as proprietary when current but after a relatively brief timewould be considered obsolete for corporate decisionmaking purposes. in somecases, such as historical studies, older data is better. for instance, data aboutearly adopters of technology can certainly be useful in better exploring advantages that may accrue to early entrants in an industry (the socalled firstmoveradvantage).3.4.2appropriate subject pools and instrumentationin addition to benefiting from improved access to data (see section 3.2 above),social scientists exploring the impacts of information technology also wouldbenefit from better access to appropriate subject pools for behavioral studies.most universitybased subject pools, which do not operate during exam periodsand breaks, are best suited to shortterm studies of the behavior of individuals.to study the effects of technologies designed for groups, researchers need accessto groups. creating groups composed of strangers in an experimental laboratorywill not allow researchers to understand the longterm effects of technologies thatrequire or cause substantial changes in organizational procedures governing howpeople work together.in addition, social scientists need new instrumentation for more rapid datacollection. data collection may be an area for fruitful collaboration betweensocial scientists and technologists exploring, for example, internetbased surveyand interviewing technologies. use of these new sources of data would alsorequire attention to the privacy concerns they raise.3.5approaches to meeting requirements for databased on discussions at the workshop and in position papers submitted byworkshop participants, the workshop steering committee developed a set of approaches to meeting requirements for data needed to advance research on theimpacts of information technology. listed below, these approaches are intendedas illustrations of ways to enable researchersñin concert with government andthe private sectorñto address the need for more extensive, more timely, and newsources of data.¥making data related to the social and economic impacts of computingand communications available to the research community through a clearinghouse. a clearinghouse would provide documentation and archiving of datasets (but not an evaluation of data quality). it might be necessary to developincentives for researchers to contribute data to this archive. journals could makesubmission of data to an appropriate clearinghouse a requirement for publication.for example, journals publishing research in the biological sciences typicallyrequire authors to deposit genetic sequences and similar data in publicly accesfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96fostering research on impacts of information technologysible databases such as the national institutes of health genetic sequence database, genbank.14 the terms of federal research funding could also supportefforts for a clearinghouse. for example, the national science foundation expects grantees to share research data with other researchers (with safeguards inplace for the rights of experimental subjects and the like). depositing researchdata in a clearinghouse could be an efficient way for researchers to satisfy thisexpectation. an explicit expectation that data be deposited in appropriate databanks could also be added as a condition of receiving grants.in addition, a clearinghouse could encourage comparabilityñin both formatand research methodologyñacross data sets and the reuse of data, especially ifacademic researchers and also commercial data sources were to collaborate ondefining standards.a possible model for such a clearinghouse is the interuniversity consortium forpolitical and social research located within the institute for social research at theuniversity of michigan. funded by subscribing member institutions, it providesaccess to a large archive of computerized social science data. a clearinghouse couldalso derive support from grant funding and charges for access to data sets.both the archiving and standardssetting functions would enable increasedsecondary use of data sets, which would of course depend on the social sciencecommunityõs ease of access to data in a clearinghouse. joint work between socialscientists and technologists could lead to building new kinds of data clearinghouses and new tools and techniques for making use of them.¥exploring ways for researchers to gain access to privatesector data.commercial data on firmsõ capital investment in information technology is ofconsiderable value to researchers examining the social and economic impacts ofcomputing and communications. consultant, trade magazine, and industry groupdata is another valuable resource (see section 3.2.1).overall, however, several factors impede collaboration between researchersand the private sector. first, data on individual firms is often protected becauseof competitive concerns. one remedy is for social scientists and the commercialsector to explore aggregation and other ways of hiding individual corporate identity. second, incentives for collaboration by privatesector firms typically arelacking, although one way of providing them is to establish an agreement wherebyresearchers who use privatesector data then make research results available in auseful form to the firm or organization that supplied the data. to both protectproprietary interests and increase incentives, strengthened institutional relationships between the research community and industry associations would be valuable.it is important to note that privatesector sources of data may have a number ofpossible limitations, including a lack of consistent definitions and methods overtime and the tendency of privatesector firms to preserve only the current informafostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge97tion. in many of these cases closer working relationships between researchers andthe private sector can provide solutions (see section 3.2.1 for examples).¥increasing data collection efforts by government. as described insection 3.2.3, deregulation and privatization can reduce the quantity and availability of data on telecommunications and computing at a time when more, notless, information is needed to guide policy decisions. budget constraints andgovernment reforms to reduce information gathering burdens also have reduceddata collection. in addition, fewer resources have been available for analyzingdata and for making the data publicly available.workshop participants noted that loss of such data sources inhibits socialscience explorations of the social and economic impacts of computing and communications. at a minimum, government decision makers need to be aware ofthe cost of losing such data. in some cases they may be able to find other ways togather valuable information. for example, additional questions might be addedto the census bureauõs current population survey (cps) to measure wirelessphone or internet use (see box 3.6), as was done by the national telecommunications and information administration and described in the report òfallingthrough the netó (ntia, 1995), which reported on computer and modem useand explored the demographics of telephone, computer, and modem use in termsof population density, ethnicity, age, and economic status. however, this approach has been taken only once, because it is expensive to add supplementalquestions to the cps.¥exploring the development of new multipurpose data sets by the research community. to what extent can multipurpose data sets based on suchtechniques as user diaries prove helpful to researchers examining the social impacts of information technology? careful observational methods have been critical to specific deep organizational studies in such areas as computersupportedcooperative work (e.g., the study of xerox technicians described in section 2.3.4).however such research has not typically relied on multipurpose public data sets.as the body of observational data grows, it may be possible to start developmentof such nonquantitative multipurpose data sets. a precedent is the human relations area files at yale university, which consist of ethnographic extracts organized in various categories. given a rich enough corpus of observational data ina given domain, it may prove both possible and valuable to invest in the creationof new, qualitative multipurpose data sets.¥establishing stronger ties with industry associations to facilitate collaborative research. in general, proprietary concerns are likely to impede collaboration between academic researchers and privatesector firms. yet to exploretopics such as the relationships among organizational structure, the use of information technology, and productivity, researchers need access to firm and processlevel data that typically is not public. nonpublic data relevant to other socialand economic research includes details of pricing, employment, demand forefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98fostering research on impacts of information technologycasts, and the like. lack of experience in collaborative work between the twocommunities is another barrier.industry associations are a possible bridge between the communities, toallow each to benefit from the resources of the other. one approach mightinvolve sponsorship of forums where academics and industry people can meet todiscuss common interests. these events can create serendipitous opportunitiesfor cooperation that could not have been predicted or planned in formal brokering.industry associations might also help connect the academic and industry communities in more formal roles such as the following:ñas an intermediary that aggregates or otherwise makes proprietary dataanonymous so that firms will be more comfortable about providing it tooutsiders;ñas a matchmaker in bringing together industry and the research community to work on projects of mutual interest;ñas a depository for research results based on industryprovided data (ifresearch reports are readily available to them, industries may be more willingto provide data); andñas a sponsor of research on topics of interest to the membership.note that limited financial resources may place constraints on such collaboration. since trade associations are unlikely to have inhouse resourcesto cover the administrative costs of a research study collaboration, it mayprove necessary to structure such a project on a breakeven basis for theassociation.¥exploring, in workshop sessions, uses of the internet as a source ofdata on social interactions. as described in section 3.3.2, the internet canprovide a wealth of information on group and community behavior. it would bevery useful to convene a workshop of technologists, social scientists, academics,and representatives of commercial interests to discuss and resolve such issues asthe following:ñhow to develop indicators of group behavior that are publicly availableon the internet;ñthe feasibility of commercial services providing data such as those onuse of their forums and chat rooms;ñappropriate sampling and estimation procedures;ñappropriate publishing and archiving procedures;ñstandards for data collection and exchange; andñhow to establish relationships with possible providers of information(e.g., search engines or newsgroup archives).such an endeavor would also need to address ethical and privacy issuesassociated with data collection, archiving, and reporting as well as the proprietary interests of commercial internet services.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datañthe basis for new knowledge99notes1.many of them were developed for other users, but some have been able to provide useful inputto social science studies of information technology. multipurpose data sets are often collectedby organizations dedicated to this task such as the institute for social research (isr) at theuniversity of michigan (see <http://www.isr.umich.edu/>), the national opinion research center at the university of chicago (see <http://www.norc.uchicago.edu>), and several other research organizations. many such multipurpose data sets are maintained by organizations likethe interuniversity consortium for political and social research (icpsr, see <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/>), which is supported by memberuniversity subscriptions. icpsr, locatedwithin the institute for social research at the university of michigan, is a membershipbased,notforprofit organization serving member colleges and universities in the united states andabroad. data sets can be found online at <http://www.isr.umich.edu>.2.for details see the project description and related documents available online at <http://www.index.berkeley.edu>.3.data sets and reports are available online at <http://stats.bls.gov/cesprog.htm>.4.information on the institute for social research can be found online at <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu>.5.work to prepare the new edition (susan carter, scott gartner, michael haines, alan olmstead,richard sutch, and gavin wright, editors, historical statistics of the united states from colonial times to the present, millennial edition, cambridge university press, in preparation,scheduled for publication in 2000) has received partial support from the national sciencefoundation and the alfred p. sloan foundation.6.a workshop participant noted that university and college promotion committees seem to givelittle weight to faculty contributions to such projects, perhaps because they, too, share thewidespread misunderstanding of the value of metadata and the scholarly research required tocreate a metadata set.7.brynjolfsson and kemerer knew that software digest, published by national software testinglabs (nstl), a private firm, had regularly reviewed all the major spreadsheet products andconducted detailed feature evaluations. by matching these data with price data from dataquest,another private firm, they could estimate the values that consumers placed on various softwarefeatures.the difficulties came in trying to get historical data. only intervention by the president ofdataquest following a chance meeting at an industry dinner finally led the researchers to historical data on prices. obtaining data on software features required a different sort of intervention. to save on storage space, nstl had simply erased all information regarding previousyearsõ spreadsheet products because there was no market for that information. repeated queries to various managers of the firm, as well as efforts to find the back issues in libraries, wereunsuccessful. finally, a midlevel employee of the firm came to the rescue. on his owninitiative, he had stockpiled back issues of software digest in the basement of his home, alongwith thousands of other magazines. he agreed to ship several large boxes with the relevantissues to brynjolfsson and kemerer, where they were duly reentered into a computer database.8.dealing with peopleõs inquiries for data can be time consuming because people often needdifferent data formats, more detailed documentation, and followup explanations of what thevariables mean; make requests for related data; and have other requirements that need attention.at a minimum, such database support activities involve one or more conversations with peopleat each participating company.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100fostering research on impacts of information technology9.the nsfnet backbone was originally the core of the internet, and thus much of the totalinternet traffic passed through it, making useful measurement of total internet traffic possible.when this backbone was replaced by a new architecture, data on total traffic became harder toacquire. also, the architecture of the backbone had been designed to allow more measurementsthan are now possible with the offtheshelf router components that were used postnsfnet,in order to satisfy deliverables of traffic measurement in the agreement with nsf.10.web advertising is one area where an effort has been made to develop useful definitions ofaccess and use (novak and hoffman, 1997).11.for several years in the early 1990s brian reid, an employee of the digital equipment corporation, collected and posted on the internet data on usenet groups. each month he used asampling plan to report estimates of usenet readership and message traffic for all usenetgroups. researchers were able to use reidõs data to track growth in overall group membershipover time, track the relative popularity of different groups at any one point in time, or identifygroups worthy of further study (e.g., sproull and faraj, 1995). reid stopped collecting andreporting usenet data in june 1995.12.reidõs study of usenet traffic is a case in point. one reason reid stopped collecting usenetdata was that its relevance declined when the world wide web was invented and the ratio ofquality material to junk declined markedly. another reason was the evolution of the wayusenet data was distributed, which made the studyõs measurement techniques increasinglystatistically meaningless. however, the ultimate reason for ending the study was not technological, but rather was related to the threat of legal challenges over privacy issues surroundingcollection, analysis, and publication of the usenet data (personal communication, brian reid,digital equipment corporation, 1998).13.this work replicated findings by hesse et al. (1993) derived from analysis of electronic surveydata.14.genbank, an annotated collection of publicly available dna sequences, is part of the international nucleotide sequence database collaboration, which comprises the dna data bank ofjapan, the european molecular biology laboratory data library, and genbank. more information on genbank may be found online at <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/web/genbank/index.html>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.options for fostering interdisciplinary reasearch1011014options for fostering interdisciplinaryresearch and improving access to resultsuse of information technology within the workplace, the home, and community and other organizations continues to evolve at a rapid pace. mainframecomputers, desktop personal computers, and, more recently, computers linked byboth corporate networks and the internet all have changed the nature of communication. at least in some segments of society, use of computing and communications technology is rapidly becoming a mass phenomenon. the implicationsare now topics for consideration in a variety of contexts.advances in identification and application of social and economic principlesbasic to understanding interrelationships between information technology andsociety are important to those who make public policy as well as to those whodesign, deploy, and use the technology. yet to help guide such efforts, there istoday relatively little interdisciplinary research, as well as insufficient dialogbetween the technology and social science communities and insufficient contactbetween the research and public policy communities. sociologists collaboraterelatively infrequently with economists, much less with computer scientists. asinteractions at the june 1997 workshop suggested, however, a collaborative approach to problem solving can lead to a clearer understanding of where technology is moving and what the social impacts may be. few social scientists, forexample, possess the detailed technical knowledge required to build useful datasets from the new kinds of data available from the internet. but social scientistsand computer scientists working collaboratively could develop tools and techniques that would make such data logs available to a wider community of socialscientists for use in their research.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102fostering research on impacts of information technologybased on discussions at the june 1997 workshop and points in the positionpapers submitted by its participants, the workshop steering committee identifiedseveral options for fostering interdisciplinary research and making the results ofsuch research more accessible to the public and policy makers.4.1encouraging interdisciplinary studiesand collaborationdiscussion at the june 1997 workshop indicated that there is a great deal ofinterest in and value to be gained from pursuing interdisciplinary work. althoughsome regularly held conferences such as the telecommunications policy research conference or the aspen institute telecommunications roundtable areessentially interdisciplinary, workshop participants observed that establishedmeans of facilitating working relationships among social and computer scientistsare currently lacking. approaches suggested for encouraging fruitful interactionsincluded interdisciplinary workshops, curricula, and fellowships.¥interdisciplinary workshops. participants in the june 1997 workshopremarked on the value of convening researchers from various relevant field toexplore interdisciplinary approaches to studying the impacts of computing andcommunications. workshops and summer programs in a number of interdisciplinary areas would be useful in fostering increased collaborative work. at a minimum, workshops bringing together investigators previously funded by the national science foundation (nsf) to do joint technology/social science work mightbe convened. expanding the focus of such workshops to include people fromindustry who could comment on nonnsffunded collaborative research couldalso prove useful. in addition, it is important for funding agencies to be able torecognize good interdisciplinary work and for industry managers and academicprincipal investigators to be able to understand some of the management challenges involvedñopportunities for crosscommunication that interdisciplinaryworkshops can facilitate.¥interdisciplinary curricula. workshop participants suggested that serious interdisciplinary work might also be promoted by preparing students directlyto engage in it. for example, although computer science curricula already include courses in performance analysis, the systems analyzed are not typicallyembedded in largescale social systems, and so joint course development foranalysis of the performance of complex systems could produce useful results.this step might be taken initially in the context of postdoctoral training andmasterõs degree programs, given that currently not enough is known to be codified at the textbook level. it was observed that development of interdisciplinarycurricula would help to strengthen the interdisciplinary research community aswell as raise awareness of interdisciplinary issues in computer science and engineering and social science fields.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.options for fostering interdisciplinary reasearch103¥interdisciplinary fellowships. also noted by workshop participants wasthe potential value of having graduate or postgraduate fellowships for socialscientists interested in becoming familiar with social and economic aspects ofinformation technology and for computer scientists interested in exploring socialissues arising from the use of information technology. such fellowships wouldencourage the intellectual crossfertilization and professional networking crucialto fostering productive research relationships.4.2funding to strengtheninterdisciplinary researcharising from the june 1997 workshop activities were a number of suggestions for leveraging funding so as to strengthen crossdisciplinary work in computer and social sciences.¥evaluation of large technology system research proposals that recognize the value of including an interdisciplinary component. some workshopparticipants expressed the view that behavioral, social, legal, and economic implications of the design and deployment of technology should be considered inevaluating proposals for research on large technology systems. interdisciplinaryresearch has for some time been a significant component of a number of nsfsponsored computer science research programs, such as the national supercomputing centers. increasingly, support for interdisciplinary research has come toinclude a social science component. for example, the second phase of themultiagencysupported digital libraries initiative1 includes a òhumancenteredóresearch component to investigate both the impacts of digital libraries and waysof enhancing the potential uses of such libraries. part of this component coversresearch on the longterm social, behavioral, and economic implications andeffects of new digital library capabilities.¥synergistic use of major research programs that build or deploy prototypes of computing and communications systems for use by individuals ororganizations. as workshop participants suggested, research programs that fieldnew information technology offer important opportunities to improve understanding of the technologyõs impacts and to enhance the organizational or societal outcomes of the research. funding that targets investigating the social impact of new technologies has a precedent in the department of energy andnational institutes of health setasides of about 3 to 5 percent of the total research budget of the human genome project to fund research and public education on ethical, legal, and social issues (elsi) related to the project. althoughcomputing and communications research is not centered in a single very largeresearch effort like the human genome project, overall advances in computingand communications are, as workshop participants noted, posing societal challenges of a similar magnitude.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104fostering research on impacts of information technology¥collaboration with private foundations. in considering ways tostrengthen interdisciplinary research, workshop participants observed that government agencies are not the only source of research funding. private foundations, such as the kellogg, markle, mellon, and sloan foundations, have becomeinterested in the economic and social impacts of using information technologyand have funded some related initiatives. moreover, important opportunities forcollaboration lie at the intersection of basic research questions, which are oftenaddressed by government investment in the development of new scientific andengineering knowledge, and pressing social needs, which the grants and programs of foundations often are designed to address.¥collaboration with industry. another suggestion arising from the workshop was that researchers increase their collaboration with industry. industryresearch covers such social sciencerelated topics as consumer behaviorñincluding who uses computers, how they are used, and related human factors in computer use. researchers at several major computer companies were asked to estimate the fraction of total research and development spending devoted by theircompanies to social science research. one researcher separated out social sciencefrom other research and development by identifying which units in the researchlaboratory conducted social science investigations, an approach indicating thatabout 1 percent of the companyõs research and development spending was used forsocial science research. taking a different approachñconducting a rough assessment of social science content across the research and development portfolioñresearch managers in two companies estimated spending on social science researchthere at about 10 percent of the companiesõ total research budget.the private sector has funded a number of useful surveys and applied research projects. several such research programs mentioned in this report are theresult of cooperation between private industry and academic researchers. acurrent example of a major investment in social and economic research, the ibminstitute for advanced commerce, was announced in december 1997 and isintended as a research partnership between academia and industry to study electronic commerce and the changing nature of technology, work, and industrystructure. the planned partnership, with initial funding of $10 million, stemsfrom ibmõs need for more academic research on the internetõs impact on electronic commerce, an area in which ibm is expanding its business (narisetti,1997).as several participants in the workshop indicated, collaboration betweenindustry and academia could benefit both social science researchers and the private sector. for example, industry consortia funding for independent gatheringand publishing of basic information and analysis by independent scientists couldfoster significant advances and ensure fair reporting of results. pooling of funding through consortia would allow for larger investments than any one corporation might be willing to make on its own. in collaborative projects for developfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.options for fostering interdisciplinary reasearch105ment of technology prototypes, both industry and social scientists might benefitfrom routine inclusion of performance assessment or evaluation up front.4.3making the results of interdisciplinaryresearch more accessibleworkshop participants expressed a belief in the need for more effectivecommunication of the results of interdisciplinary social science research on computing and communications issues to both the public and policy makers.¥availability of an online guide to current, relevant research. it wasnoted that a perceived disconnect between research results and critical legal andpolicy decision making is perhaps due in part to the dispersed nature of relevantinterdisciplinary research. one suggested approach to improving access to pertinent results was to have an online resource (e.g., a web page) containing headlines and abstracts of policyrelevant social science research, along with pointersto the print and/or online published results. such a site could also contain regularly updated literature reviews summarizing the state of the art in various areas,as well as directories of specialists in particular areas. with some effort, such aresource could serve as a medium for communication not only among researchersbut also with individuals in the policy and business worlds. the bibliographyprepared as part of this report could become part of such a resource. an electronic newsletter providing regular updates on research findings would also beuseful.¥supplemental ways of disseminating research results. some at theworkshop also pointed out that research results need to be presented in ways thatare most useful to policy makersñin some cases written materials alone may notsuffice. interdisciplinary researchers might seek out and take advantage of opportunities to provide testimony at hearings; professional societies might organize specialized briefings for policy makers.note1.a research program jointly sponsored by the national science foundation, defense advancedresearch projects agency, national library of medicine, library of congress, national aeronautics and space administration, and national endowment for the humanities.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106fostering research on impacts of information technology106bibliographyassociation for computing machinery (acm), u.s. public policy committee. 1994. codes, keysand conflicts: issues in u.s. crypto policy. acm, new york. available online from <http://info.acm.org/reports/acmcryptostudy.html>.advisory commission to study the consumer price index. 1996. toward a more accurate measure of the cost of living: final report to the senate finance committee, december 4. advisory commission to study the consumer price index. december 4. available online from< http://www.statusa.gov/ben/publications.html>.aiello, john. 1993. òcomputerbased work monitoring: electronic surveillance and its effects,ójournal of applied social psychology, 23(7):499507.alberts, david s., and daniel s. papp. 1997. the information age: an anthology on its impact andconsequences. national defense university press, washington, dc.allen, thomas, and michael s. scott morton. 1994. information technology and the corporationof the 1990s. oxford university press, oxford, united kingdom.american library association. 1996. òhow many libraries are on the internet?,ó technical report,larc fact sheet number 26. american library association, chicago, il.anderson, robert h., tora k. bikson, sally ann law, and bridger m. mitchell. 1995. universalaccess to email: feasibility and societal implications. rand corporation, santa monica,ca. available online from <http: /www.rand.org/publications/mr/mr650/>.arthur, brian w. 1989. òcompeting technologies, increasing returns, and lockin by historicalevents,ó economic journal, 99(394):116131.arthur, brian w. 1994. increasing returns and path dependence in the economy. university ofmichigan press, ann arbor, mi.arthur, brian w. 1996. òincreasing returns and the new world of business,ó harvard businessreview, 74(4):100109.attewell, paul. 1994. òinformation technology and the productivity paradox,ó organizationallinkages: understanding the productivity paradox, douglas harris (ed.), national academypress, washington, dc.attewell, paul, and james rule. 1989. òwhat do computers do?ó social problems, 36(3):225.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography107attewell, paul, and james rule. 1994. òcomputing and organizations: what we know and whatwe donõt know,ó social issues in computing, chuck huff and thomas finholt (eds.).mcgrawhill, new york.attewell, paul, and juan battle. 1997. òhome computers and school performance,ó technical report.department of sociology, graduate school and university center, city university of new york.autor, david, lawrence katz, and alan krueger. 1997. òcomputing inequality: have computerschanged the labor market?,ó nber working paper 5956. national bureau of economicresearch, cambridge, ma.bailey, joseph, and erik brynjolfsson. 1997. òin search of ôfrictionfree markets:õ an exploratory analysis of prices for books, cds and software sold on the internet,ó technical report,mit internet commerce group. sloan school of management, massachusetts institute oftechnology, cambridge, ma.baily, martin neil, and alok k. chakrabarti. 1988. innovation and the productivity crisis. brookingsinstitution, washington, dc.baily, martin neil, and r.j. gordon. 1988. òthe productivity slowdown, measurement issues andthe explosion of computer power,ó brookings papers on economic activity, (2):347431.baker, michael a., and alan f. westin. 1972. databanks in a free society: computers, recordkeeping, and privacy. quadrangle books, new york.bakos, y. 1997. òreducing buyer search costs: implications for electronic marketplaces,ó management science, 42(12):16761692.bakos, y., and e. brynjolfsson. 1997a. òaggregation and disaggregation of information goods:implications for bundling, site licensing and micropayment systems,ó internet publishingand beyond: the economics of digital information and intellectual property, d. hurley, b.kahin, and h. varian (eds.). mit press, cambridge, ma. available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.bakos, y., and e. brynjolfsson. 1997b. òbundling information goods: pricing, profits and efficiency,ó technical report. massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma. availableonline from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.banker, r.d., and r.j. kauffman. 1988. òstrategic contributions of information technology: anempirical study of atm networks,ó proceedings of the ninth international conference oninformation systems. association for computing machinery, new york.banker, rajiv, robert kauffman, and mo adam mahmood. 1993. strategic information technology management: perspectives on organizational growth and competitive advantage. ideagroup publishing, harrisburg, pa.baruch collegeharris poll. 1997. òbaruch collegeharris poll on internet advertising,ó businessweek, september 25. available online from <http://www.businessweek.com/1997/40/b3547025.htm>.basu, susanto, john g. fernald, and miles s. kimball. 1997. òare technology improvements contradictory?,ó technical report. department of economics, university of michigan, ann arbor.baym, nancy k. 1993. òinterpreting soap operas and creating community: inside a computermediated fan culture,ó journal of folklore research, 30:143176.belinfante, alexander. 1991. òmonitor report: telephone penetration and household family characteristics,ó common carrier docket no. 80286. common carrier bureau, federal communications commission, washington, dc.bell, d. 1973. the coming of postindustrial society: a venture in social forecasting. basicbooks, new york.bell, david g., daniel g. bobrow, olivier raiman, and mark h. shirley. 1997. òdynamic documents and situated processes: building on local knowledge in field service,ó informationand process integration in enterprises: rethinking documents, toshiro wakayama, srikanthkannapan, chan meng khoong, sham navathe, and joanne yates (eds.). kluwer academicpublishers, norwell, ma.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108fostering research on impacts of information technologybender, d.h. 1986. òfinancial impact of information processing,ó journal of management information systems, 3(2):2232benjamin, robert et al. 1984. òinformation technology: a strategic opportunity,ó sloan management review. massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma.berman, eli, john bound, and zvi griliches. 1994. òchanges in the demand for skilled laborwithin u.s. manufacturing industries,ó quarterly journal of economics, 109:367398.bernard, h. russell, eugene c. johansen, peter d. killworth, christopher mccarty, gene a. shelley,and scott robinson. 1990. òcomparing four different methods for measuring personal socialnetworks,ó social networks, 12:179215.berndt, ernst r., and zvi griliches. 1993. òprice indexes for microcomputers: an exploratorystudy,ó pp. 6393 in price measurements and their uses, m.f. foss, m.e. manser, and a.h.young (eds.). nber studies in income and wealth, vol. 57. university of chicago press,chicago, il.berndt, ernst, and catherine morrison. 1995. òhightech capital formation and economic performance in u.s. manufacturing industries: an exploratory analysis,ó journal of econometrics,65(1):943.berndt, ernst r., iain cockburn, and zvi griliches. 1996. òpharmaceutical innovations and marketdynamics: tracking effects on price indexes for antidepressant drugs,ó pp. 133188 inbrookings papers on economic activity: microeconomics. brookings institution, washington,dc.berring, robert c. 1995. finding the law,10th ed. west publishing, st. paul, mn.besen, stanley m., and joseph y. farrell. 1994. òchoosing how to compete: strategies and tacticsin standardization,ó journal of economic perspectives, 8:117131.bier, melinda. 1996. òpersonal empowerment in the studies of home internet use by lowincomefamilies,ó journal of computing in education, 28(5):107121.bikson, t.k., j.d. goodchilds, l. huddy, j.d. eveland, and s. schneider. 1991. ònetworked information technology and the transition to retirement,ó technical report. rand corporation,santa monica, ca.bollier, david, and charles m. firestone. 1995. the future of community and personal identity inthe coming electronic culture. aspen institute, washington, dc.bollier, david, and charles m. firestone. 1996. the future of electronic commerce. aspen institute, washington, dc.borko, h., and m.j. menou. 1983. index of information utilization potential: the final report ofphase ii of the i.u.p. pilot project. unesco, paris.bradley, stephen, jerry a. hausman, and richard l. nolan. 1993. globalisation, technology, andcompetition: the fusion of computers and telecommunications in the 1990s. harvard business school press, boston, ma.bresnahan, timothy. 1986. òmeasuring the spillovers from technical advance: mainframe computers in financial services,ó american economic review, 76(4):742755.bresnahan, timothy. 1997. òcomputerization and wage dispersion: an analytical reinterpretation,ó unpublished technical report. national bureau of economic research summer institute,harvard university, cambridge, ma.brock, gerald. 1994. telecommunication policy for the information age. harvard university press,cambridge, ma.browning, john. 1997. òcyber view: universal disservice,ó scientific american, 276(february):40.bruce, harry w. 1996. òa useroriented view of internet as information infrastructure,ó ph.d.dissertation, university of new south wales, australia.brynjolfsson, erik. 1993. òthe productivity paradox of information technology: review and assessment,ó communications of the acm, 36(12):6676. available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik.html>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography109brynjolfsson, erik. 1996a. òinformation assets, technology, and organization,ó managementscience, 40(12):16451662.brynjolfsson, erik. 1996b. òthe contribution of information technology to consumer welfare,óinformation systems research, 7(3):281300.brynjolfsson, erik. 1997. òhow do information technology and work place organization affectlabor demand? firmlevel evidence,ó technical report. sloan school of management, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma.brynjolfsson, e., and c. kemerer. 1996. ònetwork externalities in microcomputer software: aneconometric analysis of the spreadsheet market,ó management science, 42(12):16271647.brynjolfsson, e., and j.y. bakos. 1996. òbundling information goods: pricing, profits and efficiency,ó technical report. sloan school of management, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma. available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik.html>.brynjolfsson, erik, and l. hitt. 1996. òparadox lost? firmlevel evidence on the returns toinformation systems spending,ó management science, 42(4):541558.brynjolfsson, erik, and l. hitt. 1997. òcomputers and productivity growth: firmlevel evidence,ótechnical report. sloan school of management, massachussetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma.brynjolfsson, erik, and shinkyu yang. 1996. òinformation technology and productivity: a reviewof the literature,ó advances in computers, 43(february):179214.brynjolfsson, erik, and shinkyu yang. 1997. òthe intangible costs and benefits of computer investments: evidence from the financial markets,ó proceedings of the international conference oninformation systems, atlanta, georgia. available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/erik/>.brynjolfsson, e., a. renshaw, and m.v. alstyne. 1997. òthe matrix of change,ó sloan management review, 38(2):3754.bureau of labor statistics. 1994. òrepetitive tasks loosen some workersõ grip on safety andhealth,ó technical report. bureau of labor statistics, washington, dc.bureau of labor statistics. 1998. òlabor market experiences and more: studying men, womenand children since 1966,ó technical report, national longitudinal surveys. bureau of laborstatistics, washington, dc, january.burtless, gary. 1988. the work response to a guaranteed income: a survey of experimentalevidence. brookings institution, washington, dc.campbell, karen e., and barrett a. lee. 1991. òname generators in surveys of personal networks,ó social networks, 13:203221.carter, d.e., and b.s. baker. 1991. concurrent engineering: the product development environment for the 1990õs. addisonwesley, reading, ma.castells, manuel. 1996. the rise of the network society. basil blackwell, cambridge, ma.cavoukian, ann, and don tapscott. 1997. who knows: safeguarding your privacy in a networkedworld. mcgrawhill, new york.cerf, vinton. 1997. òcomputer networking: global infrastructure for the 21st century,ó computingresearch: driving information technology and the information industry forward. computingresearch association, washington, dc.chandrasekaran, rajiv. 1998. ògovernment finds information pays,ó washington post, march 9,p. a1.chung, woo young. 1998. òwhy do people use the internet?,ó doctoral dissertation (in progress),boston university, boston, ma.coase, r.h. 1959. òthe federal communications commission,ó journal of law and economics,2:2640.coase, ronald. 1937. òthe nature of the firm,ó economica, 4:385405.colebourn, john. 1996. ònet listings ôinvade privacyõ: victoria blasted over property info,óvancouver province, september 26, p. a4.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110fostering research on impacts of information technologycolwell, rita. 1996. òglobal climate and infectious disease: the cholera paradigm,ó science,274(december):20252031.commercenet/nielsen media research. 1997. òdemographic and electronic commerce study,ótechnical report. commercenet/nielson media research, palo alto, ca, spring. summaryavailable online from <http://www.commerce.net/work/pilot/nielsen96/press97.html>.committee on science, engineering, and public policy. national research council. 1987. technology and employment, innovation and growth in the u.s. economy, richard cyert and davidmowery (eds.). national academy press, washington, dc.computer intelligence. 1997. òconsumer technology index.ó computer intelligence, la jolla, ca.available in part online from <http://www.ci.zd.com/news/ctic97.html>.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1991. computers at risk: safe computing in the information age. national academy press, washington,dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1993. computing professionals: changing needs for the 1990s. national academy press, washington,dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994a.information technology in the service society: a 21stcentury lever. national academypress, washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994b. realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academy press, washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994c.research recommendations to facilitate distributed work. national academy press, washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1994d.rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities, dorothy denning andherbert s. lin (eds.). national academy press, washington dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1996a.keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment. national academy press, washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1996b.cryptographyõs role in securing the information society, kenneth w. dam and herbert s. lin(eds.). national academy press, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/records/0309054753.html>.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1996c. theunpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000. national academy press,washington, dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1997a. forthe record: protecting electronic health information. national academy press, washington,dc.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1997b.more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, dc.computing research association. 1997. òcomputing research: driving information technologyand the information industry forward,ó technical report. computing research association,washington, dc.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography111congressional budget office. 1996. emerging electronic methods for making retail payments.u.s. government printing office, washington, dc.cook, thomas. 1975. sesame street revisited. russell sage, new york.costa, arthur, and rosemarie liebmann. 1997. supporting the spirit of learning: when process iscontent, corwin press, thousand oaks, ca.cron, w.l., and m.g. sobol. 1983. òthe relationship between computerization and performance:a strategy for maximizing the benefits of computerization,ó information and management,6(3):171181.cuban, v. 1994. òthe promise of the computer,ó social issues in computing, chuck huff andthomas finholt (eds.), mcgrawhill, new york.culnan, mary. 1991. òthe lessons of the lotus marketplace: implications for consumer privacy inthe 1990õs,ó technical report. school of business administration, georgetown university,washington, dc.cummings, jonathan, lee sproull, and sara kiesler. 1998. òinternet support groups as an adjunctto patient care,ó working paper. boston university, boston, ma.curley, kathleen, and philip pyburn. 1982. òintellectual technologies: the key to improving whitecollar productivity,ó sloan management review, 24(1):3139.curtis, pavel. 1997. òmudding: social phenomena in textbased virtual realities,ó the culture ofthe internet, sara kiesler (ed.). lawrence erlbaum associates, rahway, nj.cutler, david, and mark mcclellan. 1996. òthe determinants of technological change in heartattack treatment,ó nber working paper 5751. national bureau of economic research,cambridge, ma, september.cutler, david m., mark mcclellan, joseph p. newhouse, and dahlia remler. 1996. òare medicalprices declining?ó nber working paper 5750. national bureau of economic research,cambridge, ma, september. available online from <http://www.nber.org>.danziger, james n., and kenneth l. kraemer. 1986. people and computers: the impacts of computing on end users in organizations. columbia university press, new york.danziger, james n., william h. dutton, rob kling, and kenneth l. kraemer. 1982. computers andpolitics: high technology in american local governments. columbia university press, newyork.david, paul. 1989. computer and dynamo: the modern productivity paradox in a nottoodistantmirror, technical report. center for economic policy research, stanford university, palo alto,ca.david, paul a. 1985. òclio and the economics of qwerty,ó american economic review, 75(2):332337.david, paul a. 1990. òthe dynamo and the computer: an historical perspective on the modernproductivity paradox,ó american economic review, 80(2):335361.denison, edward. 1985. trends in american economic growth, 19291982. brookings institution,washington, dc.denning, dorothy, and william e. baugh, jr. 1997. encryption and evolving technologies as toolsof organized crime and terrorism. national strategy information centerõs u.s. workinggroup on organized crime (wgoc), washington, dc. available online from <http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/denning/crypto/ocabs.html>.dertouzos, michael. 1997. what will be: how the new world of information will change ourlives. harper & row, san francisco, ca.dinardo, john, and steve pischke. 1997. òthe returns to computer use revisited: have pencilschanged the wage structure too?,ó quarterly journal of economics 112(1):291303.dordick, h.s., and g. wang. 1993. the information society. sage, newbury park, ca.drexler, k. eric. 1991. òhypertext publishing and the evolution of knowledge,ó social intelligence, 1(2):87120.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112fostering research on impacts of information technologydutton, william. 1996a. information and communication technologies: visions and realities. oxford university press, oxford, england.dutton, william h. 1996b. ònetwork rules of order: regulating speech in public electronic fora,ómedia, culture & society, 18:269290.earls, john. 1990. òsocial integration by people with physical disabilities: the development of aninformation technology model based on personal growth and achievement,ó ph.d. thesis,university of wollongong, wollongong, australia.eason, ken. 1988. information technology and organizational change. taylor & francis, newyork.economides, nicholas, and charles himmelberg. 1995. òcritical mass and network size withapplications to the us fax market,ó discussion paper no. ec9511, stern school of business, new york university, new york. available online from <http://raven.stern.nyu.edu/networks/papers.html>.economist, the. 1996. òbangalore bytes: software in india,ó march 23, vol. 338, no. 7958, p. 67.educational testing service. 1997. computers and classrooms: the status of technology in u.s.schools, policy information report. policy information center, educational testing service,princeton, nj.eisenstein, elizabeth l. 1997. òfrom the printed word to the moving image,ó social research,64(3):10491066.electronic industries association. 19841990. consumer electronics annual review. consumerelectronics group, electronic industries association, washington, dc.electronic industries association. 1992. the u.s. consumer electronics industry in review. consumer electronics group, electronic industries association, washington, dc.electronic privacy information center. 1996. who owns personal information? anatomy of aprivate case. electronic privacy information center, washington, dc.electronic privacy information center. 1997. medical privacy public opinion polls. electronicprivacy information center, washington, dc.equifax. 1997. 1996 equifaxharris consumer privacy survey. equifax, united kingdom.feldman, martha, and james march. 1981. òinformation in organizations as signal and symbol,óadministrative science quarterly, 26:171186.finarelli, margaret. 1997. globe: a worldwide environmental science and education partnership. globe program, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.globe.gov>.finholt, thomas, and lee sproull. 1990. òelectronic groups at work,ó organization science, 1:4164.fischer, claude s. 1977. networks and places: social relationships in the urban setting. freepress, new york.fischer, claude s. 1982. to dwell among friends: personal networks in town and city. universityof chicago press, chicago, il.fischer, claude s. 1992. america calling: a social history of the telephone to 1940. university ofcalifornia press, berkeley.forester, v. 1989. computers in the human context: information technology, productivity, andpeople. mit press, cambridge, ma.freeman, chris, luc soete, and umit efendioglu. 1995. òdiffusion and the employment effects ofinformation and communication technology,ó international labor review 134(45):587604.freeman, laura. 1996. òjob creation and the emerging home computer market,ó monthly laborreview, 119(8):4655.friedlander, amy. 1995a. emerging infrastructure: the growth of railroads. corporation fornational research initiatives, reston, va.friedlander, amy. 1995b.  natural monopoly and universal service. corporation for nationalresearch initiatives, reston, va.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography113friedlander, amy. 1996. power and light. corporation for national research initiatives, reston,va.froomkin, a. michael. 1996. òflood control on the information ocean: living with anonymity,digital cash, and distributed databases,ó technical report. university of miami school oflaw, miami, fl. available online from <http://www.law.miami.edu/froomkin/>.furlong, mary. 1989. òan electronic community for older adults: the seniornetwork,ó journal ofcommunication, 39(3):145153.galbraith, j. 1977. organizational design. addisonwesley, reading, ma.galegher, jolene, lee sproull, and sara kiesler. 1998. òlegitimacy, authority, and community inelectronic support groups,ó written communication, forthcoming.gay, martin. 1996. the new information revolution. abcclio, santa barbara, ca.gelsinger, v. 1991. ò2001: a microprocessor odyssey,ó technology 2000: the future of computing and communications, derek leebaert (ed.). mit press, cambridge, ma.glass, g.v., b. mcgaw, and m.l. smith. 1981. metaanalysis in research. sage publications,beverly hills, ca.glennan, thomas k., and arthur melmed. 1996. fostering the use of educational technology:elements of a national strategy. rand corporation, santa monica, ca. available onlinefrom <http://www.rand.org/publications/mr/mr650/>.goodman, william. 1996. òthe software and engineering industries: threatened by technologicalchange?,ó monthly labor review, 119(80):3745.gordon, robert j. 1990. the measurement of durable goods prices. university of chicago press,chicago, il.gottschalk, peter. 1997. òinequality, income growth and mobility: the basic facts,ó journal ofeconomic perspectives, 11(2):2140.gottschalk, peter, and timothy m. smeeding. 1997. òcrossnational comparisons of earnings andincome inequality,ó journal of economic literature, 35(2):633688.graham, john. 1976. making computers pay. john wiley & sons, new york.greenan, n., and j. mairesse. 1996. òcomputers and productivity in france: some evidence,ónber working paper 5836. national bureau of economic research, cambridge, ma.griliches, zvi. 1994. òproductivity, r&d, and the data constraint,ó american economic review,84(1):123.harris, sidney, and joseph katz. 1991. òorganizational performance and information technologyinvestment intensity in the insurance industry,ó organization science, 2(3):263296.harris, v. (ed.). 1994. organizational linkages: understanding the productivity paradox. nationalacademy press, washington, dc.hayek, f.a. 1945. òthe use of knowledge in society,ó american economic review, 35(4):317.heaviside, sheila, tija tiggins, and elizabeth farris. 1997. òstatistics in brief: advanced telecommunications in u.s. public elementary and secondary schools, fall 1996,ó nces report 97944. national center for educational statistics, u.s. department of education, washington,dc.herring, thomas. 1996. òthe global positioning system,ó scientific american, 274:4450.hesse, carla. 1991. publishing and cultural politics in revolutionary paris, 17891810. universityof california press, berkeley, ca.hesse, bradford w., lee sproull, sara kiesler, and john p. walsh. 1993. òreturns to science:computer networks in oceanography,ó communications of the acm, 36(8):90102.hitt, l.m., and e. brynjolfsson. 1997. òinformation technology and internal firm organization: anexploratory analysis, ó journal of management information systems, 14(2):81101.hitt, l.m., and erik brynjolfsson. 1995. òinformation technology as a factor of production: therole of differences among firms,ó economics of innovation and new technology, 3(4):183200.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114fostering research on impacts of information technologyhittleman, daniel r., and alan j. simon. 1997. interpreting educational research: an introductionfor consumers of research, 2nd ed. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, nj.hoffman, donna l., and thomas p. novak. 1998. òbridging the racial divide on the internet,óscience, 280(5362)(april 17):390391.hoffman, donna l., thomas p. novak, and alladi venkatesh. 1997a. òdiversity on the internet:the relationship of race to access and usage,ó technical report. vanderbilt university, nashville, tn, october. available online at <http://www2000.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/>.hoffman, donna l., thomas p. novak, and marcos a. peralta. 1997b. òinformation privacy in themarketspace: implications for the commercial uses of anonymity on the web,ó discussionpaper prepared for the conference òanonymous communications on the internet: uses andabuses,ó november 2123, university of california, irvine.hoffman, donna l., william kalsbeek, and thomas novak. 1996. òinternet and web use in theunited states: baselines for commercial development,ó communications of the acm, 39(12):3647. available online from <http://www2000.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/papers/internetdemosjuly91996.html>.howell, david. 1997. òinstitutional failure and the american worker: the collapse of lowskillwages,ó technical report. the jerome levy institute of bard college, public policy brief,annandaleonhudson, ny.howell, david, and edward wolf. 1993. òchanges in the informationintensity of the u.s. workplace since 1950: has information technology made a difference?,ó technical report 9308,c.v. starr center for applied economics, new york university, new york.huff, charles, lee sproull, and sara kiesler. 1989. òcomputer communication and organizationalcommitment: tracing the relationship in a city government,ó journal of applied social psychology, 19:13711391.huffy, chuck, and thomas finholt. 1994. social issues in computing. mcgrawhill, new york.iacono, suzanne, and rob kling. 1996. òcomputerization movements and tales of technologicalutopianism,ó pp. 85105 in computerization and controversy: value conflicts and socialchoices, charles dunlop and rob kling (eds.). academic press, san diego, ca.international data corporation. 1997a. òinternet leapfrog: the impact of the internet on globaleconomic competition.ó international data corporation, framingham, ma.international data corporation. 1997b. ònew it priorities and technologies for the year ahead,ótechnical report. international data corporation, framingham, ma.ito, y. 1981. òthe ôjohoka shakaiõ approach to the study of communication in japan,ó pp. 671698 in mass communication review yearbook, g.c. wilhoit and h. de bock (eds.). sagepublications, beverly hills, ca.johnson, frank, and george stafford. 1998. òtechnology regimes and the distribution of realwages,ó microfoundations of economic growth: a schumpeterian perspective, gunnareliasson, chris green, and charles r. mccann, jr. (eds.). university of michigan press, annarbor, mi, forthcoming,jorgenson, dale, and kevin stiroh. 1995. òcomputers and growth,ó economics of innovation andnew technology, 3:295316.jussawalla, m., d.m. lamberton, and n.d. karunaratne. 1988. the cost of thinking: informationeconomies of ten pacific countries. ablex publishing, norwood, nj.kahin, brian, and charles nesson. 1997. borders in cyberspace. mit press, cambridge, ma.kahin, brian, and james keller, eds. 1997. coordinating the internet. mit press, cambridge, ma.kahn, alfred e. 1970. the economics of regulation: principles and institutions. volume 1:economic principles. john wiley & sons, new york.kaminer, noam. 1997. òinternet use and scholarsõ productivity,ó ph.d. dissertation, university ofcalifornia, berkeley. available online from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~noam>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography115kang, jerry, radhika karmarkar, and lis leidig. 1995. privacy and the nii. national telecommunications and information administration, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/policy/privwhitepaper.html>.kaplan, r. 1989. òmanagement accounting for advanced technological environments,ó science,245:819823.karnow, curtis e.a. 1994. òthe encrypted self: fleshing out the rights of electronic personalities,ó conference on computers, freedom, and privacy. artech publishers, london.karunaratne, n.d., and a. cameron. 1981. òa comparative analysis of the information economyin developed and developing countries,ó journal of information science, 3:113127.katz, elizabeth, r. grant tate, and william a. weimer. 1995. survey of telematics for educationand training: united states, canada, and australia, volume 2. european association ofdistance teaching universities, heerleen, the netherlands.katz, james e., and philip aspden. 1997a. internet dropouts: the invisible group. bellcore,morristown, nj.katz, james e., and philip aspden. 1997b. motivations for and barriers to internet usage: resultsof a national public opinion survey. bellcore, morristown, nj.katz, michael l., and carl shapiro. 1994. òsystems competition and network effects,ó journal ofeconomic perspectives, 8:93116.katz, r.l. 1988. the information society. praeger, new york.kedzie, christopher. 1997. òa brave new world or a new world order?,ó the culture of theinternet, sara kiesler (ed.). lawrence erlbaum associates, rahway, nj.keen, peter. 1995. every managerõs guide to information technology, 2nd edition. harvardbusiness school press, boston, ma.kees, c.p., m. knipscheer, and toni c. antonucci (eds.). 1990. social network research: substantive issues and methodological questions. swets & zeitlanger, amsterdam.kehoe, colleen, jim pitkow, and kimberly morton. 1997. ògvuõs eighth www user surveyreport,ó technical report. graphics, visualization, and usability center, georgia institute oftechnology, atlanta, ga, december. available online from <http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/usersurveys/>.keyes, robert. 1993. òthe future of the transistor,ó scientific american, 268(6):7076.khosrowpur, mehdi. 1994. information technology and organizations: challenges of new technologies. idea group publishing, harrisburg, pa.kiesler, sara, and thomas finholt. 1994. òthe mystery of rsi,ó social issues in computing, chuckhuff and thomas finholt (eds.). mcgrawhill, new york.kiesler, sara, robert kraut, tridas mukhopadhyay, and william scherlis. 1997. òhomenet overview: recent results from a field trial of residential internet use,ó technical report. carnegiemellon university, pittsburgh, pa. available online from <http://homenet.andrew.cmu.edu/progress/research.html>.king, john leslie, rebecca e. grinter, and jeanne m. pickering. 1997. òthe rise and fall ofnetville: the saga of a cyberspace construction boomtown in the great divide,ó the cultureof the internet, sara kiesler (ed.). lawrence erlbaum associates, rahway, nj.kling, rob. 1996. òcomputerization at work,ó computerization and controversy: value conflictsand social choices, 2nd ed. academic press, san diego, ca.kling, rob, and tom jewett. 1994. òthe social design of worklife with computers and networks:an open natural systems perspective,ó advances in computers, volume 39, marshall yovits(ed.). academic press, orlando, fl.kling, v. 1996. òthe centrality of organizations in the computerization of society,ó computerization and controversy: value conflicts and social choices, 2nd ed. academic press, san diego,ca.knight, charles. 1854. the old printer and the modern press. john murray, london.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116fostering research on impacts of information technologykollock, peter, and marc smith. 1996. òmanaging the virtual commons: cooperation and conflictin computer communities,ó computermediated communication, susan herring (ed.). johnbenjamins, amsterdam.korzick garmer, amy, and charles m. firestone. 1996. creating a learning society: initiatives foreducation and technology. aspen institute, washington, dc. available online from < http://www.aspeninst.org/dir/polpro/csp/abstracts/crlearn.html >kozol, jonathan. 1991. savage inequalities: children in americaõs schools. crown publishers,new york.kranerg, melvin. 1989. òit as revolution,ó computers in the human context: information technology, productivity, and people, tom forester (ed.). mit press, cambridge, ma.kraut, robert, william scherlis, tridas mukhopadhyay, jane manning, and sara kiesler. 1996.òthe homenet field trial of residential internet services,ó communications of the acm,39:5565.kreuger, alan. 1993. òhow computers have changed the wage structure: evidence from microdata, 19841989,ó quarterly journal of economics, 108:3360.kulik, chenlin, and james a. kulik. 1991. òeffectiveness of computerbased instruction: anupdated analysis,ó computers in human behavior, 7:7594.kuo, e.c.y. 1989. òtrends of information in singapore,ó symposium on international technologyand singapore society: trends, policies and applications. singapore university press, national university of singapore, singapore.landauer, thomas k. 1995. the trouble with computers: usefulness, usability, and productivity.mit press, cambridge, ma.lardner, james. 1987. fast forward. w.w. norton, new york.lau, lawrence j., and ichiro tokutsu. 1992. òthe impact of computer technology on the aggregate productivity of the united states: an indirect approach,ó unpublished paper. stanforduniversity, palo alto, ca, august.laudon, kenneth c. 1996. òmarkets and privacy,ó communications of the acm, 39(9):992104.leavitt, harold j., and thomas l. whisler. 1958. òmanagement in the 1980s,ó harvard businessreview, 36(6):4148.leebaert, derek. 1991. technology 2001: the future of computing and communications. mitpress, cambridge, ma.leiner, barry m. et al. 1997. a brief history of the internet, version 3.1, revised february 20.available online from <http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/brief.html>.lesk, michael. 1997. practical digital libraries: books, bytes, and bucks. morgan kauffman, sanfrancisco.levy, frank, and r. murnane. 1997. òwith what skills are computers a complement?,ó technicalreport. national bureau of economic research, cambridge, ma.levy, frank, and richard j. murnane. 1992. òu.s. earnings levels and earnings inequality: areview of recent trends and proposed explanations,ó journal of economic literature,30:13331381.lichtenberg, frank r. 1995. òthe output contributions of computer equipment and personnel: afirmlevel analysis,ó journal of economics of innovation and new technology, 3:201217.lohr, steve. 1997. ògates to aid libraries, in footsteps of carnegie,ó new york times, june 24,p. c1.louis harris & associates and alan f. westin. 1997. òcommerce, communications, and privacyonline,ó american business information service, hackensack, nj.luker, jr., william, and donald lyons. 1997. òemployment shifts in high technology industries,198896,ó monthly labor review, 120(6):1225.lyman, peter. 1996. òbooks, bricks, & bytes,ó daedalus, 122(4):109110.machlup, f. 1962. the production and distribution of knowledge in the united states. princetonuniversity press, princeton, nj.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography117machlup, fritz. 1982. knowledge: its creation, distribution, and economic significance. princetonuniversity press, princeton, nj.malone, t.w. 1987. òmodeling coordination in organizations and markets,ó management science,33(1):17171332.malone, thomas w., and kevin crowston. 1994. òthe interdisciplinary study of coordination,óacm computing surveys, 26(1):87120. available online from <http://ccs.mit.edu/ccswp157.html>.malone, thomas, joanne yates, and robert benjamin. 1987. òelectronic markets and electronichierarchies,ó communications of the acm, 30(6):484497.malone, thomas w., kevin crowston, jintae lee, brian pentland, chrysanthos dellarocas, georgewyner, john quimby, charley osborne, and avi bernstein. 1997. òtools for inventing organizations: toward a handbook of organizational processes,ó technical report 198. mitcenter for coordination science, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma.marien, michael. 1986. ò125 impacts of new information technologies,ó future survey annual.world future society, bethesda, md.mark, jerome. 1982. òmeasuring productivity in service industries,ó monthly labor review, 105:38.mark, jerome s. 1987. òtechnological change and employment: some results from bls research,ó monthly labor review, 110:2629.markus, m.l. 1987. òtoward a critical mass theory of interactive mediañuniversal access,interdependence and diffusion,ó communication research, 14(5):491511.markus, m. lynne, and daniel robey. 1988. òinformation technology and organizational change:causal structure in theory and research,ó management science, 34(5):583598.marsden, peter. 1987. òcore discussion networks of americans,ó american sociological review,52:122131.marsden, peter v. 1990. ònetwork data and measurement,ó annual review of sociology, 16:435463.martin, michael. 1996. òwhen info worlds collide,ó fortune, 134(8):130133.marvin, leeellen. 1996. òspoof, spam, lurk and lag: the aesthetics of textbased virtualrealities,ó journal of computermediated communication, 1(2). available online from <http://www.usc.edu/dept/annenberg/jcmc>.mcafee, r.p., j. mcmillan, and m.d. whinston. 1989. òmultiproduct monopoly, commodity bundling, and correlation of values,ó quarterly journal of economics, 114:371384.mccall, william. 1996. òman who gave out vehicle records on the net forced off by complaints,ó associated press, august 8.mcconnell, sheila. 1996. òthe role of computers in reshaping the work force,ó monthly laborreview, 119(8):35.mckinsey and company. 1995. connecting k12 schools to the information superhighway. u.s.advisory council on the national information infrastructure, washington, dc.mcmillan, john. 1994. òselling spectrum rights,ó journal of economic perspectives, 8(3):145162.mcneil, barbara j., and karyn nelson. 1990. òmetaanalysis of interactive video instruction: a10year review of achievement effects,ó technical report ed321761. educational researchinformation center (eric), u.s. department of education, washington, dc.melmed, arthur (ed.). 1995. the costs and effectiveness of educational technology: proceedingsof a workshop. rand corporation, santa monica, ca.memmott, carol. 1997. òhistory takes on net proportions,ó usa today, june bonus issue.metcalfe, r. 1997. òpollinate lets you rent the software you need for just the right amount oftime,ó infoworld, 19(23):111.milgrom, paul. 1989. òauctions and bidding: a primer,ó journal of economic perspectives, 3(3):332.milgrom, paul, and john roberts. 1980. òthe economics of modern manufacturing: technology,strategy and organization,ó american economic review, 80(3):511528.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118fostering research on impacts of information technologymoris, francisco. 1996. òsemiconductors: the building blocks of the information revolution,ómonthly labor review, 119(8):1217.morrison, catherine, and ernst berndt. 1990. òassessing the productivity of information technology equipment in the us manufacturing industries,ó technical report 3582. national bureauof economic research working, cambridge, ma.morrison, ian, and greg schmid. 1994. future tense: the business realities of the next ten years.william morrow and company, new york.mueller, milton. 1996. universal service: interconnection, competition, and monopoly in the making of the american telephone system. mit press, cambridge, ma.mueller, milton. 1997. òuniversal service and the telecommunications act: myth made law,ócommunications of the acm, 40(3):3948.mueller, milton, and jorge schement. 1996. òuniversal service from the bottom up: a study oftelephone penetration in camden, new jersey,ó the information society. taylor & francis,new york.murnane, richard j., and frank levy. 1996. òteaching the new basic skills: principles for educating children to thrive in a changing economy.ó publishers weekly, 243(26):38.murphy, kevin m., and finss welch. 1993. òlessons from empirical labor economics: 19721992.inequality in relative wages,ó american economic review, 83(2):104109.narin, francis, kimberly s. hamilton, and dominic olivastro. 1997. òpublic and private research,ótechnical report. chi research, haddon heights, nj.narisetti, raju. 1997. òibm planning to research internet trade,ó wall street journal, december5, p. b10.nass, clifford, and byron reeves. 1996. the media equation: how people treat computers,television and new media like real people and places. cambridge university press, cambridge, england.nass, clifford, jonathan steur, and ellen r. tauber. 1994. òcomputers are social actors,ó proceedings of chi 94. acm press, new york.national center for education statistics. 1997. advanced telecommunications in u.s. public elementary and secondary schools, fall 1996, statistics in brief, nces 97944. office of educational research and improvement, national center for education statistics, department ofeducation, washington, dc.national information infrastructure advisory council (niiac). 1995. òa nation of opportunity: afinal report of the united states advisory council on the national information infrastructure,ó technical report. u.s. government printing office, washington, dc.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1995. òfalling through thenet: a survey of the ôhave notsõ in rural and urban america,ó technical report. ntia,department of commerce, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fallingthru.html>.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1997. òprivacy and selfregulation in the information age.ó ntia, department of commerce, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/privacy/privacyrpt.htm>.netcraft. 1996. the netcraft web server survey. netcraft ltd., bath, united kingdom. availableonline from <http://www.netcraft.com/survey>.netcraft. 1997. the netcraft web server survey. netcraft ltd., bath, united kingdom. availableonline from <http://www.netcraft.com/survey>.network wizards. 1998. internet domain survey, january 1998. network wizards, menlo park,ca. available online from <http://www.nw.com/>.nordhaus, william. 1969. invention, growth, and welfare. mit press, cambridge, ma.novak, t.p., and d.l. hoffman. 1997. ònew metrics for new media: toward the development ofweb measurement standards,ó world wide web journal, 2(1):213246.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography119noyelle, t. 1990. skills, wages, and productivity in the service sector. westview press, boulder,co.nye, david e. 1997. òshaping communication networks: telegraph, telephone, computer,ó social research, 64(3):10671091office of technology assessment. 1987. the electronic supervisor: new technology, new tensions, otacit333. u.s. government printing office, washington, dc.office of technology assessment. 1995. teachers and technology: making the connection. u.s.government printing office, washington, dc.oliner, stephen d., and daniel e. sichel. 1994. òcomputers and output growth revisited: how bigis the puzzle?,ó brookings papers on economic activity, 2:273334.oppenheimer, todd. 1997. òthe computer delusion,ó atlantic monthly 280(1):4558.orlikowski, w.j. 1992. òlearning from notes: organizational issues in groupware implementation,ó conference on computer supported cooperative work, j. turner and r. kraut (eds.).association for computing machinery, toronto.orr, julian e. 1990. òtalking about machines: an ethnography of a modern job,ó ph.d. thesis,cornell university, ithaca, new york.park, r.e. 1916. òthe city: suggestions for the investigation of human behavior in the urbanenvironment,ó american journal of sociology, 20:577612.park, r.e. 1955. society. free press, glencoe, il.parks, malcom r. 1996. òmaking friends in cyberspace,ó journal of computer mediated communication, 1(4):80. available online from <http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/>.pelgrum, w.j., janssen reiner, and t.j. plomp. 1993. schools, teachers, students, and computers:a crossnational perspective. international association for the evaluation of educationalachievement, amsterdam.perez, carlota. 1983. òstructural change and assimilation of new technologies in the economicand social system,ó futures, 15(5):357375.pool, ithiel de sola. 1984. communications flows: a census in the united states and japan.northholland, amsterdam.porat, m.u. 1977. information economy: definition and measurement. ot special publication77:12. u.s. department of commerce, washington, dc.porter, michael, and victor millar. 1985. òhow information gives you competitive advantage,óharvard business review. harvard university press, cambridge, ma.presidentõs committee of advisors on science and technology (pcast). 1997. report to the president on the use of technology to strengthen k12 education in the united states, presidentõscommittee of advisors on science and technology, panel on educational technology, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.whitehouse.gov/wh/eop/ostp/nstc/pcast/k12ed.html>.press, larry. 1997. òtracking the global diffusion of the internet,ó communications of the acm,40(11):95100.price waterhouse. 1997. 1997 price waterhouse consumer technology survey, price waterhouseõsentertainment, media and communications (ecm) group, new york. (for information onlineabout the ecm group, see <http://www.pw.com/us/2d96.htm>.)quarterman, john s. 1997. ò1997 users and hosts of the internet and the matrix,ó matrix news, 7(1).radner, r., 1992. òhierarchy: the economics of managing,ó journal of economic literature,30:13821415.regan, priscilla. 1995. legislating privacy. university of north carolina press, chapel hill, nc.resnick, paul, and hal r. varian. 1997. òintroduction to recommender systems,ó communicationsof the acm, 40(3):5658.resnick, paul, and jim miller. 1996. òpics: internet access controls without censorship,ó communications of the acm, 39(10):8793. available online from <http://www.w3c.org/pics>.rogers, everett. 1995. diffusion of innovation. free press, new york.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120fostering research on impacts of information technologyrohlfs, jeffrey. 1974. òa theory of interdependent demand for a communications service,ó belljournal of economics, 5(1):1637.romm, celia t., and nava pliskin. 1997. òtoward a virtual politicking model,ó communications ofthe acm, 40(11):95100.rosenberg, richard. 1997. the social impact of computers, 2nd ed. academic press, san diego,ca.rowe, susan a. 1994. òmanagement involvement: a key element in preventing musculoskeletalinjuries in visual display unit users in australia,ó social issues in computing, chuck huffand thomas finholt (eds.). mcgrawhill, new york.rubin, andee. 1996. òeducational technology: support for inquirybased learning,ó technologyinfusion and school change: perspectives and practices, model schools partnership researchmonograph. transportation emergency rescue committee, cambridge, ma.ryan, alice. 1991. òmetaanalysis of achievement effects of microcomputer applications in elementary schools,ó educational administration quarterly, 27(2):161184.sah, r.k., and j.e. stiglitz. 1986. òthe architecture of economic systems: hierarchies and polyarchies,ó american economic review, 76(4):716727.schement, j.r. 1990. òporat, bell, and the information society reconsidered: the growth of information work in the early twentieth century,ó information processing and management,26(4):449465.schmalensee, r.l. 1984. ògaussian demand and commodity bundling,ó journal of business,57:s211s230.scientific american. 1997. òthe internet: bringing order from chaos,ó scientific american,276(3):5082. available online from <http://www.sciam.com/0397issue/0397intro.html>.scott, john t., and albert n. link. 1997. òassessing the infrastructural needs of a technologybased service sector: a new approach to technology policy planning,ó best practices intechnology and innovation policy, wolfgang polt (ed.). organisation for economic cooperation and development, paris.shapiro, carl, and hal varian. 1997. òu.s. government information policy,ó technical report.school of information management and systems, university of california, berkeley. available online at <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/papers/policy/policy.html>.shapiro, carl, and hal varian. 1998. infotactics: competitive strategy for the information economy.harvard business school press, cambridge, ma.shy, oz. 1998. òthe economics of software protection and other media,ó economics of digitalinformation and intellectual property, debora hurley, brian kahin, and hal varian (eds.).mit press, cambridge, ma.sichel, andrew. 1997. the computer revolution: an economic perspective. brookings institutionpress, washington, dc.smart valley. 1994. òsmart valley telecommuting guide.ó smart valley, san mateo, ca. available online from <http://www.svi.org/>.smythe, d. 1977. òcommunications: blindspot of western marxism,ó canadian journal of socialand political theory, 1(3):127.smythe, d. 1981. dependency road: communication, capitalism, consciousness, and canada.ablex, norwood, nj.solow, robert. 1957. òtechnological change and the aggregate production function,ó review ofeconomics and statistics, 39:312.solow, robert m. 1987. òweõd better watch out,ó new york times book review, july 12, , p. 36.spence, michael, and bruce owen. 1977. òtelevision programming, monopolistic competition,and welfare,ó quarterly journal of economics, 91(1):103126.sproull, lee, and sara b. kiesler. 1992. corrections: new ways of working in the networkedorganization. mit press, cambridge, ma.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography121sproull, lee, and samer faraj. 1995. òatheism, sex, and databases: the net as a social technology,ó pp. 6281 in public access to the internet, brian kahin and james keller (eds.). mitpress, cambridge, ma.sproull, lee, mani subramani, sara kiesler, janet h. walker, and keith waters. 1996. òwhen theinterface is a face,ó humancomputer interaction, 11:97124.stefik, marc. 1995. òletting loose the light,ó technical report. xerox palo alto research center,palo alto, ca.stewart, thomas. 1997. intellectual capital. harvard business school press, boston, ma.stipp, david. 1997. òthe idol of the geeks, what theyõre reading in the computer biz,ó fortune,march 3, p. 40. available online from <http://www.pathfinder.com/@@y1yrbquacc@un2gz/fortune/1997/970303/fir1.html>.stoll, clifford. 1995. silicon snake oil. second thoughts on the information highway. doubleday,new york.sudweeks, fay, margaret mclaughlin, and sheizaf rafaeli (eds.). 1997. network and netplay:virtual groups on the internet. aaai/mit press, cambridge, ma.tapscott, don. 1996. the digital economy: promise and peril in the age of networked intelligence.mcgrawhill, new york.taylor, lester. 1994. telecommunications demand in theory and practice. kulwer academicpublishers, boston, ma.television bureau of advertising. 1991. tv and cable factbook: the authoritative reference forthe television, cable & electronics industries. no. 60. warren publishing, washington, dc.thurow, lester. 1987. òeconomic paradigms and slow american productivity growth,ó easterneconomic journal, 13:333343.turkle, sherry. 1984. the second self: computers and the human spirit. simon & schuster, newyork.turkle, sherry. 1995a. òcomputational technologies and images of the self,ó life on the screen:identity in the age of the internet. simon & schuster, new york.turkle, sherry. 1995b. life on the screen: identity in the age of the internet. simon & schuster,new york.tyack, david b., and larry cuban. 1995. tinkering toward utopia: a century of public schoolreform. harvard university press, cambridge, ma.u.s. bureau of the census. 1975. historical statistics of the united states, bicentennial edition,series r190. u.s. government printing office, washington, dc.u.s. bureau of the census. 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992. statistical abstract. u.s. department ofcommerce, washington, dc.u.s. bureau of the census. 1993. current population survey. u.s. department of commerce,washington, dc.u.s. department of labor. 1991. what work requires of schools: a scans report for america2000. u.s. department of labor, washington dc.u.s. department of labor. 1992. learning and living: a blueprint for high performance. u.s.department of labor, washington dc.u.s. senate. 1995. òcyberporn and children: the scope of the problem, the state of the technology, and the need for congressional action,ó j10436, 104th congress, hearing before thecommittee on the judiciary, washington, dc.van alstyne, marshall. 1997. òthe state of network organization: a survey in three frameworks,ójournal of organizational computing, 7(3).van der poel, mart g.m. 1993. òpersonal support networks,ó social networks, 15:4970.varian, hal r. 1995a. pricing information goods. harvard university press, cambridge, ma.varian, hal r. 1995b. òthe information economy, how much will two bits be worth in thedigital marketplace?,ó scientific american, 30(1)(september):200201. subsequently publishedin 1996 in educom review, (january/february):4446.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122fostering research on impacts of information technologyvarian, hal r. 1996a. òdifferential pricing and efficiency,ó first monday. available online from<http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue2/different/>.varian, hal r. 1996b. òeconomic aspects of personal privacy,ó technical report. university ofcalifornia, berkeley. available online from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/people/hal/papers.html>.varian, hal r. 1996c. intermediate microeconomics. w.w. norton, new york.varian, hal r. 1997a. òbuying, sharing and renting information goods,ó technical report. schoolof information management and systems, university of california, berkeley. available onlinefrom <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal>.varian, hal r. 1997b. òeconomic issues facing the internet,ó the internet as paradigm, charlesfirestone (ed.). aspen institute, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~hal/people/hal/papers.html>.varian, hal r., and richard roehl. 1996. òcirculating libraries and video rental stores,ó technicalreport. university of california, berkeley. available online from <http://www.sims berkeley.edu/~hal>.venkatesh, alladi. 1996. òcomputers and other interactive technologies for the home,ó communications of the acm, 39(12):4754.vickrey, william. 1961. òcounterspeculation, auctions and competitive sealed tenders,ó journalof finance, 16(1):837.walsh, john p., and todd bayma. 1997. òcomputer networks and scientific work,ó pp. 385406 inthe culture of the internet, sara kiesler (ed.). lawrence erlbaum associates, rahway, nj.warnke, jacqueline. 1996. òcomputer manufacturing: change and competition,ó monthly laborreview, 119(8):1830.webster, frank. 1997. òwhat information society?,ó the information age: an anthology on itsimpact and consequences, david s. alberts and daniel s. papp (eds.). national defenseuniversity press, washington, dc.weill, peter. 1992. òthe relationship between investment in information technology and firmperformance: a study of the valve manufacturing sector,ó information systems research,3(4):307333.weiss, laura. 1996. buildings, books, and bytes: libraries and communities in the digital age: areport on the publicõs opinion of library leadersõ visions for the future. benton foundation, washington, dc. available online from <http://www.benton.org/library/kellogg/buildings.html>.wellman, barry. 1979. òthe community question,ó american journal of sociology, 84:12011231.wellman, barry. 1997. òan electronic group is virtually a social network,ó the culture of theinternet, sara kiesler (ed.). lawrence erlbaum associates, hillsdale, nj.wellman, barry, and david b. tindall. 1993. òhow telephone networks connect social networks,ó progress in communication sciences, volume xii, w.d. richards, jr., and george a.barnett (eds.). ablex, norwood, nj.wellman, barry, and milena gulia. 1997. ònet surfers donõt ride alone: virtual communities ascommunities,ó communities in cyberspace, peter kollock and marc smith (eds.). universityof california press, berkeley, ca.wellman, barry, and scot worley. 1990. òdifferent strokes from different folks: community tiesand social support,ó american journal of sociology, 96(3):558588.wellman, barry, janet salaff, dimitrina dimitrova, laura garton, milena gulia, and carolinehaythornthwaite. 1996. òcomputer networks as social networks,ó annual review of sociology, 22:213238.westin, alan f., and louis harris & associates. 1981. the dimensions of privacy. garland, newyork.wiley, malcolm m., and stuart a. rice. 1933. communication agencies and social life. mcgrawhill, new york.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliography123wilson, diane d. 1995. òit investment and its productivity effects: an organizational sociologistõsperspective on directions for future research,ó economics of innovation and new technology, 3:235251.wolff, edward n. 1996. òthe growth of information workers in the u.s. economy, 19501990:the role of technological change, computerization, and structural change,ó technical report rr 9641. department of economics, new york university, new york.world research, inc. 1997. òjunk email survey.ó san jose, ca. available online from <http://www.survey.com/junkresults.html>.world wide web consortium. 1997. òplatform for internet content selection.ó available onlinefrom <http://www.w3.org/pics>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.125appendixesfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a127127aworkshop agenda and participantsagendamonday, june 30, 19978:00 a.m.registration and breakfast8:30welcome and introductory remarkshal varian, steering committee chair9:30breakout session 1session 1a: informationmoderator: clifford lynchassigned participants: haim mendelson, peter lyman, kenneth kraemer, marvin sirbu, thomas malone, paul resnicksession 1b: deployment case studiesñweb and collaborationtoolsmoderator: scott shenkerassigned participants: jeffrey mackiemason, john king,mark weiser, lee sproull, amy friedlandersession 1c: employmentmoderator: erik brynjolfssonassigned participants: frank stafford, alexander field, n.venkatraman, richard sutch, timothy bresnehan12:30 p.m.lunchfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128appendix a2:00breakout session 2session 2a: commercemoderator: marvin sirbuassigned participants: richard sutch, timothy bresnehan,alexander field, haim mendelson, michael froomkin, erikbrynjolfssonsession 2b: communitiesñexisting and newmoderator: jorge schementassigned participants: paul attewell, robert kling, claudefischer, mark weiser, paul resnick, frances allensession 2c: intellectual property and privacymoderator: pamela samuelsonassigned participants: michael froomkin, john king, cliffordlynch, carl shapiro5:00moderators from monday sessions meet6:00dinnertuesday, july 18:00 a.m.breakfastmoderators for tuesday sessions meet9:00breakout session 3session 3a: human capital, training, and educationmoderator: richard sutchassigned participants: frank stafford, alexander field,claude fischer, john kingsession 3b: content regulation and free speechmoderator: paul resnickassigned participants: michael froomkin, pamela samuelson,clifford lynch, peter lymansession 3c: organizationsmoderator: erik brynjolfssonassigned participants: thomas malone, john king, markweiser, haim mendelson, n. venkatraman, frances allen12:00 p.m.lunch2:00synthesisñsteering committee4:00adjournfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a129participantseconomicstimothy bresnehan, stanford universityjoseph farrell, university of california, berkeleyalexander field, santa clara universityjeffrey mackiemason, university of michigancarl shapiro, university of california, berkeleyfrank stafford, university of michigansociologypaul attewell, city university of new yorkclaude fischer, university of california, berkeleyrobert kling, indiana universityrobert kraut, carnegie mellon universityhistoryamy friedlander, corporation for national research initiativesinformationkenneth kraemer, university of california, irvineclifford lynch, university of california, berkeleypeter lyman, university of california, berkeleyhaim mendelson, stanford universitylegal aspectsmichael froomkin, university of miamipamela samuelson, university of california, berkeleyorganizationsjohn king, university of california, irvinethomas malone, massachusetts institute of technologyn. venkatraman, boston universitytechnologypaul resnick, university of michiganmarvin sirbu, carnegie mellon universitymark weiser, xerox palo alto research centerfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130appendix aobserversjennifer sue bond, national science foundationeileen collins, national science foundationedward j. hackett, national science foundationjohn e. jankowski, national science foundationalan r. tupek, national science foundationandrew w. wyckoff, organisation for economic cooperation and developmentfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b131131bposition papers submitted byworkshop participantsfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix bfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b133research on informationtechnology impactspaul attewellgraduate school and university center,city university of new yorka few comments about past impact research are appropriate at the outset,because there are some important issues that ought to be considered before moving on to new topics and research priorities. we made some intellectual mistakesin the past that we can avoid repeating in the future. since some of the workshopparticipants are new to this area of study, i think it would be helpful to lay outsome of these issues.because technological change in information technology applications hasbeen so rapid during the last 25 years, there has been a constant temptation to turnaway from studies of current outcomes of existing information technologies andinstead turn toward a kind of futurology or speculative stance about what mightbe the case in the future. examples are found in the agenda for this workshop,where topics are articulated such as: òhow will the nature of the employmentcontract change? . . .what will be the impact on k12?ó the future is important,and these kinds of questions are valid, but this stance has had some unfortunateimplications for impact research in the past. among these are the following:¥a tendency to support the development of theoretical models to predictwhat will be or might be the case, rather than pursue empirical studies of whatactually is happening now. since theorizing tends to be cheaper than data collection, this has tended to skew funding toward the former, and has often given thisfield a rather speculative feel. but speculation, even by very smart people, hasoften been far off the mark.¥a tendency to fund studies of òcuttingedgeó applications, which tend tobe located in large, dynamic (and resourcerich) firms, or superior schools, ratherthan looking at the kind of òordinaryó it that is in place in average workplacesand ordinary schoolsñthe point being that what one observes in the largest, mostresourcerich, and most committed settings is not a good predictor of the typicaleffects of a technology in the larger world. (in the field of program evaluationthere is a parallel phenomenon known as the demonstration effect: innovativeprograms are shown to work well initially in wellsupported demonstrationprojects but then prove much less effective when widely implemented in morefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix bordinary settings.) studying cuttingedge applications in cuttingedge firms,schools, or universities is fascinating, but this is not the most rigorous approachto understanding how technological change is affecting the larger population oforganizations and people. it tends to result in unrealistic scenarios.¥a tendency to direct money into prototyping new applications, and to relyon the authors of the prototype to do the impact assessment or performanceevaluation themselves or not do an evaluation at all. this has occurred all overthe òcomputer assisted cooperative workó field, as well as in the field of educational software. it is naive to expect that people who toil over developing newtechnology can provide an objective assessment of its performance, yet this approach dominates research. there is no equivalent in it research of the òdoubleblindó study, and replication is rare. perhaps this is one arena in which engineersand social scientists could collaborate: if federal funders insisted that all prototype and development projects include an armõslength performance assessment,this would be a major step forward.¥a tendency to discount findings that demonstrate negative or null impactsof it as being intellectually uninteresting on the grounds that such impactssimply reflect early versions, or startup problems, which will disappear when thenext generation of machinery or software comes online. studies indicate thatthere are large discontinuance/abandonment/nonuse rates for important andmuchhyped it products. (examples are kemererõs recent studies of abandonment of fourthgeneration software development tools and detroitõs ripping outadvanced automated manufacturing from some plants.) users of òwhat ifó decisiontools have been found to use them mechanistically even when shown thatthey are producing inferior decisions. computer searches of databases usingcurrent methods have been shown to generate large numbers of bad hits, and alsoto miss large numbers of relevant items.if it impact research were a normal social science discipline, such strikingfindings would be viewed as important scientific puzzles, unleashing a stream offollowup research seeking insights into humancomputer interactions implied bythese failures. by and large this has not occurred, because of a widespreadmentality that says that any problems with it that impact studies unearth aresimply minor implementation issues and will be overcome by the next generationof technology. this mentality reminds me of the anthropologist evanspritchardõsstudies of azande witchcraft. whenever he contrived to show african believersin witchcraft that casting a spell/curse on someone did not work in a concretecase, the believers were unshaken, retorting that of course witchcraft worked, butthat the spell had been performed poorly in this case. it does work, but impactresearch should spend much more time looking at the many settings in which itworks very differently than intended, and should mine these cases, as well as thesuccesses, in order to understand the full picture.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b135¥one of the most common findings in prior it impact studies has been thatoutcomes are far from uniform across all kinds of settings and contexts. in earlieryears we looked for the impact of it on (say) organizational centralization, andscholars tended to hew to one end or the other of a bipolar spectrum: centralization versus decentralization; upskilling or deskilling; job destroying versus jobcreating. what scholars found, in almost every case, was that this was an unproductive way to conceptualize the issue. one almost always found evidence ofboth extremes of outcomes/impacts as well as many points in between (seeattewell and rule, 1989). we finally realized that we were asking the wrongquestion. we should have asked, in what contexts does outcome a typicallypredominate, and in what contexts does outcome b tend to prevail, and whendoes one see a and b in equal measure? we found that a technology does notusually have an impact. the context or setting in which the same technology isused often produces strikingly different òimpacts.ó this phenomenon has beendiscussed in terms of òweb modelsó (kling), or òstructural contingency theoryó(attewell), or robeyõs òplus ca changeó model. all imply that we fully appreciate the role of context in technology outcomes, and that we therefore expendsufficient research effort to measure the context, and to delineate its interactionswith the technology. if we fail to do this, we return to the old òblack boxóparadigm, that is, attempting to measure only the input (say, a particular softwareprogram) and the outcome (say, kidsõ test scores) without bothering with thecontext (the classroom, the kidsõ family backgrounds) or the causal mechanisms.black box research on impacts often discovered òinconsistentó outcomes acrossstudies but proved unable to show why there was so much variation, because itneglected to measure the contextual variables that were moderating the effects ofthe input upon the output. for example, the old paradigm would phrase a research question so as to ask whether or not home pcs would improve kidsõ schoolperformance. in contrast, research within the current contextual paradigm wouldask under what conditions having pcs at home affects studentsõ school outcomes.a piece of my own work has indicated, for example, that having a home pccurrently has a minimal effect on the school performance scores of poor andminority kids but is associated with substantial positive effects on the schoolperformance of kids with high socioeconomic status (ses), when other factorsare controlled for (attewell and battle, 1997). race and class/ses, in this example, prove to be very important contextual features moderating the impact ofhome pcs on school performance.¥workshop organizers should be aware that because of the last three decades of research and the importance of context as discussed above, many distinguished scholars of technology avoid the term òtechnology impact.ó using thisterm in framing the question would be viewed by some of them as indicating anignorance of the body of scholarship in technology studies. for them, the termòimpactó connotes a kind of technological determinism that is very dated andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix bwidely discredited. personally, i am not so averse to the term òimpact,ó but i doagree with their larger point about avoiding models based on simple technological determinism.distilling these arguments into positive recommendations: (1) future research should pursue empirical studies of existing technologies in real settings, asdistinct from speculative or purely theoretical exercises; (2) care should be takento include representative organizations/settings, not just cuttingedge or hightech ones; (3) studies of unintended consequences of it, such as failures anddiscontinuance, are important for what they tell us about these technologies andabout the process of change more generally. researchers should be interested inthe full range of òimpactsóñintended and unintended; (4) projects aimed atdeveloping technology prototypes should routinely include a performance assessment or evaluation, and the latter should be conducted at armõs length from theformer; (5) contextual variables should be studied rigorously, and their moderating effects on technology outcomes should be a major part of inquiry; (6) weshould reconceptualize what we are doing as social and economic studies ofcomputing and communications technologies rather than technology impact studies, and try to avoid technological determinism.to move to the request about specific areas for research, here are somesuggestions:1.the òproductivity paradox,ó in my opinion, remains an important andunresolved issue. however, i suggest that we should move beyond dichotomousthinking (does information technology have a payoff, or not?) and ask, in whatareas/applications/settings do we see payoffs and in what areas donõt we, andwhy? what mechanisms can be identified that attenuate potential payoffs, andhow do we measure them? what interactions and contexts explain variation inproductivity outcomes?2.skills. there is anecdotal evidence that the range in performance levels incomputerrelated work is greater than that found in noncomputerized tasks. inother words, the gap between skilled and mediocre users is larger in computerrelated work. this suggests that skills in computer work are less well diffused, orare shared less than in other kinds of tasks. we need research on what constitutesskilled versus unskilled performance in computer work of various kinds, and abetter understanding about why so many of us make mediocre use of these tools.3.teenagers. i suspect that personal computers are changing the lives ofteenagers more than most other age cohorts, and that is both an opportunity and aconcern. computerized communication affords powerful opportunities for socialaffiliation (e.g., sproull and faraj, 1995) and for playing with identity, bothpreoccupations of adolescence. there have already been studies that suggest thatteenagers are spending less time watching tv and more on the web. there are afostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b137host of policy issues surrounding their use. but our knowledge base of howyoung people are using the web, and what they are getting out of it, is too sparse.4.education. as a researcher i find the literature on educational computingquite maddening. there are exciting claims of accelerated learning using computerized tools, but the research rarely gets replicated, and even the most laudedprograms (e.g., the algebra tutor at carnegie mellon) never seem to cross intopublic use, in part because these prototypes are built on unix platforms inesoteric languages. as a result the field does not progress in a cumulative manner. there is clearly room for a serious review and analysis of the state of the artin educational software, and for research on the barriers to future progress of itin education. universal access to the web is the only area i know that hasreceived systematic treatment.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendix bwhat if all information were readilyavailable to all?joseph farrelldepartment of economics, university of california, berkeleyrapid improvements in information technology raise two grand issues. first,are we moving toward a world in which, to a reasonable approximation, allòinformationó (not, of course, the same as knowledge) is readily available to all,or are there major obstacles in the way that may prevent us from getting to thatpoint? for instance, is there no such thing as òall informationó relevant to aparticular topic? are standards problems, intellectual property rights problems,database search limitations, or other issues likely to bound us well away from thatòall information availableó state?second, if we do get to that state, what will it be like? much of todayõsemployment consists of clumsily dealing with information. will the demands ofmore information be greater or less? if the problem gets òsolvedó rather than justincreasingly addressed, what are the other main things that need to be done in anadvanced societyñin other words, what will todayõs information manipulatorsdo instead?fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b139critical issues relating to impacts ofinformation technology: areas for futureresearch and discussionalexander j. fieldsanta clara universitythere are several key issues that concern me as a scholar. first, as aneconomic historian and as someone who looks retrospectively as well as prospectively, i believe we face a major issue involving the archiving of data. there aretwo main issues. people say about magnetic media that it lasts 5 years or until itwears out, whichever comes first. that is probably a bit pessimistic. but even ifthe media persist, what about the inputoutput devices? it is getting more andmore difficult to find a 5.25inch drive, and woe to him or her who has data on 8inch floppies! tape backups are sometimes even worse. new backup software issometimes not backwards compatible, so that one needs old copies of backupsoftware as well as a compatible tape drive in order to restore data. we needmechanisms to ensure the retrievability of records that previously would havebeen stored as printed records. this issue is at least as important for individualrecords (both personal and professional) as for those pertaining to the corporationor organization as a separate legal entity. whatever media are used, we needthem to be at least as durable and stable as microfilm. ideally these media shouldbe relatively inexpensive, and equipment to read and/or write on them should bestandardized and widely accessible. will individual and private enterprise besufficient to ensure retrievability? is there an externality in terms of ensuringaccess that would warrant government subsidy or intervention in this area, perhaps as part of the activity of the national institute of standards and technology?a second issue: as a scholar i look forward to tremendous opportunities interms of the archiving of old journal runs. this has an enormous potential capitalsavings impact (consider the linear feet of bookshelves in faculty offices thatmight be liberated). i look forward to being able to access 100year runs ofjournals such as the american economic review, from cdrom or over a network through software such as adobe acrobat (thus text is searchable). i see thisas less important for books and monographs (where being able to read through anentire volume, which presumably has some coherence) will still be desirable.nevertheless, the ability to search the text of scholarly monographs would beuseful. the cost of converting newly published material to this form will besmall, since most of it now exists in machine readable form before it goes to betypeset. the real challenge will be older works. there is a potential for enorfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix bmous efficiencies here in terms of research libraries and scholarly research. butwho will pay? is there a role for the library of congress? can we get to the pointthat interlibrary loan involves the simple downloading of a large file? willscholars assemble libraries of cdroms attached to personal computers? willthey invest in juke boxes so that the disks are available and retrievable whenneeded? (cdroms can be as inconvenient as the computers were prior to theadvent of hard disksñone can never seem to find the disks when one needs them,and their smaller size renders them more vulnerable to misplacement than books.)or will the material be available through servers in libraries or over commercialnetworks? obviously, copyright issues are relevant for recently published works,but i am interested in materials for which copyright is no longer relevant. howwill this affect the publishing business?finally, let me comment on ways in which new instructional technologieswill affect the craft of teaching. i believe firmly that advances in informationtechnology will play an important role in complementing rather than eliminatingtraditional classroom instruction. the advent of television and the video taperecorder were both heralded as sounding the death knell of traditional instruction.there is no evidence that this has occurred, nor that recent advances will havethis effect either, any more than computers have eliminated the use of paper orvideoconferencing facilities have spelled the demise of the 747. the effectiveinstructor acts in a complex mixture of roles. in one role the instructor is asupplier of services to students (particularly when they are enrolled in coursework beyond the age of compulsory schooling laws). in terms of this relationshipstudents are in a real sense customers. but the effective instructor occupiesanother role as wellñas, in a sense, a supervisor of students, and plays a role inmotivating, encouraging, evaluating, and developing students that is totally foreign to the service providercustomer model. for any topic there will always bea small percentage of prospective students with the necessary background, motivation, and selfdiscipline to learn from selfpaced workbooks or computerassisted instruction. for the majority of students, however, the presence of a liveinstructor, will, in my view, continue to be far more effective than a computerassisted counterpart in facilitating positive educational outcomes, just as for mostwork relationships, a live supervisor is going to be more effective than a computer replacement.the most important impact of information technology will likely occur inincreasing the productivity of the hours students spend outside of the classroom.several years ago many universities, including my own, built computer classrooms with networked computers for every one or two students. while thesehave proved effective for training in the use of various kinds of software, in mostcases they proved disastrous for standard classroom instruction. the computerscreated lineofsight obstacles between the instructor and students, and studentscould sometimes not resist the temptation to play computer games during classtime. in some instances such labs have been ripped out. nor am i persuaded thatfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b141the increasing use of presentation software on average improves the efficacy ofclassroom communication. the dimming of lights and the focusing of attentionon an overhead screen distracts attention away from the facial expression andbody language of an instructor, which gives away two of the most powerfulbenefits of live instruction. expensive overhead cameras that convert documentsto a video feed currently have lower resolution than standard overhead projectors.the greatest potential for new information technology lies in improving theproductivity of time spent outside the classroom. the norm of accrediting agencies is 2 hoursõ outside work for 1 hour in class. making syllabi, solutions toproblem sets, and, where copyright law will permit, assigned reading materialsavailable on an inter or intranet offers tremendous convenience. email andmore sophisticated groupware vastly simplify communication between studentsand faculty and among students who may be engaged in group projects and faceenormous logistical challenges in setting up group meeting times.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix bcomputermediated communicationsclaude s. fischerdepartment of sociology, university of california, berkeleyalthough not currently studying computing and communications, i nonetheless have several observations to make based, in some measure, on my paststudies in the social history of technology. most generally, i suggest caution.the major risk is to be carried away by the exaggerated claims about the consequences of computermediated communications (cmc). it is especially a risk forthose of us who both heavily use and are fascinated by cmc. we should keep inmind that big devices can have small effects; that the effects of a technology canbe contradictory and even selfcanceling; that the extent of diffusion does notnecessarily demonstrate social significance (cf. the vcr and the atm, bothnearly universal, with the cotton gin and the òpilló); and that the effects of atechnology can be substantial but only in a specific section of society, such as thewhitecollar workplace.thinking about these issues requires focus and distinctions. one set ofdistinctions concerns the subject. òinformation technologyó is too large a field,including, among other items, television and photocopying. clearly the interestis in the consequences of cmc, particularly email and the internet. is that all?on the effects side, it would help to distinguish at least three contexts: (1) commerce and the workplace; (2) public institutions, such as government and schools;and (3) private life, including families and other social networks. (some mightsuggest an additional realm: the psychological.) not only are the dynamicslikely to be different in each sphere, but so also are the quantity and nature of theavailable data. it is much easier to find out how marketing and job creation areaffected by cmc than it is to find out how kin ties or neighborhood dynamics areaffected. my own focus is on the third context.what do we know about the social consequencesñinstitutional or privateñof cmc? my impression is: not much. we have some crude estimates of computer diffusion in u.s. households, by key demographic categories, but we knowlittle about who uses cmc and for what, and probably know nothing about theimplications of that cmc use. (even our knowledge of who uses the householdtelephone, why, and with what end, is crude.) perhaps some of that basic information is available in proprietary sourcesñand perhaps those sources could beopened to researchers. much of the published research that i have seen tends tobe small scale, focused on select groups, and often of marginal quality. in anyfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b143case, we seem to have little that explains the who, what, when, where, why, andhow of domestic cmc use. and even answers to these questions, as i cautionedabove, may not tell us the answer to the key questionñso what?what do we need to know about (in the private sphere)? and how would wefind out? we need to know more accurately and in greater detail who uses cmcsfor nonwork purposes, how often, with whom or what, to what ends, and why;and conversely, who does not. beyond those basics, several bigger questionshave been raised, for example:¥does use of cmc significantly affect use of other media? what is òdisplacedó by cmc? (is, for instance, entertainment or social interaction displaced?)more generally, does cmc use significantly affect time budgets?¥does cmc use significantly affect spatial activities? does it, for instance, replace some number of trips? if so, which sorts of trips?¥does cmc use significantly affect personal social networks? are somesocial relationships developed? some reinforced? some ignored? some dropped?(e.g., do cmc users shift some attention from, say, family, to distant friends?)these types of questions might be answered with highquality surveys andintensive ethnographies of individuals. ideally, one might even design fieldexperiments on some of these topics.while important, the answers to these questions do not necessarily tell uswhat the aggregate, social effects of cmc are. understanding these effectsinvolves broaderscale and more difficult questions, such as the following:¥does the diffusion of cmc significantly affect the spatial pattern oftowns? (are we ever going to get the dispersed world of telecommuting, firstpredicted in 1893?)¥does the diffusion of cmc significantly affect subcultural segmentation?does it contribute significantly to the formation and sustenance of specializedòsocial worlds,ó marked, for example, by ònicheó magazines?¥does the diffusion of cmc significantly affect political mobilization?these types of questions cannot be easily answered by simply looking atindividual use; these concern macro or aggregate effects. here, we need complex longitudinal and/or comparative studies of institutions or communities oreven nations as cmc diffuses within them. (there are a couple of examples inthe study of television.)when journalists ask me, because i wrote a book on the early social historyof the telephone, to comment on the effects of the internet and such, i usuallydemur. ask me after the dust settles, i often reply; itõs too soon to tell now. butthe policy challenge is to estimate where this cmc òfootballó is going to landeven while it is still bouncing around on the field.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144appendix bimpacts of information technology:behaviors and metricsamy friedlandercorporation for national research initiativesbarriers to the diffusion of information technologies and their commercialapplication are many: resolution of ambiguities in intellectual property and therelative importance of patent, copyright, and contract law; development of aviable financial model or models; and appropriate contexts for deploying technologies that provide security, afford adequate protection of personal privacy,and offer reasonable protection of free speech. disputes and controversies thatsurround these issues make assumptions, usually silently, about who is doingwhat with information technologies. we appear to be in a phase of technologypush more than demand pull. but whether we believe that technology is technologically, economically, or socially constructed, it is generally the business of thesocial and behavioral sciences to understand the context in which a technology orset of technologies is thrust.the behavioral sciences, which span everything from history to social psychology, rely on observation of behavior whether embodied in dusty census recordsor recorded by telemarketers. the implications of this type of research in thenetworked information environment are potentially substantial. the mental model,which assumes that the audience can be characterized statistically and in somesense commodified, represents an (if perhaps dubious) achievement in radio, whereways to measure and characterize the audience were developed. these methodologies subsequently migrated into television. conclusions drawn from this researchare embedded in programming, commercial, and regulatory decisions.these methods are hardly without controversy in broadcast communications,and their utility in the networked information environment is questionable. thesimplest example is the problem of inferring the numbers of users. all toofrequently, the interpretation of server logs conflates usage with users, i.e., itmakes one file request the equivalent of one reader. but national caching as away of improving network performance means that readership in australia, forexample, is greatly underreported in the server logs of the home directory. proxynote: the opinions and views expressed herein are those of the author and do not reflect thoseof the corporation for national research initiatives.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b145servers and bootleg mirror sites compound the problem, as do printing and handtohand sharing of information whether in hard copy or on disks. there are anumber of studies that are experimenting with ways around these issues (e.g.,carnegie mellon universityõs homenet project, which basically controls samplesize and composition), but the issue of method seems to be one in which futureresearch is warrantedñthat is, research projects in which method is the focus ofthe research and is not incidental to it. (òcookies,ó code that resides on a userõscomputer, which is launched by the server when the user requests a file, havebeen proposed as a way around this problem. but the strategy is not withoutcontroversy.)accurate demographic characterizations are one dimension of use. anotheris the cluster of issues typically subsumed into humancomputing interactions,which is the subject of research at the university of marylandõs human computer interaction laboratory, the university of michigan, and elsewhere. manyof these research efforts use the library context as an experimental setting andrely on two research traditions: (1) observation of users and (2) two informationretrieval metricsñprecision and recall. the former is typically limited to smallsamples and is vulnerable to oversimplification of the research design. the latter(precision and recall) were invented to assess the adequacy of indexing schemesand were subsequently adopted by researchers to evaluate searching behaviorwhere the assumption was one of batch processing and the notion of iterativesearching and query refinement did not exist. neither metric considers user satisfaction but measures instead the relationship between what was found and whatwas available to be found.in march of this year, ron larsen of darpa called for developing newmetrics to replace precision and recall, but more broadly, we have to ask how farthe library paradigm can be pushed. that is, many informationseeking behaviorsare captured in the way that people use libraries, both real and virtual. but the leapfrom the local reference desk to yahoo or excite deserves to be questioned, and therange of informationseeking behaviors requires attention. there is a clear bias inresearch projects toward research in academic settings, where socalled òexpertsóhold doctorates and ònovicesó are undergraduates. it is intuitively obvious that theway a physicist does a literature search is different from the way i might look forinformation on flight schedules. ibm has taken the approach that technologiesappropriate for libraries will successfully migrate to other structured settings, notably corporations, where the economic payoffs are potentially substantial. nevertheless, in order for applications in the networked information environment toaccommodate the variation in users and in uses (which is appreciated but not fullyunderstood), much more research is required on informationseeking behaviorsoutside formal library and/or academic settings.there is much in the future of advanced information technologies that willprobably turn out to be familiar, including the need to understand the texture ofuse, whether we adopt a model of technology push or demand pull. however, thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146appendix btools by which we will do that as well as the shape and form of products andservices to be offered are likely to change. in the near term, this will closelyresemble contemporary research that evaluates usersõ demand for and satisfaction with products and services. but the specifics will change as content andapplications evolve in ways we have yet to imagine.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b147five critical issues relating to impacts ofinformation technologymichael froomkinschool of law, university of miamithe argus state?decreases in the cost of video, audio, and other sensor technology, as well ascheaper data storage and information processing, make it likely that it will become practicable for both governments and private datamining enterprises tocollect enormously detailed dossiers on all citizens. this prospect raises a host ofissues requiring research and debate. among them:¥who currently collects what data about individuals? how is it used?how is it shared? what are the trends?¥what are the existing default rules in different jurisdictions relating to thecollection of information? does the nature of default rules meaningfully alteroutcomes? do prohibitions on data collection (e.g., data protection laws), forexample, affect outcomes? to what extent are existing rules vulnerable to foreign òdata havensó and other regulatory arbitrage? to what extent do/will consumers choose alternatives to the default rules when such an option is available?¥what are the possible political, social, and economic consequences ofextensive individual profiling? is extensive profiling likely? is the absence of agreat deal of the privacy now taken for granted compatible with freedom? whatdifference does it make if the profiling is undertaken by (or available to) democratic governments? nondemocratic governments? private industry? whatwould the economic and social consequences be of making profiling data available to some? to all? at a cost? at no cost? would it be socially valuable toprohibit the creation of individualized dossiers? in an era of distributed databases, would it be technically practical to enforce such a prohibition?¥to what extent do different types of electronic cash and electronic commerce enable or disable profiling? to what extent do concerns about the control ofelectronic money laundering imply the power to restrict free speech or anonymouscommerce? to what extent does the protection of free speech and a private socialand economic space require the protection of anonymous speech and/or anonymous commerce? what are the current national policies regarding anonymousspeech and commerce? in a networked world, what are the external and extraterritorial effects of one nationõs policies regarding anonymous speech and commerce?fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148appendix blegal issues affecting digital commerce¥nonrepudiation? how to find an accommodation between the statedrequirement that (at least some) commerce based on certificateverified digitalsignatures be nonrepudiable (the x.509 tradition) and the traditional norms ofconsumer law in most countries which are designed to protect consumers fromthemselves as well as others (e.g., u.s. rules on credit card misuse).¥choice of law issues. as it becomes clearer in at least some jurisdictionswhich domestic rules apply to certificates, digital signatures, and electronic commerce generally, the issue of selecting among, or meditating between, possiblyconflicting rules in the various states and countries that could be associated withthe transaction will become inescapable. a first step toward resolving theseissues would be to undertake a considerable project of description, one that wouldlook not only at the applicable substantive law, but also at the diverse choiceoflaw rules that states might apply to transjurisdictional electronic commerce. withthis in hand, it would be possible to identify more clearly the extent to which ecommerce actually contributes to òregulatory arbitrageó and the extent to which itmerely replicates and expands existing practices.¥certification authority policies issues.ñit would be interesting to survey the content of existing certificationauthority (ca) policies (and background law) and especially to track themover time: are they converging? are they stratifying by quality of assurances offered to clients and relying partiesñi.e., òrace to the bottomó oròstruggle to the topó or òproduct differentiationó? these data would informany discussion of the regulation of cas, as well as the debate over efforts toharmonize international standards.ñone could also explore whether it is possible to design a standardsemantics of ca policiesñand perforce of applicable background nationallegislationñthat could form the basis for users to set up rulebased decisionmaking that could be built into ecommerce software. this software wouldallow the user to define properties that a certificate must have before it wouldbe accepted. this would be an interesting case study of the potential fortechnological solutions to reduce (although they could not eliminate) theneed for legal services, because currently users must make each decisionmanually for every certificate, either on advice of counsel or, if this is impractical for cost reasons, then based on the reputation of the ca.the economics of trust and reputationit would be interesting and useful to know more about the psychology andeconomics of trust and reputation, between individuals and also between personsand institutions. trust and reputation appear to be integral to the usefulness ofnetworked communications between strangers. in an era of information overloadfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b149and rapidly growing numbers of web pages of indeterminate quality, does thefuture belong to editors and other reputationenhancing quality certification organizations? this issue has obvious implications for news and other current information. but it also applies to many other things, such as education, in which onecan imagine òinternet modeló degreegranting institutions that certify the qualityof various distance learning courses, and attest to the rigor of exams or administerexams directly.interesting questions for both empirical and theoretical study include, towhat extent can òtrustó meaningfully be transferred? can transitive trust bemodeled? if a trusts b, to what extent does bõs assertion that c is trustworthyactually induce a to trust c? how much (and in what circumstances) should atrust c? what indicia other than a naked statement (or certificate) could/should boffer a regarding c? the answer presumably varies enormously with the context: different assurances are required regarding, e.g., scientific bona fides, general sincerity, and creditworthiness.distributional effects of the internet on work and economyalthough there has been speculation about the distributional effects of theinternet on the labor force and on institutional providers of services, there seemsto have been little empirical work. it would be interesting to do sectoral studies,looking at provision of services such as travel services and banking, and theretailing of òcommodityó products such as cds and perhaps a òmade to orderóproduct also, in order to determine what effect the internet has on industrialconcentration, and on employment patterns.rule formation in (partial) òanarchyóuntil very recently, the internet has developed its technical standards andsocial practices without much government intervention. of course, the internetdeveloped against an elaborate background of regulation of telecommunications,electricity, and many other things necessary to its operation. nevertheless, inimportant ways both the internet engineering task force (ietf)based standardsprocess and the òinternet normsó of usenet, email, and mailing lists evolved in ameaningfully anarchic way. to what extent is the ietf decisionmaking modeltransferable to other realms? can the fundamentally consensusbased modelsurvive the growth and commercialization of the internet? is it possible toeducate (socialize) large numbers of new users? does the method produce òbetteró decisions (and according to what metric)? is it fairer? is selfselection aviable method for decisions that do not relate to technical standards, and which inmost cases apply to issues that are neither lifethreatening nor of widespreadsalience? what sort of social practices is the vigilantestyle internet method ofenforcing social norms suited to? where is it inappropriate?fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150appendix bcultural influences on the process andimpacts of computerizationrob klingcenter for social informatics, indiana universitymost of the popular, professional, and scholarly literature about computerization treats (1) computercommunication systems (ccs) as tools, (2) their adoption and use as parts of largely rational social processes, and (3) the impacts ofccs use as knowable by examining the social system of ccs users and thetechnical characteristics of ccs. this kind of conceptualization dates back (atleast) to leavitt and whisler (1958) who argued that (upward reporting) organizational mis would lead to a relative thinning out of middle managers and aresulting òhourglass shapeó in the structure of organizations. since the 1960s, thenumber of popular, professional, and scholarly books and articles about the socialconsequences of computerization have grown from a thin rivulet (1960s) to astream (1970s) to a river (1980s) and now to a flood (1990s). the number ofacademic studies has grown at a modest pace and in the late 1980s and 1990s hasbeen swamped by the volume of professional and popular writing.in this seemingly vast literature, one can find a number of analytical strategies for understanding the social consequences of computerization. in popularand much of the professional writing it is easier to find elements of technologicaldeterminism. but in the academic studies, leavitt and whislerõs technologicaldeterminism is relatively pass” (although technological determinism reappears invarious guises, such as the òcues filtered outó arguments in sproull and kieslerõscmc studies summarized in their book, connections: new ways of working inthe networked organization (1992).in scholarly studies, the main alternatives to technological determinism havebeen various contingency analyses (with different stances about which social andtechnological factors are important contingency makers) and nondeterministicsocial process theories (such as markus and robeyõs (1988) òemergent processtheoriesó). for example, deterministic analysis would hold that documentarynetworks such as lotus notes would encourage the sharing of information withinorganizations, whereas a contingency analysis would treat the organizationalincentives for sharing information within specific groups as an important influence on the ways that notes would be used in specific organizations.in addition, some analysts have noted the ways that ccs of a given generictype can be implemented with important technical variations and social convenfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b151tions for using them. for example, electronic forums differ in such respects aswho has access to them, who controls their content, the nature of documentaryarchiving, the technological complexity faced by people who use them, and soon.most people who use ccs know about their possibilities through a combination of personal experience and accounts in the professional and popular media.when professionals were the primary users of ccs, the roles of computerizationmovements (iacono and kling, 1996) were specially important, although usuallyoverlooked. today, popular usage alters the social processes by which peoplecome to learn about the possible social roles of new forms of ccs.it is hard to estimate the role of the mass media in popularizing the internetand the www in 19931994; but the enthusiasm of reporters and the suddenbroad visibility of urls in national media in 19941995 should not be ignored.however, ideas about the social shaping of ccs and social influences on theiruse have diffused rather slowly into professional and popular writing.many of the questions addressed in this workshop are answered, in part, bybeliefs about how the public (including various professionals) will use ccs (andrelated services). i believe that we should take the popular cultural representations of ccs as serious influences on the ways that people will use these systemsñand on their likely social impacts. these representations are not alwayshomogeneous, and they will change over time (for example, from ccs as ògiantbrainsó in the 1950s through òproductivity machinesó in the early 1980s throughòcommunication mediaó in the 1990s). however, as vendors develop new technologies and services, the media play important roles in giving them meaning andpopularizing them (e.g., how did java become so popular so fast?).fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152appendix bquestions for researchjeffrey k. mackiemasondepartment of economics, and school of information,university of michiganwhat is currently known? what questions need to be addressed?costs are falling exponentially for technologies built primarily with siliconand sand: computing cycles and bandwidth. the decline in data storage costswould also seem remarkable but for the comparison.almost, but not quite the same thing: technological progress in these areas isaccelerating. (possible research question: is it? how is it measurable?) ignoringcost, remarkable new things are possible each year. (a thousand ibm 360s connected with rs232 cables would not a parallelprocessing supercomputer havemade.)we have a long history of adapting to falling costs and technologicalprogress. but we are not well adapted to such fast change. in the context of ourhistory and institutionsñsocial, political, cultural, at leastñsuch rapid advancement is deviant. deviancy threatens existing institutions.institutions (conventions; standard practices; social, business, and politicalnorms) evolve to deal with problems that undermine the ideal of a competitivemarket equilibrium: positive externalities (standardization), public goods (government provision), and transaction costs (default rules, social conventions). butwhen relative costs and technological opportunities change rapidly, the problemsthat the institutions solved are no longer the same.problems are changing rapidly, but institutions change slowly and reluctantly. new problems, old institutions: things break, or progress is delayed.examples:¥international spectrum allocation: need for global bandwidth reservationsfor low earth orbit satellites and other wireless networks.¥governance of the internet: need for assignment of domain names andinternet protocol numbers, routing policy, content control.¥international banking and currency control.¥international taxation, currently largely sourcebased: where is cyberactivity taking place? how easy will income shifting to find a lowtaxrate basebecome?fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b153¥church, school, and other local community institutions being challengedas core communications channels for shared values, culture, and social norms.rise of disembodied, asynchronous òcommunityó (email, usenet, special interest groups). paradox of improved communications channels increasingbalkanization?so, at least one set of fundamentally important questions for research involves looking beneath specific impacts to uncover the institutional structures,assumptions, and rigidities that are becoming dysfunctional, and then consideringhow to facilitate the transition to new institutions that are likely to accommodatethe effects of exponential decreases in the costs of sand and silicon.¥what government core institutions underlie market interventions, subsidyand tax policies, and trade policies? what educational structures? what legalinstitutions?¥what do we take for granted about intellectual property (before we get tothe question of protection)?¥what mechanisms for establishing trust, evaluating, authenticating, andproviding assurance underlie conventional commerce, and how can a system oftrust be evolved for electronic commerce?¥what law applies to artificial agents who participate in information exchange? what socially acceptable policies exist for dealing with deadly threats tothe public health like outbreaks of level iv computer viruses (ebolapc, ebolamac)?¥what does universal service mean? when should government treat emergent network services with large potential positive network externalities as publicgoods that should be subsidized?¥good advice: assume cpu cycles and bandwidth are free. what then?what will be useful methods to determine answers to such questions?the cycle of change strains some traditional methods. it is hard to get datafrom ònatural experimentsó on which generalizable hypotheses can be tested.for example, internet congestion seems to be a problem. various approaches toallocating scarce, easily congested resources have been proposed, including different types of usagesensitive pricing. lots of concern: will this increaseinformation inequality? squelch creative explosion of internet applications?slow adoption? chase away independent, voluntary provision of content inexchange for industrialized creation and control of massmarket content? somefundamental research questions: how much consumer surplus is lost due tocongestion? (how much does waiting òhurtó? what applications are we notgetting to use because they canõt tolerate unpredictable congestion, and howmuch are those worth to us?) how would different classes of users respond tousagesensitive pricing (if it constituted a small fraction of their consumptionfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154appendix bbudget)? thus, would the benefits (of less congestion in current services, andnew services enabled with guaranteed quality of service) outweigh the adverseeffects on adoption rate and social externalities of communication, reduced innovation, change in content, change (not necessarily increase!) in information inequality?to answer these questions, we might normally run consumer demand studiesto estimate user valuation of various service qualities at different prices, lookingfor natural experiments to assess the value of social externalities.the problem: no data! and even as data start to become available, the datagenerating process is nonstationary (stationarity is a prerequisite for classicalstatistical estimation and analysis): new services are introduced, users are on alearning curve, participation externalities are riding up the adoption curve. example: how much do we learn about future internet demand if we study prewww demand? and if we wait to observe, strong network externalities andresulting standardization may lock us into policies and standardized solutionsthat are inefficient, inflexible, and limiting (e.g., wintel architecture; the òmistakesó of qwerty and vhs standards). the traditional pace of research andinstitutional adaptation is too slow.possible implication: social science research may need to do more field andlab experimentation, rather than waiting around for the real world to toss upnatural experiments.there may also have to be some merger between traditional social scienceand engineering methodologiesñsome attempt to learn from results that are notfully general, developed, and rigorously tested following a modernist hypothesistesting method. thus, look to findñand designñsystems, policies, and institutions that òjust work.ó think about how to make them work better, withoutclinging too tightly to the òoptimalityó paradigm. internet litmus test: òrunningcode that works.ólikewise, traditional conceptual structures may need reworking.many observersñbut not economists for the most partñhave suggested thatòtraditional economics is dead,ó that there is a ònewó economics of information.yet the òspecialó features of information problems are familiar in economics:high fixed costs plus low variable costs, congestion externalities, positive network externalities, and tipping. what may be new is that several of these becomesimultaneously significant, and for a greater, more essential share of exchange.we are used to thinking of these and designing policies for them as special cases.nonetheless, we should not blithely discard hardwon principles. for example, some would have it that soon bandwidth will no longer be scarce: it willbe infinite (effectively) and free. not by the laws of physics, of course. hasanything ever become infinite and free? no, just relatively less scarce. it seemsstill very useful to study the relative scarcity of different resourcesñsilicon,sand, labor, creativity, attentionñand to focus on how relative scarcity is changfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b155ing. where the change in scarcity is occurring is where the opportunities andproblems lie. the end of scarcity is a red herring.a few areas on which to focus research:¥information warfare: survivability of communications networks (civilianas much as military); institutions and policies for response to transnational terrorism and criminality (that uses or attacks information infrastructure);¥artificial agent economies: how to harness the efficiency, stability androbustness of competitive economies for realtime management and control ofcomplex systems (electric grids, telecommunications networks, smart highways,spreadspectrum bandwidth allocation); and¥evaluation and social filtering: the economics of attention, trust, andreputation. funding models for information and information services, and theireffect on the creation and distribution of content.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156appendix belectronic interactionspaul resnickat&t laboratoriesthe internet offers new opportunities both to support and to study interactions among people who do not know each other very well. i believe that recommendations, trust, reputations, and reciprocity will play important roles in suchinteractions and thus deserve attention from interdisciplinary research teams.there are interesting topics in all stages of commercial interactions, fromsearch processes to negotiation to consummation of transactions:¥recommendations and referrals can help people to find interesting information and vendors. there is a need for continued research on techniques forgathering and processing recommendations (this is sometimes called collaborative filtering). compilation of ògrand challengeó data sets of recommendationswould help this field advance.¥the structure of negotiation protocols and the availability of informationabout past behavior of participants will affect the kinds of outcome that arepossible. economists have theoretical results regarding many simplified negotiation scenarios, but there is a need for interdisciplinary research to apply andextend these results to practical problems of protocol design.¥finally, in the transaction consummation phase, much effort has focusedon secure payment systems. some transactions, however, require a physicalconsummation (mailing of a product, for example) and hence must rely on trust insome form. research can explore the role of reputations in creating trustworthy(though not completely secure) contract consummation. such transactions mayalso have lower transaction costs than secure payment systems, even in the realmof purely electronic transactions.noncommercial electronic interactions also offer many interesting opportunities. electronically mediated interactions are visible and available for analysisin a way that facetoface interactions typically are not. for example, òsoftbotsócould scour the web to create various graphs of relations between people andinformation resources. social network theorists have already devised a numberof techniques for analyzing such graphs. one possible application would be tohypothesize about and then analyze the credibility of information sources infostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b157various parts of a social network. another possible application of network analysis would be to analyze the flow of reciprocity (or gift exchange, as esther dysonput it) and perhaps devise ways to increase a social networkõs level of reciprocity.in the last couple of years, i have become particularly interested in theconcept of social capital, as articulated by james coleman, robert putnam, andothers. social capital is a resource for action that inheres in the way a set ofpeople interact with each other. iõm still struggling for various ways to connectthis concept to specific research questions and projects. some of the ideas aboveare born from those struggles, and iõd welcome any project ideas or new ways ofthinking about these problems.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158appendix bsocial impact of information technologyfrank stafforduniversity of michigana great deal of attention has been given to new information technology asthe main empirical force changing the wage structure and giving rise to wageinequality. yet something on the order of skillbiased technical change is usuallygiven no formal representation. the theory that could actually explain the changing wage structure is some type of unbalanced growth model. in fact the theorythat could apply is not too hard to imagine. it is a closed economy òtradeó modelwith òbiasedó technical change (johnson and stafford, 1998). skilled and unskilled workers produce different goods. suppose that there are three goods.throughout, skilled workers produce good a (professional services, most obviously), and less skilled workers produce good c (including basic retailing).initially, let us suppose that there is a large good b sector, such as manufacturingand some other services, produced by less skilled workers. then the new technology appears. it improves the ability of skilled workers to produce the good boutput, previously the domain of the less skilled workers.what in general will happen to the equilibrium when this skillbiased technological progress occurs? the average real wage will rise, but the skilledworkers will get more than 100 percent of the benefit, implying that the real wageof less skilled workers will fall. in contrast, if the new technology had allowedthe skilled workers to be more productive at their traditional specialty (good a),then the real wage of all workers would have risen.a model of this simple sort would go a long way in organizing thought aboutsome of the patterns reported in the literature on changing wage structure. skilledworkers have been substituted for less skilled workers in many organisation foreconomic cooperation and development manufacturing industries, for example.in that (good b) industry there has been a rise in the ratio of nonproduction toproduction workers, and overall growth in manufacturing productivity has beenstrong. in contrast, highskill servicesector (good a) productivity growth hasbeen generally slow. one need only think of higher education and legal services(and possibly medicine) as cases in point. the terms of trade within the domesticeconomy could be defined as the prices of goods produced by skilled workers andothers. the price of the good b sector has fallen because of biased technicalchange, and as additional lessskilled workers become available to produce morefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b159traditional good c products such as retail services, they experience deterioratingterms of (internal) trade. for some countries with rather little trade, such as theunited states, the closedeconomy aspect of such a framework is most empirically relevant. for other countries, such as japan, both trade and external as wellas internal technological effects will be important to incorporate in an assessmentof wage pressures.consider the price of tuition and the price of routine health care assistanceprovided by home health care aides. data from the bureau of labor statisticswage series show the latter to have been falling below the level of inflation since1973. on a more optimistic note, if the new technology can be applied toimprove the productivity of skilled workers in their traditional domains, bothskilled and unskilled workers would be better off. the new information technology is so far helping the nonmarket productivity of skilled workers: use of theinternet will be providing a huge array of services via the household sector. dataavailable to study this aspect of technical change are close to nonexistent. thereal standard of living may come to depend more on the nonmarket sector. wehave developed a methodology for studying the value of nonmarket output thoughthe use of timeuse diary data, based on a grant from the national science foundation in the mid 1970s and early 1980s. we are currently studying the access ofchildren under the age of 12 to information technology with timeuse diaries bothin the home and in schools. the data are being collected as a special supplementto the panel study of income dynamics, funded by the national institute of childhealth and human development. copies of our instruments are available at<http://www.umich.edu/~psid/>.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160appendix bthe uncalming effects of digitaltechnologymark weiserxerox palo alto research centerthe important waves of technological change are those that fundamentallyalter the place of technology in our lives. what matters is not technology itself,but its relationship to us.in the past 50 years of computation there have been two great trends in thisrelationship: the mainframe relationship and the pc relationship. today theinternet is carrying us through an era of widespread distributed computing towardone of ubiquitous computing, characterized by deeply imbedding computationthroughout the world. ubiquitous computing will require a new approach tofitting technology to our lives, an approach we call òcalm computing.ó calmcomputing is not a natural result of increased use of technologyñin fact unbridled digital technology naturally decreases calm.imagine the following experiment; or if you are brave, try it. find two emptycardboard toilet paper tubes, and tape them over your eyes so that you are lookingout through them. you now have no view up, down, left, or right, only a narrowcone of view straight in front. now walk. what happens? you have lost the flowof information from the periphery into the center, and have only the center.everything that you see is a surprise, because it just pops in without warning.your head must constantly swivel or you will trip, run into things, miss peoplepassing you, and generally bumble.if you wear toilet paper tubes for a few hours you will feel exhausted andhighly anxious. your head will have been constantly swiveling to try to partiallycompensate for the lack of peripheral vision. you will feel overloaded with all thework you did to keep up with your world. you will be emotionally drained by allthe surprises when things popped into view and when you had to compensate forthe unexpected.wearing toilet paper tubes is like living in the digital age, where the feelingof exhaustion is called òinformation overload.ó digital technology, like toiletpaper tubes, tends to deliver information with a set of biases. these biases pushus toward the center of our awareness and tend to leave out the essential periphery that helps us make sense of and anticipate the world around us. more andmore of the economy and business and life are mediated through digital technology. if we lose the periphery, we may be smarter about whatever is right in frontfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b161of us, but stupid to the point of ignorance about what is nearby but out of sightbehind the toilet paper tube.proper action has always meant keeping the periphery and center in balance.the center is the domain of conscious, symbolic thought and action. the periphery is the domain of flow, of context, of intuition, and of understanding. thecenter is the domain of explicit knowledge of what to do, the periphery thedomain of knowing how to do it. take away either of these and near paralysisresults.there are 10 biases in todayõs digital technology that contribute to unbalancing center and periphery. these are saying, homogenizing, stripping, reframing,monosensing, deflowing, defamiliarizing, òuglying,ó reifying, and destabilizing.1.saying names the tendency of digital technology to make everythingexplicit.2.homogenizing is the delivery of digital information at an ascii monotone that puts all information into the same pigeonhole.3.stripping is the loss of social context and frame that frequently comeswith digital transmission.4.reframing results because there is always a social context and frame, andafter stripping, a confusing or illegitimate context may result.5.monosensing is the emphasis on the eye over all other senses, reducingour inputs, our style, and our intelligence.6.deflowing is the loss of the context that lets us enter the òflow stateó ofgreatest intelligence and creativity, and so reduces our anticipation and history.7.defamiliarizing is the loss of familiar social practices as we try to workand live on the net.8.òuglyingó names, with an ugly word, the uncomfortable feeling withwhich the low state of design in digital technology leaves us.9.reifying results when implicit practices are cast in stone, removing the whitespace that lets anything work, as when a company puts all its processes online.10.destabilized is our emotional state after buffeting from all the above.the above add up to a bias toward the center, and away from the periphery.understanding the power of balance between focus and periphery, and caring about both, can be a tremendous source of advantage in the digital age.digital technology, through its homogeneous, ubiquitous, and voluminous provision of information, can enable an even richer periphery for action. the dangercomes if we believe that only focus is effective. trying to focus on the increasingvolume of bits can overwhelm us, and we can badly misuse our full intelligenceby ignoring attunement, community, and peripheral awareness. the opportunityfor focus is greater than ever before, but only if we recognize that there is nofocus without periphery, there is no center without a surround. if we can stay inbalance, we can expect a world of greater satisfaction and effectiveness.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c163163ccommissioned papersfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164appendix cfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c165infrastructure: the utility ofpast as prologue?amy friedlandercorporation for national research initiatives, reston, virginiain 1890, advocates of direct current (dc) electric power systems employedalternating current (ac) to electrocute first a dog and then a condemned criminalat the auburn (new york) state prison in a flamboyant attempt to demonstratethat ac was unsafe. the incident is perhaps the bestknown episode in the socalled òwar of the systems,ó which came to an end with the invention of therotary converter in 1892, which enabled existing dc distribution systems to beintegrated into the more efficient ac systems, and completion of the niagarapower project in 1895, which showed that large generating plants and associatedtransmission lines capable of meeting regional needs could, indeed, be built.1electric power is one of four infrastructure history studies sponsored by thecorporation for national research initiatives (cnri). the others address railroads, telephones and telegraphs, and banking; a fifth, radio, is in progress. thesestudies collectively examine attributes of infrastructure through literature reviewsin american history, economics, political science, and sociology. initially, threequestions were posed:¥when and how did takeoff occur?¥what were the public and private roles?¥and, how did an infrastructureñcharacterized by access, òshareability,óand economic advantageñemerge?these questions worked well for the first three studies: rail, telegraphy/telephony, and electricity. but the unspoken assumption behind these questions istechnologyñthe application of engineering and science to accomplish a purpose.in the course of the fourth study, banking, which turned out to be about information, we began to look at the problem of infrastructure somewhat differently,examining properties of ubiquity, interdependence, and reciprocity, independentof a given technology or set of technologies. this focused attention on thenote:the opinions and views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarilyreflect those of the corporation for national research initiatives (cnri). © 1997 by the corporationfor national research initiatives. reprinted by permission.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166appendix corganizational and management structures, which had formed important elementsof all of the preceding studies but had not occupied center stage.finally, all four of the infrastructures were subject to regulation during thenew deal. indeed, much of the current deregulation is designed to dismantle theworld that the new deal put in place. from a policy perspective, then, the studiesnot only delineate more clearly what the relative and changing public and privateroles were but also explain how the new deal approaches to regulatory policycame to be, at least with respect to these four industries.the perils of drawing historical analogiesthe remainder of this paper discusses themes and observations common toall four of the subject infrastructures. but a word or two is necessary on the perilsof drawing historical analogies. all four of these infrastructures obtained shapeand form during a period of extraordinary growth. between 1790 and 1850, thewestern boundary of the united states moved from the mississippi river to thepacific ocean; population in the same period grew by an average of about 30percent per decade. after 1860, population growth fell off to a mere 20 percentor so per decade until 1910.2 urbanization increased dramatically after 1870. in1890, the u.s. census bureau announced that the frontier was closed, and threeyears later, historian frederick jackson turner proposed his frontier thesis, whichwas at least partially a eulogy for this period in american history. by 1920, morethan half of the nationõs population lived in cities. this meant that through thesecond half of the nineteenth century and into the twentieth, there was a growing concentration of demand for networked technologies such as water, power,and communications as well as for inter and intraregional transportation andfinancial services. moreover, the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuriessaw prices fall so that construction of the physical infrastructure of electricity,for exampleñthe generating plants, transmission lines, power stations, andsubstationsñtook place in an environment of declining real costs which couldbe passed off to consumers as lower rates while the companies still turned aprofit.the flip side was wages. real wages increased in the 1920s, the period inwhich recognizably modern suburbia proliferated, creating an environment ofnew construction and consumer demand that made extension of power and phonelines attractive, easy, and relatively cheap. indeed, the residential market forelectricity, with its demand in the evening hours, now became more attractive asa means of continuing to balance peak load. the distribution system was largelyin place, and the marginal cost of the òlast mileóñthat is, connections to individual residencesñwas relatively low compared with the total construction costof the system, including the generating plant and longdistance transmissionlines. economies of scale based on improvements to generating and transmissiontechnologies were increasing, and the cost as well as the price of electricity fell.3fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c167this stands in marked contrast to current debates over strategies for fundingconstruction of the òlast mileó for the digital communications infrastructure.the second cluster of differences concerns public/private roles. at the birthof the republic, most people thought of the government as localñ parish orcountryñand perhaps as the state. the federal government was a dim presence,known to most of the people in the form of the postal system. eligibility requirements, imposed by the states, meant that many men could not vote; universalsuffrage for men was not the norm until the 1820s, and women were first grantedthe vote at the territorial levelñin wyoming in 1869. (wyoming granted womenthe vote at the state level in 1890 when it entered the union.) african americans,enslaved or free, were denied the vote until passage of the 15th amendment in1870, and again, restrictive eligibility requirements excluded most blacks fromthe vote, particularly in the deep south, until the twentieth century.the vote is the most direct means of broad participation in civil life. just asthis participation was circumscribed on a number of grounds in the nineteenthcentury, so, too, was the governmentõs perception of its intervention in the life ofits citizens. the civil war (1861 to 1865) represented a massive intervention indaily life, calling up òvolunteersó in both north and south; levying direct taxation; and affecting the economy significantly through the sale of bonds, federalregulation of the currency, and procurement of goods and services, thus layingthe foundation for a number of private fortunes. but these were the exceptionrather than the rule. even the transcontinental land grants to the railroadsñwhich amounted to an area greater than california and nevada combinedñweremodest relative to the total cost. carter goodrich concluded that combined stateand federal financial assistance to the transcontinental railroads amounted toabout 13.5 percent of their total construction cost, and that this assistance wassubstantially less than that provided for canals.4 sustained intervention by thegovernment in american daily lives, as measured by per capita increase in government revenues and expenditures, appears to have increased consistently after1890 and to have begun with localñnot federalñauthority.5federal regulation, marked by the organization of the interstate commercecommission (icc) in 1887 to regulate the railroads, was initially a forum forresolving disputes and was embraced by some figures in the industry as a way ofsetting uniform national policy in an environment of competing state policies.however, by the new deal, the regulatory agency was seen as a more activeinstrument, and the government, rather than acting as a mediator, was seen ashaving a positive obligation to ensure a minimal standard of security for itscitizens. this is obvious in both social and economic programs, e.g., the socialsecurity administration and the banking reform that expanded the scope of thefederal reserve, established the federal deposit insurance corporation, andregulated the structure of the industry.6thus, for most of american history, government was a distant presence.research labs, like thomas edisonõs in menlo park, new jersey, arose withfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168appendix ccorporate support. his was dominated by the telegraph giant, western union,itself controlled by william vanderbilt, who had financial interests in both railand telegraphy. not surprisingly, western union sponsored research into domains that resonated with its business goals. in 1873, western union announcedits willingness to reward handsomely any inventor who could achieve multiplexing on its lines, thus increasing capacity without additional investment in thewired plant. this led directly to the simultaneous invention of the telephone byelisha gray and alexander graham bell. edison also came up with a receiverdesign at western unionõs behest. his lamp and associated dc generating anddistribution system represented the most successful in a series of attempts tochallenge the gas companies by producing superior interior illumination at acompetitive price.7 thus, the great nineteenthcentury infrastructures arose byprocesses of competition, compromise, and consensus in which the public presence was, at best, a facilitator and at times a mediator.what falls out?economic growth, deflation, and different expectations of government arethree important differences that shaped the development of the infrastructuresstudied. but six themes do fall out as common to all four of the studies:¥period of experimentation,¥firstorder substitutions and feedback effects,¥evolution of new structures,¥not always the òbestó technology,¥natural monopolies, and¥physical plant and service.each of these observations is discussed in greater detail in the next sections.period of experimentation: winners and losersall of these examples witnessed a period of experimentation in which therewere winners and losers and in which a new technology or technologies per sewere necessary but not sufficient for takeoff. railroads are the obvious example. most of the technologies required for selfpropelled steam engines onrails (i.e., locomotives) were developed by the 1830s, but takeoff, measured bya leap in miles of rail construction, did not occur until the 1850s. there were,moreover, numerous small railroad companies that were gradually incorporatedinto larger corporate systems. but this was a surprisingly slow and at timescontentious process that required decades.the standardization of the gauge is a case in point. by 1860, there wereseven gauges for 30,626 miles of track. of these seven, the standard, 4foot, 8.5fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c169inch gauge represented the bare majority of mileage (53.3 percent). the secondmost common gauge was the 5foot gauge, which was concentrated in the south,a region that was further isolated by insufficient intraregional rail links, including a critical lack of bridges across major rivers. more generally, the effort bymany southern cities to secure an urban hinterland resulted in highly localizedlines emanating from the major cities but not connecting them.8three considerations drove conformity to the òstandardó gauge, a precondition to interconnection: the big eastern railroad firms, eager to tap into the rapidlyexpanding markets in the west, particularly for western grain, which requiredtransport across many states and many independent rail lines; the outbreak of thecivil war, which underlined the need for efficient eastwest transportation andcommunications from both political and military perspectives; and finally, specification in 1862 of the 4foot, 8.5inch gauge for construction of the new transcontinental roads. between 1870 and 1880, most of the companies outside thesouth adopted the uniform gauge; 3 percent merely built a third rail. following ameeting among leading railroad interests in the south on february 2, 1886, thesouthern lines were brought into conformity with the 4foot, 8.5inch gauge.9standardization of gauge as well as increasing conformity in signaling, scheduling, and administrative procedures (e.g., crosslicensing access to track; throughticketing and bills of lading; inventory control and management) enabled freight toflow across tracks and equipment controlled by competing interests. at the sametime, mergers and acquisitions meant that many of the smaller companies built toservice portland, maine, or baton rouge, louisiana, were incorporated into largerentities, resulting in a pattern of many losers and a few big winners. similarpatterns characterized both telephony and electricity.the bell interests had enjoyed a 20year patent monopoly in telephony, butwith the expiration of key patents in 1893, the number of telephone companiesserving local or regional markets exploded. much to bellõs corporate dismay, theorganization found itself confronted by a potential welter of services, technicalstandards, and lively competition. indeed, in 1903, more than half of the nationõs1,051 incorporated towns and cities hosted more than one telephone company. in1915, at least 40 percent of the telephone exchanges in cities with a population of5,000 or more competed with another local exchange, and dual service continuedto exist in parts of the midwest and plains until 1924. by the end of that year,however, at&t, then under the jurisdiction of the interstate commerce commission (icc), had bought 223 of the 234 independent telephone companiessubject to the agencyõs jurisdiction.10electricity tells a similar story. until the widespread adoption of ac technology, service areas, limited by the short, onemile range of dc distribution, tendedto be relatively compact. it was fairly easy for a small electric utility to identifya market. thus, between 1887 and 1892, 28 separate firms offering electricservice were formed in chicago aloneñnot including users who purchased independent, selfcontained plants. in their analysis of the structure of the electricfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170appendix cutility industry in 18971898, hausman and neufeld conclude that most firmswere only marginally profitable. weaker firms found it difficult to raise capital,which is one reason put forth for the founding of municipally owned electricplants.11the integration of dc into ac systems meant that economies of scale andscope were technologically possible as well as desirable since highvoltage actransmission over distance was more efficient but meant higher threshold costs.hausman and neufeld found that strong power companies offering a higher rateof return tended to be older and larger, to have bigger generators, to rely on hydrorather than steam, to have a strong commitment to ac generation, and to have abetter load factor (i.e., the ratio of average to peak demand). these firms had thepotential to enjoy substantial cost savingsñconditions, the authors observe,òwhich would be expected to presage a major period of consolidation,ó andwhich did, indeed, occur. power generation and transmission companies evolvednotions of holding companies as a way to leverage capital and manage broaddistribution. led by samuel insull of commonwealth edison, industry executives cultivated state regulatory agencies that mandated standardized service andinterconnection. by 1924, 7 holding companies controlled 40 percent of thenationõs generating capacity, and 16 holding companies generated threefourthsof the nationõs electrical power. thus, even the publicly owned municipal utilities, which provided service to endusers, were dependent on private power providers and transmission line companies for access to bulk power.12firstorder substitutionsso far, we have discussed the overall shape and form of these industries. ineach case, there was an initial period of expansion and proliferation followed byconsolidation into a fewñor one, in the case of telephonyñcorporate giants.this was in some cases pushed by the requirements of the technology, e.g.,electricity. but this was not necessary; telephony, for example, could have existed as a series of interconnecting yet independent companiesñcorporate consolidation and management were not necessary.in each of these cases, there was a product that let endusers or consumers dosomething or have something better. the substitution effect is most obvious inelectricity. there already existed a market in interior illumination provided bycandles, kerosene, and gas. edison intentionally set out to provide a superiorproduct that was costcompetitive with the equivalent gas service, and the pricingof electricity was established in terms of competition with gas.13telephony was also an improvement on existing local communications technologies. in 1873, western union enjoyed a monopoly over telegraphic service,which was primarily between cities. about 10 years earlier, the telegraph gianthad begun to experiment with combined telegraphic and delivery services as away to provide local communications connections. western union also began tofostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c171explore switching technologies that allowed financial information to flow fromseveral banks to a single clearinghouse and then from the clearing house back outto the banks. the initial market for telephony was believed to be local, thusfilling the gap in service. telephony was initially constrained by signal attenuation to a range of about 20 to 30 miles in urban environments where cable waslaid below grade, although transmissions across distances of 800 miles could beachieved with openair lines. by 1890, bell interests were already pursuing interurban transmission in headtohead competition with the telegraph monopoly.rail transport was also conceived of as a substitution, in this case, for transport via canal or overland. although canals had achieved the first major costsavings, rail held the advantage in perishables and highvalue goods, where thedesire for speed outweighed higher costs.14 the differential between rail andwater has been a matter of some debate. in general, though, competition betweenrail and water tended to lower all freight charges. similar interproduct competition also tended to keep electric utility rates relatively low and encouraged utilityexecutives to cooperate with regulatory agencies, thus distancing themselvesfrom the contentious and adversarial positions taken by the gas companies.evolution of new structures:niches, organization, and efficiencyeventually, niches for different services formed and new structures and services evolved. for example, early nineteenthcentury turnpike companies, neveras profitable as hoped, quickly gave way in the longdistance market to bothcanals and railroads. on the other hand, expanding numbers of middle and longdistance routes via either rail or water increased the need for shortdistanceoverland services of 15 miles or less. this increased demand more than offset theloss of longdistance business. plank roads, constructed on the same principle aswooden sidewalks, were introduced after the mid1830s, and wagons dominatedthe short haul, that is, distances less than 15 to 20 miles long, where the rate wascheaper than either rail or canals and time was not a constraint. this was seen asan advantage to some entrepreneurs. john murray forbes of boston, who controlled the michigan central, avoided construction of branch lines and encouraged local construction of plank roads affording access to the railroad without hishaving to expend capital to reach markets. water transport via coastal, lake, orriver steamer or by canal barge had the advantage in medium to long hauls,averaging 650 miles, especially where the commodities shipped were high bulkand low value. innovations during the nineteenth century tended to reduce costsmainly over medium to long distances. waterways were good albeit not perfectsubstitutes for rail and generally had the advantage in shipping highbulk/lowvalue goods over long distances. rail possessed the advantage in shipping highvalue items over medium and long distances and in shipping highbulk/lowvaluecommodities over medium distances.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172appendix csimilar differentiation characterized power. competition with electric companies spurred gas producers to cut prices and improve the product. òwateró gas,introduced in 1880s, was considered greatly superior to the earlier coal gas; it wascleaner and provided better light. the manufacturing process required a largerscale of operation, which increased the costs of entry but also resulted in economies of scale. in a newly competitive environment, consumers gas of chicagowas able to offer still lower prices, thus forcing the price of gas to fall from $3.00to $1.75 per 1,000 cubic feet. the new gas technology resulted in similar pricecompetition in houston and a 40 percent decrease in local rates. with electricitybeginning to encroach upon the lighting market in upper and uppermiddleclasshouseholds and commercial establishments, gas seemed poised to capture themarket of middle and working class homes where kerosene light was still thenorm.discovery of natural gas fields and realization of the thermal applications ofgas led to further service and product differentiation. between 1900 and 1940,higherincome urban households adopted electricity first and tended to preferelectricity for lighting and natural gas for hot water and perhaps cooking, with anoil burner for heat. middle and lowerincome residents converted to new energies more slowly. they selected electricity for light first, then shifted from a coalto a gas stove, and finally added a gas hotwater heater.15 thus, consumers choseamong multiple energy technologies, and the urban energy landscape as late asthe 1920s was characterized by a mix of coal, oil, gas, and electricity.applications of electricity in the heavy industries took place after worldwar i as a result of continued advances in technology as well as soaring prices forboth coal and labor. but the implications of electrification were more profoundthan substitution of one power source for another. applications of central stationgenerated electricity in manufacturing and industry had begun in the 1890samong small users who realized the advantages of the small ac electric motor inproviding fractionalized power in highly segmented, laborintensive processeswhere needs were historically too small to justify a large investment in a steamengine: the apparel industries, chemicals, printing, and several equipment manufacturers (electrical, nonelectrical, and transportation), and metal fabrication.this cluster of industries remained at the forefront of electrification through1954. largescale enterprises, characterized by substantial sunk costs in existingtechnology and by power and heatintensive processes (lumber, paper, petroleum, stone/clay/glass, and primary metals), consistently lagged in adopting electric power. given the scale of their facilities and the importance of the heat byproduct (e.g., steam) to their industrial processes, managers of these industriestended to install selfcontained electric generating plants when they did decide togo electric after 1919.16electricity thus offered smallscale enterprises access to power that formerlythey did not have. in both the heavy and light industries and manufacturingplants, electrification revolutionized the organization of work. prior to the introfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c173duction of electricity, industry relied on centralized, beltandshaft systems linkedto a single prime mover (either water or steampowered). the advent of electricity and the electric motor enabled a restructuring of industrial processes to a moreefficient, decentralized unit drive system where energy was made available at thepoint of use. unit drive systems possess numerous advantages. elimination ofthe centralized line shaft system reduced fuel inputs and increased energy efficiency by reducing friction losses implicit in beltandshaft distribution. factorystructures no longer needed to support heavy mechanical systems, permittinglighter, singlestory factory layouts, which in turn permitted better materialshandling and flexible work flows. finally, components of the process becameindependent, and having to fix a problem in one did not shut the entire systemdown. walter devine, who has conducted the seminal work on electrification andorganization of industrial processes, argues that reduced energy requirementsresulting from efficient application of electricity in unitdrive systems resulted inhigher productivity of capital and labor. and economist harry oshima finds thatin textiles, six laborintensive mechanized processes in the era of steam werereengineered to 25 processes without a concurrent increase in labor inputs.17thus, electrification enabled efficiencies in industrial and manufacturing processes.not always the òbestó technologythe efficiency cum labor substitution argument set forth by oshima is part ofa larger literature that addresses the relationship between technology and growthin the american economy in the late nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. twothemes in this literature resonate with contemporary concerns: one is the relationship between technology and labor, and the second is the socalled òproductivity paradox.ó the productivity paradox consists in the fact that althoughelectricity was adopted as early as 1889, measurable gains in aggregate nationalproductivity began to appear only in the 1920s, after large industrial plantsñmetals, petroleum, transportationñshifted to electric power. why the lag?for one thing, early adopters were small, laborintensive manufacturingplants where good light and access to fractionalized power were important. buttheir impact on the total industrial sector was small relative to the heavy industries, which did not electrify until after 1919. according to economist arthurwoolf, this transition occurred in the context of rapidly falling prices for electricity, escalating prices for coal, and increased costs of labor. woolf concludes thatfirms took advantage of cheaper energy costs to offset higher labor costs byrestructuring their operations.18his analysis has been criticized as overly reductionist and too reliant on thecosts of electricity and labor as the principal determinants without taking intoaccount the engineering flexibility and efficiencies that electric power enabled orthe process of incremental adoption that began with smaller enterprises.19 fifostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174appendix cnally, the expectation that a new technology will be quickly recognized andadopted underestimates the significance of the process of experimentation, whichcharacterized all of the infrastructure technology we have studied, as well as theimplied costs of converting an installed base and investment in the status quo tosomething new. indeed, the existing investment in dc systems and technologiesis one reason for the emotional intensity that characterized the òwar of thesystemsó in the 1890s.the pace of adoption of electricityñor any technologyñis one dimension ofunderstanding technological diffusion. a second is the ògoodnessó of that technology. here, a certain tautology tends to enter the discussion, which goes asfollows: technology x enters the common use and is considered the òbestósolution because it has become the successful solution, and success is equatedwith value.20 there is substantial evidence to the contrary. the adoption of thestandard gauge, for example, was the consequence of tradition, the founder effect, and the advantages of a network. the standard 110 volts in power distribution is a function of the economic analysis that one of edisonõs researchersundertook to determine the costs of a system that would be price competitive withgas, where the principal cost was the price of copper. finally, william paulbarnettõs dissertation on the diffusion of telephony challenges this tautology andelucidates the interaction between technology diffusion and demand.the explosion in demand and proliferation of companies after 1894 hadcreated a manufacturing bottleneck. western electric, a wholly owned bellsubsidiary, could not keep pace with the demand for equipment. as a result,lesser but still satisfactory devices were developed and used by the independentcompanies. during the first decade of the twentieth century, there were basicallytwo competing technologies: the common battery system, which presumed acommon power source and a physically centralized system; and the more primitive òmagnetoó instrument, which relied on local, individualized battery powercontained in each device.21barnett is interested in the relationship between technology and competition.he found that independent telephone companies offering combinations of localand longdistance services both cooperated and competed with each other. successful companies enjoyed cooperative relationships within a technological standard, even though that standard was not necessarily the most sophisticated technology available. thus, relatively primitive, singleexchange commonbatterycompanies, offering local service, thrived in complementary relationships withmultiexchange companies, providing regional longdistance service, so long aslocal and regional servers shared a standard technology and interconnection waspossible. technological sophistication only appears to have mattered when twocompanies competed for the same market niche, as in the competition for regional longdistance service. there, companies with a more advanced technology enjoyed an advantage. thus, barnett describes a gradual process of successful local and longdistance market/service differentiation within the context of afostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c175standardized and interoperableñbut not necessarily the most sophisticatedñtechnology.what is the òbestó technology then? barnettõs research suggests that it is thetechnology that satisfies endusers, which may or may not be the most sophisticated available. these results were confirmed by kenneth lipartitoõs research ontelephony in the south. lipartito found that southerners did not necessarily wantthe sophisticatedñand expensiveñservice offered by at&t. when telephoneservice was introduced to huntsville, alabama, a local newspaper editor observed that residents wanted connections to nearby townsñnot to new york cityor washington, d.c.22whither ònatural monopolyó?we come now to the vexing theoretical question of natural monopoly. explanations of natural monopoly begin with a model of the market based on supplyand demand, and focus their analyses on factors affecting supply (or production).thus, one definition of a natural monopoly looks at the production plant and findsthat natural monopolies are characterized by high fixed costs of the physicalplant. another definition of natural monopoly argues that a natural monopolyexists if multiple producers will result in excess capacity and waste.the railroad companies quickly learned that excessive competition couldresult in overbuilding and waste. frustrated by the pennsylvania railroadõs dominance of the pittsburgh market, for example, andrew carnegie financed williamvanderbiltõs efforts to build a parallel line into pittsburgh. vanderbilt had hisown quarrel with the pennsylvania railroad: the company had bought an interestin the new york, west shore, and hudson, which, in 1881, proposed to build aline into new york city on the west side of the hudson riverñthus duplicatingthe exclusive rail route into manhattan owned by vanderbiltõ s new york central. by this time, however, j.p. morgan had developed a substantial interest inthe rail companies as an underwriter as well as a financier. concerned by theoverbuilding and ruinous rate wars between the pennsylvania railroad and thenew york central, he assembled the principals of both firms on his yacht, thecorsair, and a deal was struck.23in the case of networked systems, the issue of competition is complicated bythe question of network externalitiesñthat the value of the system increases asmore members join it. thus, with respect to telephony, the natural monopolythesis argues that the inherent value of a single, integrated network to consumers,together with the wastefulness of multiple systems, meant that large systemstended to devour small ones, and that efficiencies increase when the systemencompasses the maximum number of users. the theoryñfrequently articulatedby at&t representatives in the twentieth centuryñseems to confirm the traditional view of telephony as a natural monopoly, which provided costeffective,highquality service to its subscribers.24fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176appendix cthere are, however, a few problems. for one, interconnected and networkedsystems do not necessarily achieve economies of scale, a lesson railroaderslearned quite painfully and the telephone companies relearned when they tried todesign switchboards that could accommodate large numbers of users.25 foranother, the model presumes that demand is constant and homogeneous, a contention that historical data do not support.barnett demonstrated differentiated demand in iowa and pennsylvania, andliparito also showed that southern users were uninterested in superior technology and longdistance connections; they prudently bought the cheapest service.it is a rational decision from an economic point of view, but it is not consistentwith the theory. southern consumers clearly did not seek to maximize theirnetwork access, and the nature of southern demand was obviously different fromthe interests clamoring for broader access. even within the south, different strategies were required in north carolina from those that had worked in georgia.26finally, claude fischerõs analysis of the spread of telephony between 1900and 1940 finds that early subscribers wanted residential telephone service for acombination of reasons. some, notably physicians, saw its commercial andprofessional value. indeed, one of the entrepreneurs in antioch, california, wasa doctor who, it is said, envisioned substituting telephone service for homingpigeons to maintain communication with his dispersed, rural patients. a secondgroup of subscribers saw its social value; this group contained a disproportionatenumber of women and rural residents, precisely the group left out of the at&tbusiness plan, which, based on the example of western union, emphasized national service for businesses. but fischer found that telephone service tended tobe adopted first among professional and socially elite households and then topercolate more slowly through the local socioeconomic structure.27fischerõs underlying interest concerns the diffusion of technology, and hesees in the example of the telephone evidence that consumer behavior and demand affect technological development and expansion of service. thus, cheaperalternatives such as direct dialing and party lines, initially resisted by corporateat&t because they might diminish at&tõs high quality of service, were implemented to capture the consumer market in some cases already served by independent competitors. fischer also found that corporate advertising first focused onbusiness and commercial applications. when the marketing message was adjusted again in the 1920s to stress the sociability of telephony, the change incontent came in response to patterns of consumer behavior, rather than in anticipation of them.28these studies all challenge the association of natural monopoly and telephony by demonstrating the importance of consumer demand (rather than production efficiencies) to the process of diffusion of technologies and related services. in chapter 3 of his dissertation, mueller constructs a series of purelytheoretical models in which he considers outcomes based on either a singleservice, dual service, or concentration of demand. he argues that dual servicefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c177can exist in situations in which demand is concentrated but not uniform. conversely, interdependent demand and widely distributed communication patternstend to result in convergence. this finding resonates both with the patterns thatlipartito found in north carolina and virginia as well as with the success of thelocal independent company in fort wayne, indiana, where communications demand was primarily local and regional and could clearly be met by the localindependent company.29finally, despite at&tõs undisputed technological advantage in longdistance service, mueller points out that demand for longdistance service was smalland concentrated in a limited stratum of business users.30 theoretically, at least,this type of demand can sustain dual service, with different entities offeringservice in complementary nichesñjust as they, in fact, did in barnettõs analysis.under the latter scenario, at&tõs superior longdistance capability could haveenjoyed complementary relationships with regional companies. since dual service, which would have afforded integrated local/longdistance service throughcooperating organizations, is theoretically possible (hence monopoly is neithernatural nor inevitable), he looks elsewhere for an explanation, turning his attention to strategy.the key decision, he argues, was interconnection. bell initially refused tointerconnect with the independent telephone companies, fighting competitionwith lawsuits over alleged patent infringement and rate wars. independent companies in wisconsin and ohio also initiated lawsuits, attempting to compel bellto provide them interconnections because the telephone was a common carrierand therefore obligated to provide service impartially. these suits were generallyeither unsuccessful or were withdrawn, when independent companies realizedthat providing access for bell to their subscribers ceded a valuable asset. by1897, both at&t and the independents subscribed to a theory of competition,which posited subscriber access territories (that is, the geographical areas inwhich subscribers were physically located) as a fixed resource. thus, telephoneservice offered by one company necessarily diminished the potential market of asecond company. neither at&t nor the independent companies recognized thatthe distinct communication needs of urban businessmen and those of smalltownand rural residents might in principle have been served by overlapping telephoneservice areas.31physical plant and servicebellõs business model was consciously patterned on western union: highend, national service to business clients under a single corporation that controlledboth the wired plant and the service delivery. this was quite similar to therailroads, which owned the roadbed and the rolling stock and provided transportation services. in their day, this was a departure from existing practices: earlyfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178appendix cnineteenthcentury turnpike companies constructed roads and charged a toll foraccess and use. they failed.despite the innovation in management represented by the railroads, overtime the profitable and competitive enterprises were frequently those in which theservice was separated from the physical plant and in which the physical systemwas segmented. american express is a case in point. american express wasbegun as a fast freight service; shippers promised their clients rapid delivery,used the railroads as a common carrier, and were able to charge a selection ofaffluent clients what the market would bear. this meant that american expresstargeted the lucrative end of the market, where the profit margins were high, anddid not bear the cost of maintaining the plant itself. rather, american expresscould take advantage of what competitive pricing did exist from the transportcompanies while charging endusers for a special service.a similar differentiation in service occurred in the electrical power industry. the industry evolved into a tripartite organization of large powergenerating plants, transmission line companies, and local utilities that provided serviceto endusers. the most profitable part of this system was in longdistancetransmission. transmission line companies did not have to bear the extremelyhigh cost of constructing power generating plants but controlled access to bulkpower by the local utilities. in this case, the profitability was in segmenting theservice and controlling the intermediary function. this wasñand isñalso thecompetitive part of the industry, suggesting that monopoly control is not necessary for profitability even though excessive competition can result in overbuilding and ruinous competition, as the railroads discovered and the corsairincident illustrates.a word on bankingall of the above examples have been drawn from the infrastructures thatdeveloped around science and technology. banking feels like the odd man out.banking is fundamentally a service industry based on information; it is the sumof a series of informational transactions, based on shared concepts, procedures,and relationships that enabled commodities and funds to flow within and amongregions. banking is, therefore, an infrastructure of and about informationñinformation in the form of discounts, interest, and prices, and information (ormisinformation) that allowed consumers (including other bankers and investors)to make decisions about spending and saving.eighteenth and early nineteenthcentury merchants considered banking anauxiliary of trade. after about 1840, the volume and complexity of financialtransactions, which resulted from expanding population, public works, and economic development, precipitated specialization among the emerging financialservices. finance became separate from commerce, and banking segmented intocommercial and investment houses. the range of financial intermediaries, whichfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c179included savings and loans, brokerages, and insurance companies, enabled thenationõs savings to be invested in countless projects ranging from home mortgages to railroads. of these, commercial banks were probably the most important,32 and much of the shape and form of banking varied within increasinglyrestrictive thresholds and boundaries established by state and federal laws, mediated by local demands for credit and opportunities for investment.antebellum banks provided a source of credit and a circulating medium ofexchange by issuing redeemable bank notes. an antebellum bank made money ifit invested wisely, and if its notes stayed in circulation. most of the bankõsinvestment capital came from its investors. if a bank failed, not only did theinvestors lose whatever they had put into it, but the various noteholdersñwhoranged from small merchants and households to other banksñalso suffered because the bank notes were now unredeemable and hence worthless. thus, earlybanking is largely about managing currency, but in the process, a series of cooperative structures emerged.the suffolk system (1819 to 1858) in massachusetts was one response to theproblem of shaky bank notes and represented an attempt to stabilize the systemby increasing confidence, or trust, in bank notes. the suffolk bank intended toreverse greshamõs law by driving out bad money with good; to a large extent thebank succeeded, partially by threatening to redeem large numbers of notes issuedby irresponsible banks, and partially by compelling other banks to participate inthe system and to maintain reserves with the suffolk bank as security for theirnotes.33 free banking (1837 to 1863) was another strategy; states establishedminimum entry requirements and stipulated purchase of public securities thatwere held as security against bank note issues. finally, discount rates, whichemerged in the context of domestic money markets, were a key indicator of therelative risk associated with a given bankõs notes, and the market itself discriminated between good money and bad, while facilitating flows of capital within andamong regions.34two antebellum tools, reserve requirements and discount rates, remain features of the modern banking infrastructure and have become instruments of regulatory policy. vestiges of three other antebellum innovations also survive inmodern practice: cooperative bank insurance, correspondent relationships, andthe clearinghouse. of these, the clearinghouse may be the most significant as anexample of emergent cooperative behavior in a competitive system.new york city emerged as the nationõs financial center in the 1850s, and notsurprisingly, many innovations originated there or in albany. the new yorkclearinghouse was organized in 1853. like suffolk, it relied on cooperationamong interdependent institutions to achieve greater operational efficiency andinstitutional stability among the members and hence to instill greater publicconfidence in the banking system. clearinghouses required reserves, instituteddisclosure requirements, and came to act as a lender of last resort by issuing loancertificates, which member banks used during periods of financial stress. interfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180appendix cdependence among banks was furthered by correspondent relationships amongbanks and bankersõ balances (reserves deposited by one bank in another as security for checks and notes), which were codified by new york state law. the newyork state hierarchical model of country and city banks took on national proportions, and by the panic of 1857, actions by new york city bankers had wideimpacts.35 not surprisingly, the civil war legislation, which mapped out apyramid of relationships among banks patterned on new yorkõs law and practice, also set new york city at the apex. elements of the clearinghouse systemwere even perpetuated in the federal reserve system (1913), including checkclearing, hierarchical organization based on the size of the bank and the population it served, and voluntary membership. the ironyñand the conundrumñisthat structural interdependence, which strengthened the position of any one member, also enabled weakness in one part of the system to travel throughout it,36 asevidenced in crises in 1857, 1907, and 19291930.more questionsthis paper carries a question in its title. if the utility of history is to providesolutions, then the answer is òproceed with caution,ó because the solutions thatwere right in 1890 are unlikely to work in 1990, and it would be folly to map ratestructures from 1900 to 2000. indeed, the bell systemõs initial decision to patternits business strategy on western unionõs successful national monopoly fundamentally misunderstood the implications of telephony as a social phenomenon,and the error brought bell intense competition in many local and regional markets. but if the point is to provide a common framework and baseline of experience, then history has something to offer.whether by abstracting service delivery from the physical plant or by segmenting the system, differentiation of services as a means of providing competition and introducing a profit incentive carries a few questions. how will thephysical plant be built and who will maintain and upgrade it? and what can bedone about creamskimming, that is, offering services that skim off the lucrativeend of the market so that serving the entire market becomes unprofitable? historically, both the telephone company and the electrical power companies haveused crosssubsidization among market segments as a pricing strategy. in the1920s, residential electric rates subsidized industrial rates, and from the end ofworld war ii until 1974, longdistance telephone rates subsidized local rates.federal intervention has been one means of ensuring fairness, either throughregulation or by creating incentives through taxadvantaged or belowmarketloans in the case of rural electrification. indeed, the rural electrification administration (rea) is considered a success story. in 1930, about 10 percent of thefarms in the united states had access to electricity; by 1946, half of the nationõsfarms were electrified and the program was solvent. nearly every dollar that hadbeen loaned out had been repaid. the rea did result in the organization of morefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c181than 1,000 decentralized, smallscale cooperatives serving 5 million families. inthe postwar period, it also led to competition with local utility companies thateffectively increased their range of service. in some instances, the power companies skimmed off the most lucrative customers by building their lines through themost profitable areas, thus depriving local cooperatives of an important segmentof their customer base. moreover, in the late 1940s, efforts by the trumanadministration to continue to expand public power were frustrated by congressõrefusal to fund construction of transmission lines. in 1952, transmission lineconstruction was included in the appropriation to southwest power. through acombination of rea funding and federal flood control policies, which resulted inhydroelectric dam construction, national electrification was accomplished in the1950s.37federal intervention clearly resulted in expansion of electricity to underserved rural populations. however, it is less clear whether public interventionhas historically best served the interests of the consumer or those of the producer.consider the example of banking. key concepts and relationships of the bankinginfrastructure, which were invented to improve its stability and shore up publicconfidence, migrated from the private to the public sector, where legislation andregulation broadened the scope of their impact. these include the discount rate,reserves, checks and check clearing, and interdependence through cooperativestructural relationships. many historical and contemporary observers argue thatbanking remains sound and profitable so long as public confidence in it remainsstrong; panics occur when the public loses confidence. but when voluntaryprivate cooperative solutions seemed to fail, public reform efforts have steppedin, and public requirements, whether in the form of free banking thresholds ornew deal mandates, have become a means of building public confidence in whatis ultimately a private system.on the other hand, the contents of the new deal reforms do not appear tohave addressed the underlying economic causes of the great depression,38 andthe separation of investment from commercial bankingñthe core new deal reformñin fact met the needs of bankers themselves. during the expansionist1920s, the distinctions between investment and commercial banking had blurred.real wages were rising, and large numbers of small accounts became attractive,since they could accumulate into significant pools of capital. in this new market,the commercial banks enjoyed several advantages. they had access to a newsource of funds through depositorsõ accounts; both investment banks and trustcompanies had traditionally relied on the resources of a select clientele. it wasvery successful. between 1927 and 1930, the percentage of bond issues thatoriginated with banks and their affiliates doubled, while the influence of privateinvestment banking shrank accordingly. but when the crash came, more peopleexperienced the collapse directly, and their bankers became their targets. facedwith hostile hearings on capitol hill, private investment bankers, who had seencommercial banks encroach upon their securities business in the 1920s, lined upfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182appendix cbehind the separation of investment and commercial banking, thus reducing competition in a declining market. commercial bankers themselves came on board inpart to forestall more severe regulation and in part because the new legislationpromised to exclude investment banks from demand deposit business, relievingcommercial banks from the need to pay interest on demand deposits and securingthem a part of the market.39proponents of the capture theory of regulationñwherein the industry subjectto regulatory authority òcapturesó or subverts the commission or agency to itsown endsñcan easily see in the structure of early regulatory agencies how stabilization of the industry met corporate needs by limiting competition. indeed,gregg jarrell argues that utility and power companies that were subject to regulation after 1912 actually saw relatively higher profits, higher rates, and loweroutput after regulation than before. thus, he believes that state regulation at theturn of the century was a òproproducer policy.ó40 william emmons in his dissertation in business economics comes to somewhat similar conclusions withrespect to regulation in the 1930s. namely, state regulation appears to havehad little or no effect upon prices, but prices tended to fall when competitionwas present. thus, competitionñnot regulationñresulted in lower prices toconsumers.41whether the private sector would have expanded into otherwise unprofitableor marginal markets in electrical power or telephony without federal involvementthrough mandates, preferential loans, and hydropower construction projects is aseparable and asyet unanswered question. moreover, as the history of bankingillustrates, with liquidity crises and panics occurring with depressing 20yearregularity between 1800 and 1930, the price of competition may be a level ofinstability that is considered unacceptable.for the near term, we are likely to live out the curse of interesting times. butbased on these historical examples, i would venture a few predictions:1.there will be several, not one, òkiller appsó in the information technologies and they will possess the following characteristic. they will be services thatclearly meet usersõ immediate needsñproduct substitutionñand enable consumers to begin to do things differently, just as small consumers of central powersources took advantage of fractionalized delivery of power to obtain interiorillumination and to begin to mechanize their laborintensive processes. we havealready seen this in the introduction of word processing and spreadsheet programs as well as the deployment of intranet and email technologies. recall, too,that the demand is differentiated, and not all òusersó are conventional endusers.for example, there will be a market for intermediate services just as there existsa machine tool industry to support manufacturing. the information technologieswill thus ripple through our institutions, so becoming ubiquitous, sometimesnoticeable, like the lamp on the wall, and sometime invisible, like the wiringbehind it.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1832.these òkiller apps,ó like edisonõs lamp, will not be ends in themselvesbut will unlock an underlying technology and science that are sufficiently robustto support other kinds of activities, just as the significance of the lamp was notinterior illumination but the system of power generation and delivery that eventually enabled the creation of a power infrastructure. many of todayõs informationapplications themselves will thus migrate into the information infrastructurewherein the defining characteristic is the ability to support more advanced applications and services.3.there will be winners and losers. we have already seen this exemplifiedin former household names that are now barely memories. this is not an aberration of the hightechnology world but rather characterizes all of the infrastructures we have studied from railroads to banking. how stability and fairness willbe achievedñwhether through government regulation and/or incentives, orthrough market mechanisms, such as pricing strategies, or through a combinationof public and private strategiesñremains to be seen. history is replete withexamples and experiments, some of which succeeded and some of which failed.what they show conclusively is that we humans are inventive and time will tell.notes1.thomas p. hughes, networks of powers: electrification in western society, 18801930 (baltimore and london: the johns hopkins university press, 1983), 108; thomas p. hughes, òtheelectrification of america: the system builders,ó technology and culture 20 (january 1979):143.2.population data are based on the u.s. census and are tabulated in the appendices to bernardbailyn et al., the great republic (lexington, massachusetts: d.c. health and company,1977), xviii.3.david e. nye, electrifying america: social meanings of a new technology (cambridge,massachusetts: mit press, 1990), 260ð61.4.carter goodrich, government promotion of canals and railroads, 18001890 (new york:columbia university press, 1960), 271. on the size of the grants, see lloyd j. mercer, railroads and land grant policy: a study in government intervention (new york: academicpress, 1982), 7.5.see j.b. legler, r. sylla, and j.j. wallis, òunited states city finances and the growth ofgovernment, 18501902,ó journal of economic history 48 (1988): 34756.6.the expansion of federal authority into social welfare issues during the new deal is discussedin robert l. rabin, òfederal regulation in historical perspective,ó stanford law review 38(1986): 1192, 12431261.7.on corporate support for edisonõs research, see hughes, òthe electrification of america,ó13032; on western unionõs competition and the invention of the telephone, see david a.hounshell, òbell and gray: constrasts in style, politics, and etiquette,ó proceedings of theieee 64 (september 1976), 1306; on the significance of edisonõs systems approach, seehughes, networks of power, 21; on prior experiments in electric lamp design, see robertfriedel and paul israel, edisonõs electric light: biography of an invention (new brunswick,n.j.: rutgers university press, 1986), 115; on the competition with gas, see ibid., 123, 206207.8.george rogers taylor and irene d. neu, the american railroad network, 18611890 (cambridge, massachusetts: harvard university press, 1956), 14, 4245, 48.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184appendix c9.taylor and neu, the american railroad network, 5258; goodrich, government promotion ofamerican canals and railroads, 17981; thomas e. root, railroad land grants from canalsto transcontinentals (tulsa, oklahoma: natural resources law section monograph series,no. 4. section of natural resources law, american bar association and the national energylaw and policy institute, university of tulsa, 1987), 1920.10.william paul barnett, òthe organizational ecology of the early american telephone industry:a study of the technological cases of competition and mutualismó (ph.d. dissertation,university of california, berkeley, 1988), 12; milton mueller, òthe telephone war: interconnection, competition and monopoly in the making of universal telephone service, 18941920ó (ph.d. dissertation, university of pennsylvania, 1989), 3; peter temin and louisgalambos, the fall of the bell system: a study in prices and politics (cambridge: cambridge university press, 1987), 11.11.william j. hausman and john l. neufeld, òthe structure and profitability of the u.s. electricutility industry at the turn of the century,ó business history 32 (april 1990): 23233.12.hausman and neufeld, òthe us electric utility industry,ó 23839, 241; hughes, òthe systembuilders,ó 15759. american power and light was, for example, instrumental in organizingutah power and light; see john s. mccormick, òthe beginning of modern electric powerservice in utah, 19121922,ó utah historical quarterly 56 (winter 1988): 422. on the extentof electrical power controlled by the holding companies, see jacobson, òwater works, electricutilities, and cable television,ó 83. on the dependence of municipal utilities on privatecompanies for bulk power, see richard rudolph and scott ridley, power struggle: the hundred year war over electricity (new york: harper & row, 1986), 3841.13.friedel and israel, edisonõs electric light, 123, 206207.14.prior to the opening of the erie canal in 1825, the costs of shipping one ton of wheat or flourfrom buffalo to new york city show that the price fell from $100 by road to $10$12 by theerie canal. moreover, a single canal barge could haul a load ten times the size of that drawn bya fourhorse conestoga wagon on the best toll roads. robert william fogel, ònotes on thesocial saving question,ó journal of economic history 39 (1979): 30, 4950; patrick oõbrien,the new economic history of the railways (new york: st. martinõs press, 1977), 83; on theprimacy of the transfer from road to water, see albert fishlow, american railroads and thetransportation of the antebellum economy (harvard economic studies cxxvii. cambridge,mass.: harvard university press, 1965), 44, 55, 77; john b. rae, the road and car inamerican life (cambridge, mass., and london: mit press, 1971), 20; john f. stover, ironroad to the west: american railroads in the 1850s (new york: columbia university press,1978), 16064. there has been extensive discussion with respect to calculating the rates viawater and rail reflecting the variations by commodity, distance, and destination as well aswidespread rebating. for a review of the technical literature on this issue, see david l. lightner,òrailroads and the american economy: the fogel thesis in retrospect,ó journal of transporthistory 4 (1983): 2126.15.harold l. platt, the electric city: energy and the growth of the chicago area, 18801930(chicago: university of chicago press, 1991), 4647; òhoustonõs first battle over utilityrates,ó the houston review: history and culture of the gulf coast 9 (1987): 5968. theprincipal output of petroleum refineries from 1859 to 1900 was kerosene, which was used as analternative to gas and electricity for interior illumination. gas required connections to a centralsource. although electricity might be obtained from a selfcontained plant, the threshold costwas relatively high, and there remained the problem of exhausting the heat generated by theplant. kerosene, however, was easily transported, provided acceptable, steady light, and didnot require hookups to a centralized system. still, by 1900, petroleum refiners could see thatelectric lighting would soon displace kerosene and focused their attention on developing stovesand furnaces, which had been available but were not widely used. oil burning furnaces wenton the market in the 1920s but did not begin to displace coalburning furnaces until the price offostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c185coal soared after world war ii; see ruth schwartz cowan, more work for mother: theironies of household technology from the open hearth to the microwave (new york: basicbooks, 1983), 9495; mark h. rose, òurban environments and technological innovation:energy choices in denver and kansas city, 19001940,ó technology and culture 25 (july1984), 53234.16.richard b. du boff, electric power in american manufacturing, 18891958 (new york: arnopress, 1979), 64, 7174, 98100, 13435.17.in a groupdrive system, one energy source supplies power to several machines; in a unitdrivesystem, there is one energy source per machine. walter j. devine, òfrom shafts to wires:historical perspective on electrification,ó journal of economic history 43 (june 1983): 34768, 371; harry t. oshima, òthe growth of u.s. factory productivity: the significance ofnew technologies in the early decades of the twentieth century,ó journal of economichistory 44 (march 1984): 164. this summary of the advantages of unitdrive systems, whichis based on devineõs important essay, is found in paul a. david, òthe dynamo and the computer: an historic perspective on the modern productivity paradox,ó american economicreview 80 (may 1990): 358.18.arthur g. woolf, òelectricity, productivity, and labor saving: american manufacturing, 19001929,ó explorations in economic history 21 (april 1984): 178, 189. the average price ofelectricity fell by 50 percent between 1910 and 1929; coal prices tripled in the same period, andwages doubled.19.david e. nye, electrifying america: social meanings of a new technology (cambridge,massachusetts: the mit press, 1990), 18687. nye somewhat oversimplifies woolfõs thesis,since woolf himself acknowledges (based on devineõs research) òthe tremendous amount offreedom in plant designó (p. 177) afforded by electric power, although he predicates willingness to use electric power on its falling prices. moreover, woolf goes on to conclude that òtheprocess of electrification allowed for substantial management and factory design changes thatgreatly enhanced productivityó; see woolf, òelectricity and productivity,ó 189.20.this tautology is particularly acute in the history of the internal combustion engine and theautomobile, although it also riddles the history of telephony. for a discussion, see david a.kirsh, òthe electric car and the burden of history: studies in automotive systems rivalry inamerica, 18901996ó (ph.d. dissertation, stanford university, 1996), 5, 2231.21.barnett, òorganizational ecology of the early american telephone industry,ó 13, 1617.22.kenneth lipartito, the bell system and regional business: the telephone in the south, 18771920 (baltimore: the johns hopkins university press, 1989), 93.23.stover, iron road to the west: american railroads in the 1850s, 117.24.kenneth lipartito, òsystem building at the margin: the problem of public choice in thetelephone industry,ó journal of economic history 49 (june 1989): 323; the bell system andregional business: the telephone in the south, 18771920 (baltimore: the johns hopkinsuniversity press, 1989), chapter 1.25.milton mueller, òthe switchboard problem: scale, signaling, and organization in manualtelephone switching, 18771897,ó technology and culture 30 (july 1989): 53460, passim.26.lipartito, òsystem building at the margin,ó 332.27.claude s. fischer, america calling: a social history of the telephone to 1940 (berkeley:university of california press, 1992), 136, chapters 4, 5, and 7 for detailed discussion ofconclusions stated on pp. 26163.28.fischer, america calling, 4748, 8183; see also òôtouch someoneõ: the telephone industrydiscovers sociability,ó technology and culture 29 (january 1988): 3261.29.milton mueller, òthe telephone war: interconnection, competition and monopoly in themaking of universal telephone service, 18941920ó (ph.d. dissertation, university of pennsylvania, 1989), 13233; lipartito, the bell system and regional business, 167.mueller bases his argument on interdependent demand theory, particularly as articulated in1989 by w. brian arthur, at that time a professor of economics at stanford university. arthurfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186appendix cpostulated a theory of òincreasing returns,ó by which he meant that the utility of a giventechnology increases as more people select that technology. however, arthur also stresses thatthe initial selection may be a matter of historical accident, rather than the result of economicefficiencies or technological superiority. over time, as increasing returns tend to create positive feedback that magnifies otherwise random variation, the process of adopting technologywill tend to converge on a standard. arthur describes the process of technological adoption asòa random walk with absorbing barriers,ó wherein the absorbing barrier is the point at which agiven technology has a large enough market advantage to compel most users to conform to it, aphenomenon he calls òlockin.ó the firm that controls the critical technology will, therefore,have obtained a monopoly position. the synopsis of arthurõs thesis is based on muellerõsdiscussion; see mueller, òthe telephone war,ó 4446. the original paper is w. brian arthur,òcompeting technologies and lockin by historical events,ó the economic journal 99 (march1989): 11631. the most obvious, current example of the phenomenon arthur describes isbeta versus vhs. arthur is not the only architect of the theory of increasing returns, but he hasgiven it a rigorous, econometric expression that nonetheless provides for fuzzy vagaries ofhistorical circumstances.30.mueller, òthe telephone war,ó 4748.31.mueller, òthe telephone war,ó 18397.32.on the importance of commercial banks relative to other financial services entities, see larryschweikart, òu.s. commercial banking: a historiographical survey,ó business history review 65 (1991): 606607. schweikartõs essay is an excellent review of the literature as ofabout 1990 as well as an introduction to the fundamental issues in the field.33.on the suffolk system, see donald j. mullineaux, òcompetitive monies and the suffolk banksystem: a contractual perspective,ó southern economic journal 53 (1987): 88498.34.there is a substantial literature on free banking. in addition to schweikartõs essay, the following offer some perspectives on this period: james a. kahn, òanother look at free banking inthe united states,ó american economic review 75 (1985): 88185; hugh rockoff, òinstitutional requirements for stable free banking,ó cato journal 6 (1986): 61734; òthe freebanking era: a reexamination,ó journal of money, credit, and banking 6 (1974): 14168;arthur j. rolnick and warren e. weber, òinherent instability in banking: the free bankingexperience,ó cato journal 5 (1986): 87790; ònew evidence on the free banking era,ó american economic review 73 (1983): 108091; george a. selgin and lawrence h. white, òtheevolution of a free banking system,ó economic inquiry 25 (1987): 43957.35.charles w. calomiris and larry schweikart, òthe panic of 1857: origins, transmission, andcontainment,ó journal of economic history 51 (1991): 80734 provides an overview of theliterature as well as a contextdependent explanation of the panic itself based on the structure ofthe financial markets and contemporary events. see also: richard h. timberlake, òthe central banking role of clearinghouse associations,ó journal of money, credit, and banking 16(1984): 115; gary gorton, òclearinghouses and the origin of central banking in the unitedstates,ó journal of economic history 45 (1985): 27783; gary gorton and donald j.mullineaux, òthe joint production of confidence: endogenous regulation and nineteenthcentury commericalbank clearinghouses,ó journal of money, credit, and banking 19 (1987):45768.36.see, for example, bruce d. smith, òbank panics, suspensions, and geography: some noteson the ôcontagion of fearõ in banking,ó economics inquiry 29 (1991): 23048.37.on federal flood control policy, see d. clayton brown, electricity for rural america: thefight for the rea (contributions in economics and economic history, no. 29; westport,connecticut: greenwood press, 1980), 10913; jeanette ford, òelectricity for a region: thesouthwest power administration,ó chronicles of oklahoma 60 (winter 19821983): 455;charles coate, òthe new school of thought: reclamation and the fair deal, 19451953,ójournal of the west 22 (april 1983): 5859. on competition between rural cooperatives andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c187local power companies, see david mitchell, òthe origins of the robertson electric cooperative,ó east texas historical journal 25 (2, 1987): 7179.38.explaining the great depression, which is notable primarily for its duration, has taken on acontentious life of its own. current explanations emphasize its complexity and combination ofmacroeconomic, internal, and monetary dimensions. what is clear, however, is that it was notcaused by commercial bankers invading the precincts of investment bankers. for overviews,see barry eichengreen, òthe origins and nature of the great slump revisited,ó economichistory review 45 (1992): 21339; schweikart, òu.s. commercial banking,ó 63335; eugenenelson white, òbefore the glasssteagall act: an analysis of the investment banking activities of national banks,ó explorations in economic history 23 (1986): 52.39.george j. benston, the separation of commercial and investment banking: the glasssteagallact revisited and reconsidered (new york: oxford university press, 1990), 13638; white,òbefore the glasssteagall act,ó 3437; òthe political economy of banking regulation, 18641933,ó journal of economic history 42 (1982): 39; robert eli litan, òan economic inquiryinto the expansion of bank powersó (ph.d. dissertation, yale university, 1987), 4547; vincentp. carosso, investment banking in america (harvard studies in business history 25; cambridge, mass., harvard university press, 1970), 24951; george david smith and richardsylla, òthe transformation of financial capitalism: an essay on the history of americancapital markets,ó financial markets, institutions & instruments 2 (no. 2, 1993), 27.40.gregg a. jarrell, òthe demand for state regulation of the electric utility industry,ó journal oflaw and economics 21 (october 1978): 29293.41.william monroe emmons iii, òprivate and public responses to market failure in the u.s.electric power industry, 18881942ó (ph.d. dissertation, harvard university, 1989), 17273.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188appendix ccomputer and communication technologies:impacts on the organization of enterpriseand the establishment and maintenanceof civil societyjohn leslie king and kenneth l. kraemeruniversity of california, irvineintroductionthis paper is the first step toward a comprehensive review of critical issuesin the social and economic impacts of computers and communications technologies. it is broad in its coverage, corresponding to the charge we were given.1 thepaper considers social and economic impacts of at several levels: groups, organizations, transorganization, and society. it also discusses the policyrelevantimplications of the research and issues for future research. it is grounded inempirical research as well as established and emerging theory. however, itproceeds from the assumption that the changes being wrought by computers andcommunications technology are of such magnitude that fundamental theoreticalaspects of social understanding might be challenged. thus, we are not bound bythe isomorphic constraints of existing disciplinary tradition in our analysis. theultimate purpose of the paper is to challenge the community of scholars engagedin research on the profound socioeconomic and sociotechnical changes underway.the audience for the paper includes scholars in the social sciences, broadlydefined, including economics, sociology, political science, psychology, communications, and management. it concerns, as well, scholars from the science andengineering disciplines who are concerned with the effects of their creations andwith a desire to learn more about how the processes of technological design,development, implementation, and maintenance can be improved in the generalinterests of human welfare. finally, it includes scholars from the humanities and 1the charge for this paper was given by hal varian in a message of may 5, 1997: òi suggest thatyou try to broaden your overview to include a survey of the potentially policyrelevant economic andsocial science contributions to computers and communications issues. relevant issues include therole of government, privacy, free speech, intellectual property issues, employment, training/education, commerce, communities, and organizations. i realize that you cannot address all of these issuesin depth, but it would be useful to look at as many as possible.ófostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c189the arts who are interested in the changes, actual and potential, that computersand communications technology imply for human experience and selfreflection.the paper is preliminary, as any paper of this breadth must be. it is a collage,assembled by the authors based on their own research and that of others. despitethe limitations of this preliminary paper, it supports several strong conclusionswith implications for future research. the paper hopefully provides a background for, and a stimulus to, discussion at the workshop.organization of this paperthis paper discusses three areas:¥the organization of enterprise,¥establishment and maintenance of civil society, and¥recommendations for research.the rationale for this organization is dependent on several underlying assumptions that must be understood if the discussion is to make sense. the firstassumption is that all social phenomena must ultimately be understood in waysthat account for individual action. although our analysis takes place above theindividual level, beginning at the lowest point with characteristics of goaloriented work groups, we recognize that the foundations of our discussion must betraced to explanations of individual intention and action, no matter how extensively mediated or channeled by higherlevel social forces or conditions of thenatural world. moreover, we assume that the closer our analysis is to the individual level, the greater will be the power of individualistic explanations inaccounting for what we observe. at the higher end of our analysis, at the broadlevels of culture and society, the power of individualistic explanations is expected to weaken considerably.these assumptions justify our selection of the categories of enterprise andcivil society as the two levels of discussion for our purposes. we acknowledgethat other conceptual schema can work to organize this discussion. however, wefeel that this scheme has the advantages of capturing all the major social scienceperspectives needed for the task, while remaining parsimonious and indicative ofthe distinction between òmicroó and òmacroó approaches to social phenomenacommon throughout the social sciences.enterprise in our use refers to those human activities that are undertaken forthe direct production of goods and services, whether under a marketbased governance structure or a policybased regime. enterprise includes everything fromlocal businesses to multinational firms in the private sector, and everything fromspecial districts for services such as flood control to multinational military forcesin the public sector. the defining features of enterprise include the pursuit ofproduction objectives within specific production constraints, an inherent logic offostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190appendix cproduction (however poorly understood by the participants in the enterprise), andtangible measures of performance in the accomplishment of the objectives. weadopt a perspective that is influenced primarily by microeconomics, social psychology, and organizational politics, each of which has close ties to individualistviews of social behavior. the operating assumption is that the people involved inenterprise will, to the extent that they are able, act in ways that conform toeconomic rationality, are socially tractable at the group level, and are politicallystable and salient. the successful pursuit of these goals will produce equilibriumconditions that are not easily disturbed. this implies that existing equilibria,produced largely before the advent of recent computers and communicationstechnologies, will not be easily disturbed. the onus, from this perspective, is onshowing that impacts from those technologies are real, significant, and lasting.civil society refers to the larger social order that makes economic rationality,social tractability, and political stability possible at the local level of groups,organizations, and production sectors. this position proceeds from the premisethat democratic government is a satisfactory, though not necessarily optimal,form of social governance for achieving those ends, while other forms of socialgovernance, such as autocracy, oligarchy, and plutocracy, are not. our focus ismainly on social institutions that shape the organization of enterprise, and ispredicated on the assumption that civil society enables particular organization ofenterprise, and not the other way around. our assessment of computers andcommunications technologies in the realm of civil society draws on intellectualperspectives from political theory, the sociology of institutions, and cultural anthropology, and to a lesser degree, institutional economics.we have attempted to anchor our discussion in empirical research findingswhenever possible, although in this draft we have not specifically cited the researchwe have used. however, a hallmark of research on the social impacts of computersand communications is that coverage of this vast field has been sporadic andepisodic. in addition, the high probability that use of these technologies is changingfundamental aspects of enterprise and civil society makes it exceedingly difficult toanchor some of our conclusions and recommendations in established empiricalevidence. as we suggest in the conclusion to this paper, a major challenge for theresearch community is to define, design, and implement research into the socialimpacts of computing and communications that serve as sound guidance for technology design and development, organization of enterprise, and the establishmentand maintenance of civil society in the information age.clarification of some termscomputers, in this review, refer to substantially more than the basic machinesassociated with computing. computer technology is a òpackageó that encompassesa complex, interdependent system comprising people (computer specialists, users,managers), hardware (computer mainframes, peripherals, telecommunicationsfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c191gear), software (operating systems, utilities, and application programs), techniques(management science models, procedures, organizational arrangements), and data.computing and communications technologies are increasingly intertwined in theeveryday functioning of sociotechnical systems at all levels of organizations andsociety. other information technologies, especially mass communication technologies such as film, audio recordings, radio, television, and print, have implicationsfor organizations and society, but we do not include them in this analysis. we focuson computers and those key information technologies that tend to be closely linkedwith computers, mainly data communications.the organization of enterprisewe begin with the assumption that the underlying drivers that shape individual actions leading to the organization of enterprise are individual desires foreconomic rationality, social tractability, and political stability. these objectivesare meaningless unless understood within a context of civil society that embodiesabiding social values, and thus must be seen as derivative of rather than generative of those values. it might therefore seem that the organization of enterprise isdetermined by civil society, but this is not the case. certain forms of social ordermake particular kinds of enterprise difficult or even impossible, but within thespace of what is possible under a given social order, the organization of enterprisecan be seen as a matter of choices made by individuals and groups. it is furtherassumed that the individuals and groups making such choices are at least to somedegree blind to the outcomes that particular choices entail, and thus, the discovery of satisfactory organization schemes will be at least to some degree discovered through trial and error as opposed to created entirely by design.this section deals with the organization of enterprise by dividing the subjectinto key issues that relate to computers and communications technologies. theseare the concept of organization, the organization of production and distribution,organizational structure, enterprise boundaries, mediation patterns, organizationalpolitics and process, and work life.the concept of òorganizationóperhaps the most important potential impact of computers and communications on organizations is a shift in the very concept of òorganizationó as aneconomic and social entity. once considered to be semipermanent and routinizedby definition, ideal organizations increasingly have come to be seen as flexible,changeoriented, and able to shift their boundaries, alliances, and partnershipsrapidly to meet changing conditions. computers and communication technologies increasingly permit anytime, anywhere communication, synchronous andasynchronous collaboration, and tight linkages in operational processes withinand between organizations (e.g., manufacturers and their suppliers and distribufostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192appendix ctors, and manufacturers and the direct buying public). the concept of theòadhocracyóña fluid organization in which members come and go as interestschangeñhas emerged as competition for the concept of bureaucracy. aftermany decades of increasing vertical integration of production and growth as atotem of success, many organizations have divested themselves of every functionthat was not a core competence, and that could possibly be òoutsourcedó orbought on the market. small really did become beautiful, at least in principle.young entrepreneurs who started little companies in their garages built novelideas into huge companies and fortunes, capturing the imagination of the world.and the mighty such as at&t, ibm, and gm appeared shaken as the world theyhad built started to collapse around them.yet, as recent history has shown, organizations such as at&t, ibm, andgm have by no means been pushed aside by the changes of the information age.they have adopted and adapted the technologies and harnessed them in ways thathave allowed radical òdownsizingó of work forces while retaining and in somecases enhancing top management control over firmsõ performance and profitability. and the startup companies created in garages have found it necessary toadopt timehonored aspects of organizational hierarchy in order to function effectively. this lesson from recent history reveals an important but frequently overlooked aspect of the information revolution: that its revolutionary character isbeing channeled through pathways established by powerful social and institutional forces that are not necessarily swept aside by the effects of technology, nomatter how powerful those effects are.much of the rhetoric about profound change in organizations has been speculative and undisciplined, based more on idealized views of what organizationsought to be rather than on the practical realities that shape organizational formand function. one can construct scenarios of organizational demassing and decentralization, but one also can just as easily construct sound arguments thatcomputer and communication technologies give new life to the traditional bureaucracy. functions normally carried out by middle managersñinformationgathering, decision making within directives, communications with lowerlevelstaff, and monitoring and upwardreporting of activities carried on belowñcanbe replaced to some extent with technology. the resulting òflatteningó of theorganization through the elimination of middle managers has been said to bringgreater òempowermentó of remaining employees. but technological change canjust as easily allow significant increases in organizational centralization, tightermonitoring of employee activity, more effective enforcement of compliance withthe desires of top management, and the redesign of tasks in ways that make itdifficult for employees to act outside of prescribed patterns.there are reasons to be confident about profound changes under way in thecharacter and concept of organizations as a result of new computer and communications technologies. at the same time, it is important not to let ideologicalenthusiasm substitute for careful reasoning and empirical research. the remainfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c193der of this section on the organization of enterprise explores the ways in whichimpacts might arise, and forms the base for discussion of needed research.the organization of production and distributioneconomic activity has long been divided into production of goods and services and their distribution to the final consumers. neither production nor distribution makes sense without the other, and the concept of the value chain hasemerged to unite them in an endtoend scheme. of particular importance is theconcept of coordination. coordination is both necessary and costly, and in thepast several decades much attention has been focused on transaction costsñeasily observable costs of coordinationñto explain how and why production anddistribution are organized the way they are. in particular, the focus has been onthe choice between organizing by hierarchy, meaning the imposition of a policyregime to ensure coordination of various components of production and distribution, vs. organization through markets, meaning interaction among parties governed by the balancing of supply and demand through the marketplace.it is misleading to place hierarchy in opposition to market mechanisms,because this implies that the two are in some consistent way substitutable for oneanother. in practice, they tend to be complementary. at the most rudimentarylevel, markets can be seen as an organic innovation to facilitate economic exchange between individuals with minimum social overhead and no social direction other than to permit participants to pursue their own welfare. in this characterization, hierarchies evolve mainly for coping with imperfections in marketssuch as occur in the case of public goods that, for various reasons, are sociallydesirable but unlikely to be provided by individual investors in a market setting(e.g., national defense). although not directly substitutable for each other, here isan important sense in which societies choose to organize production and distribution predominantly around either hierarchies or markets.an extreme comparison is the command economies vs. market economies,characterized by the two sides of the cold war. a more useful example for thisdiscussion is that between vertical integration of production and distribution ofproducts and services, conceivably under a single company throughout the valuechain, versus a disaggregated value chain in which products and services arepassed along from one organization to another through sale in markets, beingòassembledó as they go, before reaching the final consumer. where workable,markets are usually considered to be more efficient than hierarchies, and in acondition of open choice among options, hierarchies emerge mainly as a consequence of market failures. the political position that derives from this is that themarket should govern as much of production and distribution as possible, whilehierarchies serve as a kind of backup in the event of market failure. given thatwe have already segregated civil society from this discussion, it is not necessaryto argue this point in detail at the level of organization of enterprise.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194appendix cit has been argued that computers and communications technologies canprecipitate a shift from hierarchical organization of production and distribution tomore marketlike forms. the logic of this argument is that an infrastructure ofcomputing and communication technology providing 24hour access at low costto almost any kind of price and product information desired by buyers wouldreduce the informational barriers to efficient market operation, and presumablyfacilitate a shift from hierarchy to market organization. if this infrastructure alsoprovided the means for effecting realtime transactions such as sales based onsuch information, whole classes of intermediaries such as sales clerks, stockbrokers, travel agents, and so on, whose function is to provide an essential information link between buyers and sellers, might be eliminated. removal of intermediaries would not only prune the existing hierarchies that now govern buyingand selling, but would also reduce the costs in the production and distributionvalue chain, further encouraging the shift toward markets.organization structureorganization structure refers to the social organization of authority and responsibility assignments within groups with production objectives, predicated onneeds of specialization and division of labor. a longstanding concern in organizational structure is over the centralization versus decentralization of decisionauthority within organizations. research indicates that use of computers andcommunications technologies per se has neither a centralizing nor a decentralizing influence. the prevailing organizational context in which the technologiesare used is a much stronger influence on whether organizations centralize ordecentralize than is the technology, which can support either type of arrangement. in general, use of these technologies tends to reinforce existing organizational tendencies, and in some cases can be a powerful tool in facilitating organizational changes. an organization that wishes to decentralize can implementinformation systems that provide to lower level managers the information necessary for decentralized decision making. organizations wishing to centralize canuse the technologies to facilitate surveillance by top management over lowerlevel managers. computers and communications technologies have been used todownsize middle management when there is congruence between the centralization of authority in the organization and centralization of control over use ofcomputing resources. in organizations where both are decentralized, middle managers use the technology to enhance their value to senior management and tomaintain their relative influence and size.enterprise boundariescomputers and communications technologies have enabled the emergenceof the transorganizational enterprise. as producing organizations downsize andfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c195outsource in order to focus on their core competencies and shed organizationalweight and overhead, they become less capable of providing fullrange productsand services for the markets they supply. this is particularly true in the case ofhighly complicated, limited production products (e.g., large information systemsand commercial aircraft) but also extends to more traditional manufacturing sectors. the òmanufactureró in many cases is not deeply involved in the actualfabrication of parts, or even in assembly. these arrangements are quite differentfrom those represented by the large, integrated manufacturers who bought largenumbers of supplies and parts from small suppliers. these arrangements oftenentail interlocking minority ownership arrangements, longterm supply/buy commitments, sharing of product and market information, cooperative design andmanufacturing, and risk sharing. they depend on rapid and effective communication and information links among partners, supplied through information technology.the transorganizational enterprise can alter alliances and allegiances andcreate community at various social levels. for example, detroit was the center ofthe global automobile industry while the u.s. automobile industry dominated theworld. as japanese competition emerged, the result was not a shift in centers(e.g., detroit to yokohama), but rather, industry realignment around a globalmarket for òworld cars,ó with manufacturing and assembly taking place in manycountries. this shift has had many ramifications, including imbalances in merchandise trade, use of transborder transfer pricing to manipulate national taxationsystems, and the shifting patterns of employment as jobs are sent òoffshore.ówhile not directly causative of these changes, computers and communicationstechnologies have made them possible. the technologies also have broughtabout a blurring of the traditional links between employment and place. largeu.s. firms have set up major information processing centers in india and thephilippines, where skilled programming talent can be found at low prices. theseforeign workers òcommuteó to work as òvirtualó guest workers over the satelliteand fiberoptic links that tie them to their employers. in a sense, the technologieshave eliminated national borders, and in the process have made many nationallabor policies moot.mediation patternsmany aspects of enterprise rely on mediation to function correctly within thelarger production system. for example, many supply and distribution chains usethe mediation of brokers, expediters, agents, and so on. mediators often survivethrough successful exploitation of information asymmetries, such as the knowledge necessary to match a cargo carrierõs excess capacity to the needs of a onetime shipper. in principle, computers and communications technologies canfacilitate disintermediation by linking the parties along the value chain and reducing information asymmetries. for example, these technologies have facilitatedfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196appendix cthe evolution of enhanced òmail orderó retailing, in which goods can be orderedquickly by using telephones or computer networks and then dispatched by suppliers through integrated transport companies that rely extensively on computersand communications technologies to control their operations. nonphysical goods,such as software, can be shipped electronically, eliminating the entire transportchannel. payments and reconciliation can be done in new ways. the result isdisintermediation throughout the distribution channel, with cost reduction, lowerendconsumer prices, and higher profit margins.another, more subtle example can be seen in heavily computerized òwarehouseó department stores that have taken market share from traditional department stores by capitalizing on the costsaving advantages of advanced supplychain management. in the simplest form of this model, the end retailer and themanufacturer disintermediate the distributors that once sat between them, drivingassociated costs from the system. in the more extensive model the retailerdisintermediates itself from the traditional job of retailingñbuying wholesaleand resellingñby never taking possession of the merchandise. in this model, themanufacturer receives pointofsale (pos) information on sales of its products ata given location directly from the retailer, updates its planning for manufacturingand distribution, sends a restocking order to distribution, dispatches the goods tothe retailer location, and stocks the shelves. the manufacturer still owns themerchandise, which the endconsumer then picks up and carries through thepointofsale terminal, beginning the cycle again. the retailer is no longer aretailer in the traditional sense of the term, but rather an òaccess provideró throughwhich end customers are delivered to the manufacturerõs point of presence, andwho charges the manufacturer an òaccess fee.ó the traditional distributors andtheir costs are disintermediated in this model, and transaction costs associatedwith the retailerõs purchase of goods from the manufacturer are eliminated.mediation, hierarchy, and marketsthese changes raise interesting questions about the possible shifts from hierarchies to markets in production and distribution. the examples above appear toreduce the operation of markets and result in vertical integration or at leastvertical channel partnerships, wherein suppliers and retailers develop close andperhaps collusive relationships. market dominance could only reemerge if exclusive vertical partnerships proved to be unsustainable. the crux of the argumentsfavoring markets over hierarchies revolves around the powerful attractor of reduced transaction costs and the possibility of greater innovation in transactionsthan is possible under the constraints of hierarchy. it has been argued thateconomic organizations predicated on ongoing auction, negotiation, and coalitionbuilding behaviors, without the overhead and conservatism of hierarchy,could unleash an unprecedented wave of economic growth and innovation.still, the question of whether hierarchy can or should be replaced by marketsfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c197is open. many interorganizational information networks have been used to forgestable and longlasting relationships among selected economic partnersñquitethe opposite of the impersonal òspot marketóñand the ecology of these networkscan be quite complicated. for example, travel agents theoretically are able tomove freely among various computerized airline reservation systems, and airlines can easily disintermediate agents by building direct connections to passengers. in fact, agents tend to lock into one system as their primary reservation aid,and build their business around that system. the companies that own the reservation systems were originally owned by the airlines, and they kept tight hold ontravel agents through incentives and constraints, such as forgiving costs of terminal rentals and discouraging agents from using more than one system. thisbehavior was so common that federal regulation was enacted to make reservationsystems òneutraló in order to reduce anticompetitive practices. in this case, thehierarchy of the government stepped in to ensure the vitality of the market, whichwas threatened by the use of computers and communications technologies.there are important questions about who benefits from movement towardmarkets in place of hierarchies. those who occupy key positions in existinghierarchies are likely to fight loss of power, and the elimination of old hierarchieswill probably give way to new hierarchies as the new market structures becomeunderstood and exploitable for the longterm advantage of particular parties.already the consumer credit network industry that has made possible òprofileóadvertising has come under severe criticism from privacy advocates and consumer groups for invasion of privacy and appropriation of consumersõ òinformation property.ó it is not clear that the powerfully seductive vision of the movefrom hierarchies to networks in economic organization is comprehensive in itsconsideration of what must change.organizational politics and processthe fundamental question of organizational politics is who gains and wholoses from change. some have predicted that computers and communicationstechnologies will shift power to technocrats; others have suggested that use ofthese technologies will strengthen pluralistic features of organizations by providing different interest groups with the tools to respond to their opposition. mostresearch suggests that such power shifts are rare, and that organizational elitestypically use their control over resources to shape the acquisition and applicationof computers and communications technologies in ways that perpetuate theirpower. however, there are exceptions. the availability of data in electronicform can empower new participants in decisionmaking processes, while thespread of networked pcs, email, and other technologies provides opportunitiesfor new actors to gain influence. the unresolved issue is whether, and to whatdegree, these technologies alter systematically the balance of political powerwithin organizations.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198appendix cdecision makingthe use of computers and communications technologies enhances the abilityto organize, maintain, and retrieve information needed for decision making andallows modeling in which large amounts of information can be mined to provideinsights that help decision makers evaluate different scenarios. applied to groupdecision making, these technologies seem to enable efficient handling of complicated decision problems that are not easily managed without technological support. more broadly, the use of these technologies in decision making appears tohave the effect of enforcing a stronger discipline on the process of deliberation,with more careful attention to underlying assumptions and sensitivities.work lifecomputers and communications technologies allow individuals to communicate with one another in ways complementary to traditional facetoface, telephonic, and written modes. they enable collaborative work involving distributedcommunities of actors who seldom, if ever, meet physically. they permit individuals, groups, and organizations ready access to rich arrays of information,often in machinereadable form, that permits data exchange for local or remoteprocessing without costly conversion. these technologies utilize communicationinfrastructures that are both global and always òup,ó thus enabling 24hour activity and asynchronous as well as synchronous interactions among individuals,groups, and organizations.computers and communications technologies can change the nature of workby altering the quality of the work environment, the nature of job skills, and thequality of social interaction within the organization. one effect involves thelevels of job stress and work pressure experienced by information workers. somestudies have found that automated systems decrease time pressure, while otherssuggest that the technologies have speeded up work and increased the level ofstress and time pressure on workers. other studies have found the technologieshave had a positive effect on workersõ job satisfaction, sense of accomplishment,and interest in their work, a greater sense of control over their work, and a senseof enhanced status among coworkers and clients. with few exceptions, thetechnologies have not resulted in òdeskillingó of work, but instead have expandedthe number of different tasks that are expected of workers and the array of skillsneeded to perform those tasks. the exceptions appear in certain types of factoryfloor and clerical work, in which the use of the technologies has resulted in somedeskilling if not elimination of such jobs.social interaction in organizations has been affected by the use of computersand communications technologies. peertopeer relations across department lineshave been enhanced through sharing of information and coordination of activities. interaction between superiors and subordinates has been made more tensefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c199because of social control issues raised by the use of computerized monitoringsystems, but on the other hand, the use of email has lowered barriers to communications across different status levels, resulting in more uninhibited communications between supervisor and subordinates.the impacts of computing on work life have been basically positive withrespect to individualsõ job satisfaction, sense of accomplishment, interest in theirwork, control over their work, and social interaction with peers and superiors.however, computers and communications have also speeded up work, increasedjob pressure and time pressure, deskilled low end clericaltype jobs, and eliminated certain clerical and factoryfloor jobs.employment and unemploymentthere has long been concern over the impacts of computers and communications on employment. the ability of computers and communications to performroutine tasks such as bookkeeping more rapidly than humans led to concern thatpeople would be replaced by computers and communications. the response tothis argument has been that even if computers and communications led to theelimination of some workers, other jobs would be created, particularly for computer professionals, and that growth in output would increase overall employment.the net effect of computers and communications on employment is still amatter of considerable debate. employment in particular jobs, such as telephoneoperators and bank tellers, has undoubtedly decreased with the increased use ofcomputerized switching systems and automatic teller machines. such clearcutcases are uncommon, however. the statistical measures used to determine employment conditions are not precise enough to isolate the effects of one factorsuch as the use of computers and communications. after decades of computerization of all sectors of the economy, the united states has generally achieved fullemployment periods of economic expansion, while experiencing cyclical unemployment during periods of recession. the ratio of publicsector to privatesectoremployment has not changed much either. it is more likely that computers andcommunications have led to changes in the types of workers needed and in wagerates for different occupations rather than to changes in total employment. forexample, research shows that computer users receive higher pay than noncomputer users in the same jobs. it does appear that use of computers and communications has resulted in a shift of jobs from the united states to other countries,particularly to asia but also to generally lower wage locations.establishment and maintenance of civil societycivil society is the social order in which the òrules of the gameó are articulated and enforced for individuals, groups, organizations, and sectors. our prifostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200appendix cmary focus in this discussion is on the institutions involved in the construction ofdemocratic government, and on the relationships between the people and government. we also address the process by which individuals are elected and appointed to serve in institutionally defined positions of influence and authority inthe democratic governance structure.democratic governancecomputers and communications technologies have taken on a highly visiblerole as tools of government and as symbols in the ongoing debate about howgovernment ought to function. there has been considerable speculation overwhether use of these technologies can and will alter the functioning of democraticgovernment. there are a variety of forms of democratic government. we chooseto focus our discussion on the constitutional form of democratic governmentfound in the federated structure of the united states. the united states is theoldest and greatest user of computers and communications technologies amonglarge democratic countries; effects on its democratic institutions should by nowbe apparent.our discussion covers three areas: effects on the fundamental structure ofdemocratic institutions predicated on separation of powers and the concept offederalism; effects on the relationship between government and the people; effects on the processes of deliberation and constitutional operation. it also toucheson risks inherent in high levels of dependence on technology.effects on democratic institutionsthe u.s. form of democratic government is predicated on two key assumptions. the first is the separation of power horizontally across the key functions ofgovernmentñthe legislative, executive, and judicialñin order to ensure thateach branch holds the others in check. in principle, differential use of computersand communications technologies by one of the branches could undermine thechecks, thereby providing substantive, procedural, functional, or symbolic advantage compared to the other branches. the second assumption is that powershould be separated vertically in order to keep as much of the authority of government as close to the citizen as possible. in principle, the construction of nationalinformation systems for criminal justice, taxation, welfare, and so on might enhance the power of the central government in comparison to the regional andlocal governments.the introduction of computers and communications technologies in the u.s.federal government was accompanied from the start by speculation that powerwould accrue to the branch with the most technology. given the preponderanceof technology in the executive branch, one would expect it to gain advantage overthe legislative and judicial branches. in fact, no such power shift has occurred.fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c201the separation of powers doctrine ensures that each branch has separate functions, that each is constitutionally and politically independent of the other, andthat each has inviolate recourse through which to check the others. computersand communications technologies do not and cannot fundamentally change theseconstitutional relationships. three examples serve to illustrate:¥example 1. assume that, as a result of its greater computing, information,and analytic capabilities, the executive branch gains power over the smaller, lessexperienced, and diffuse bureaucracies supporting the legislative branch. thelegislative branch can limit and control executive branch computerization bystopping the purchase of new computer systems through legislation, by stranglingthe procurement process through audits and inquiries, and by raising politicallydamaging questions of faulty procurement, cost overruns, mismanagement, andother evils resulting from executive computerization. the legislative branch canalso request data from executive agencies, which are usually willing to comply inexchange for favorable treatment of their appropriations. finally, the legislativebranch can buy its own computers, develop its own information systems, andoperate its own analytic models with its own staff. through these mechanisms,the legislative branch can readily establish parity with and independence from theexecutive branch.¥example 2. assume that the executive branch tries to influence judicialreview or overload the judicial branch with data from its vast stores of computerdatabases. the judiciary is the least computerized of the three branches of government and so is considered most vulnerable to the information that the executive branch can amass in support of its legal and policy preferences. the judiciary, in response, can use its tremendous power over legal proceedings to holdthe executive branch to answer for its actions. the judiciary can grant or denystanding of parties, can determine the materiality of information, and can in effectdeclare all or part of the executive branchõs information to be ònoninformationóand therefore inadmissible in any of its proceedings. the judiciary, alone amongthe branches, has the power to decide what information òisó within its own house.the judiciary can also force the executive branch to provide the informationit wants, when it wants it, and in the form it wants it, regardless of whether theinformation yet exists or what it costs the executive to get it. finally, whereviolations of federal law may be involved the judiciary can override executivebranch attempts to withhold information under claims of òexecutive privilege.óin summary, the judiciaryõs powers overwhelm any advantage the executivebranch may gain from computers and communications technologies.¥example 3. assume that the legislative branch seeks to gain advantageover the executive through the use of computers for oversight. even if an òidealócomputerized system for legislative oversight were in place, the executive couldstall in the provision of information, could provide misinformation and disinformation, and could refuse outright to provide information requested by thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202appendix clegislative branch. in such a confrontation, only the judiciary would have thepower to mediate the disagreement. the most powerful response of the executivebranch is the ability of the executive to take his or her viewpoint directly to thecitizens, thereby marshaling popular support and potentially nullifying the effectsof oversight by the legislature. the use of computers and communications technologies is unlikely to produce power shifts from the executive to the legislativebranch in this area either.the branches are able to check one another in virtually any case wherecomputers and communications technologies play a role, simply because thepowers of democratic institutions transcend whatever advantage the technologiescan confer.another possibility is that acquisition of vast computer databases could giveone level of government exceptional power over other levels. the most commonspeculation has been that the central government gains power at the expense ofthe regional and local governments. there is no evidence that this has happened,and moreover, it is unlikely that such a shift could happen. for one thing, thecentral government does not need computers and communications technologiesto gain a power advantage because it already has the supremacy of federal law onits side. the states have wide powers of autonomous action (i.e., the residue ofpowers not conferred by the constitution upon the federal government) but notindependence. also, intergovernmental relationships seldom involve the federalgovernment òorderingó state and local governments about. instead, most federalactions affecting states involve the federal government paying for national programs, such as unemployment and social welfare, that are implemented by stateor local governments, or holding out carrots and sticks to induce state and localgovernments to adopt particular policies or programs.it is conceivable that the careful use of computers could permit the federalgovernment to be more heavyhanded in its superior role by enabling federalagencies to better monitor state compliance with federal expectations. however,the current political trend is in the opposite direction. the dominant trend offederalism is toward devolvement of funding, administration, and oversight responsibility to the state and local level. as in the case of separation of powersacross the branches of government, the distribution of power across the levels ofthe federated government system is itself a central part of democratic governanceand the institutions that ensure such governance. use of computers and communications technologies is highly unlikely to affect this as time goes on.effects on relationships between government and the peoplein the foregoing discussion we address the impacts of computers and communications technologies on democratic institutions. at a more fundamentallevel, there is concern that these technologies can affect the relationship betweenfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c203government at all levels and the citizens of the country. a central principle of theu.s. form of democratic government is the desire to protect citizens from government tyranny. at issue is whether the use of computers and communicationstechnologies could give government the power to overwhelm constitutional safeguards against abuse of individuals or groups. creating a wellbalanced distribution of power between individual citizens and the government created by and forthose citizens is a central problem in the maintenance of civil society. the issueis not whether individuals are imperiled by a faceless government armed withcomputers, but rather whether duly elected representatives, working through appropriate constitutional mechanisms, will engender computerdependent abuse ofindividual rights.most of the concern over this issue is expressed in the debate about computers, databanks, and personal privacy. there has been considerable speculationand discussion of scenarios about the potential problems for privacy due to thecomputerization of government recordkeeping activities, but there has been littleempirical evaluation of the privacyrelated consequences of the use of computersand communications technologies. the debate has at times been largely ideological. with enough data and the right computer systems, authorities will beable to monitor the behavior of large numbers of individuals in a systematic andongoing fashion. the issue is no longer what authorities can do, but what theychoose to do in surveillance of the population.privacy is a politically sensitive topic, but as a concept in society and law itis surprisingly not well developed. existing uses of computerized databankshave not yet abridged personal privacy sufficiently to require constitutional action or even substantial supreme court action on the matter. nevertheless, theprivacy issue is being played out in the realms of rhetoric, legislation, and executive action. the controversy is likely to persist due to the creation and interconnection of large systems containing personal information and the relatively weakenforcement of existing privacy legislation.effects on the political processcomputers and communications technologies do not appear to be seriousagents of change in democratic government, at least as seen thus far. however,there is a chance that these technologies will have a very substantial influence onthe political processes that lead to the election of representatives and the mobilization of national political movements. much has been written about the effectsof communications media, particularly the mass media of radio and television, onthe processes by which public opinion is formed and guided, and on the politicalcontests that determine who will govern. the addition of advanced forms ofpublic opinion sensing and computerized directmail systems has created a package of tools that are transforming the nature of the political process. there isconcern that the extensive manipulation of public moods through the use offostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204appendix ctechnology will decrease the electorateõs overall awareness of the issues, andincrease the tendency toward the election of individuals on the grounds of mediaimage and singleissue directmail advertising. the ultimate concern is the deliverance of the role of political opinion making, and thereby the mobilization ofpolitical bias, into the hands of technicians who stand between actual politicalleaders and the electorate. this can result in reduced influence of the electorateover political leaders, and potentially, the means for wholesale distortion of theissues by political leaders with skilled òimagemakingó technocrats.the impact of computers and communications on political fund raising andcampaigning could prove to have significant effects on the political process, notbecause of any particular weakness of the constitution itself or as a result ofchanges in the structure or function of the governmental system, but becausechanges would be part of larger effects of automation on the mobilization of biasamong interest groups in the population. the concept of constitutional democracy depends on an informed electorate, capable of discriminating among candidates based on their overall strengths. critics contend that extensive use of television in campaigns has decreased the quality of debate and reduced attention to theissues. highly targeted, singleissue fund raising and campaigning conductedthrough computerassisted direct mail or targeted telephone solicitation couldcontribute to such a trend. the constitution itself addresses only the majoroffices and issues of enfranchisement, and not the protocols of party behavior orcampaigning. it is possible that computingbased changes in the conduct ofpolitical contests will eventually have an effect on the ways the constitution isinterpreted and implemented.an orthogonal view of technology and its impact on social life implies moresubtle and possibly more important concerns for democratic government. thisview engages concern over the application of computers and communicationstechnologies to mass surveillance, national information systems, and politicalcampaigningñin particular, to the question of what is really important in thedetermination of who should govern. this concern is manifest in aldous huxleyõsbrave new world, in which technological advancements were deliberately, andto a large measure democratically, applied toward elimination of need and stabilization of the social order. the new world was the epitome of successful technocracy, to the point that circumstances that gave rise to jealousy were preemptedthrough ubiquitous use of technology. technology was used not to give expression to malicious and destructive tendencies, but rather to support wellintentioned efforts to eliminate the causes of strife. in the process, the removal ofstrife eliminated existential choice, and thereby, freedom. technology maximized efficiency in exchange for unavoidable limitations on individual privacy,choice, and freedom.this story is useful for considering the ultimate impacts of computers andcommunications technologies on democratic government. the world depicted byhuxley evolved over a protracted period of time, and each step along the wayfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c205posed a choice: to live with the contradictions of the present, or to remove themwith technical solutions. to the extent that democratic government is threatenedby the application of information technology, the threat does not come fromweaknesses in the constitution or the government it shapes. rather, the threatcomes when the governed fail to protect and defend their rights to personalprivacy. whether the growing use of information technologies in mass socialsurveillance or in partisan political contests is leading to this end remains to beseen. however, this analysis gives sufficient evidence to warrant renewed concern and to prompt increased monitoring of computing activities conducted bygovernment or used in political processes.technology, dependency, and riska civil engineer working on the large california water project, which bringswater from the sacramento/san joaquin river delta to southern california, onceremarked, òif we donõt build this canal, we wonõt need it.ó the creation of vitalinfrastructure ensures dependence on that infrastructure. as surely as the worldis now dependent on its transport, telephone, and other infrastructures, it will bedependent on the emerging information infrastructure. in a sense, this is aninevitable price of technological progressñdependency occurs only when thething depended on is very valuable to the dependent. at issue here is the character of dependence that is likely to evolve, and the institutional responses to thatdependency.dependency on technology can bring risks. failures in the technologicalinfrastructure can cause the collapse of economic and social functionality. regional blackouts of electricity service in the northeast during the 1970s and1980s resulted in significant economic losses. blackouts of national longdistance telephone service, credit data systems, electronic funds transfer systems,and other such vital communications and information processing services wouldundoubtedly cause widespread economic disruption. dependency can also resultin unanticipated, downstream consequences in the form of negative externalitiessuch as pollution. reliance on nuclear weapons as a key component of strategyduring the cold war resulted in an atanycost development and productionprogram that left large areas of the united states terribly polluted, perhaps sobadly that they must eventually be entombed and sacrificed as a cost of the war.although it is difficult to imagine dependence on information technology producing an equivalent environmental catastrophe, toxic materials used in the manufacture of semiconductors and other hardware components have polluted manufacturing sites throughout the country that must now be cleaned up.perhaps most important, high levels of technological dependency create morethan the risk of economic difficulty from failure. when technologies are instrumental in the construction and maintenance of institutions, and workable substitutes are not available in the event of failure, institutional collapse is possible. afostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206appendix cuseful example of this is the unimodal transportation infrastructure of the losangeles region. the entire region is dependent on a single transportation infrastructure: vehicles on roadways. the failure of any major component of thatinfrastructureñfuel availability, roadways, traffic controlsñfor any lengthy period of time would bring the entire region of 12 million people to a halt. the losangeles region is at risk not only because the existing infrastructure constitutes asingle point of failure capable of threatening the region, but also because commuting long distances to work using that infrastructure is a widespread andaccepted cultural norm. the failure of transportation would strike at the heart ofa nondiscretionary social institution. the collapse of two bridges on the santamonica freeway during the 1993 northridge earthquake was minor given thehundreds of miles of freeway in the region, yet the cost to the cityõs economy wasat least a $1 million per day during the reconstruction, even after every availablealternative transport mode and scheme was implemented.in summary, technological dependency is not necessarily something to beavoided; in fact, it is probably impossible to avoid altogether. what must beconsidered is the exposure brought from dependency on technologies with arecognizable probability of failure, no workable substitutes at hand, and highinstitutional and social costs as a result of failure.conclusions and implicationsresearch issuescomputerization is a complex social phenomenon. the process of automation involves more than the acquisition and implementation of discrete components of technology. automation is a social phenomenon involving a òpackage.óthe adoption and diffusion of information technology are influenced by bothdemandpull and supplypush factors. demand forces dominate the evolution oflarge, complex, custom applications, while supply forces appear to exert a majorinfluence on the evolution of smaller packaged applications.the impacts of computers are seldom as predicted. common predictionsabout the effects of using information technology frequently fail to materialize asexpected. the failure of a prediction is not a signal that the outcome is negative.rather, it is a sign that the impacts are richer and more complex than anticipated.computerization has not resulted in widespread job displacement of middle managers because it has actually increased their job scope and roles in many cases.and, while management information system skill bureaucracies do not fit theidealtype service bureaucracy, they frequently produce leadingedge applications of the technology. the important lesson from the research, then, is thatfailures of expectation and prediction are commonplace in the world of automation. the technology and its applications are best characterized as evolutionaryfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c207in impact rather than revolutionary. indeed, many organizational managers desire stability and work against surprises. therefore, new information technologyis generally introduced slowly so that it can be adapted to meet the organizationõsneeds, and so that the staff can adapt to the technologyõs introduction.technology is political. rational perspectives on change seldom acknowledgethe explicitly political character of technology. they emphasize organizationalefficiency, concentrate on the positive potential of technology, and assume organizationwide agreement on the purposes of computing use. in contrast, politicalperspectives see efficiency as a relative concept, embrace the notion that technology can have differential effects on various groups, and reflect the belief thatorganizational life is rife with social conflict rather than consensus. from a political perspective, organizations are seen as adopting computing for a variety ofreasons, including the desire to enhance their status or credibility, or simply inresponse to the actions of other organizations. moreover, applications of the technology can cause intraorganizational conflicts. decisions about technology areinherently political, and the politics behind them may be technocratic, pluralistic, orreinforcing, with different consequences for different groups in each case.political perspectives are essential for understanding technologyõs role inorganizations. technocratic politics helps explain the relationships between thetechnologists and endusers; pluralistic politics helps explain the relationshipsamong various user interests vying for access to computing resources; and reinforcement politics helps understand the effects of computing on power and authority in organizations. reinforcement politics has proven to be important inexplaining decisions about computerization in organizations, wherein the technology is used primarily to serve the interests of the dominant organizationalelites. reinforcement occurs sometimes through the direct influence of the elites,but more often it occurs through the actions of lowerlevel managerial and technical staff in anticipation of the interests and preferences of the elites. thepolitical mechanisms used to determine the course of organizational automationwill vary, depending on the broader political structure of the organizations themselves, and these mechanisms tend to remain stable over time.management matters in complex ways. prescriptive literature is full of admonitions about the importance of management in effective use of informationtechnology. however, empirical research into the role of management and theefficacy of management policies is lacking. research of the irvine school hasdemonstrated the crucial role of management action in determining the course ofautomation, even in cases where major environmental changes were present.moreover, there are distinct patterns of management action that yield differentoutcomes. effective management of computers and communications technologies is much more difficult than suggested, however. specific policies are contingent in their effects on the state of computing management as well as the characterfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208appendix cistics of the organization. policies recommended in the practitioner literature haveproven to be associated with serious problems in the computing environment, andit is unclear whether the policies are not working, whether they have not yet hadtime to work, or whether they work only under special conditions.methodologyresearch requires the use of multiple perspectives. review of the researchshows that systematic research into social impacts requires understanding anduse of multiple disciplines for viewing the interaction of technology, organizations, and society. the work reviewed has used perspectives from the socialsciences (political science, economics, sociology, psychology, communications,and management) and from the social analysis of computing in the informationand computer sciences. perhaps more important than the multidisciplinary character of this research, however, is the value of drawing on multiple intellectualperspectives when exploring fundamental causes of social change.all meaningful explanations of the social aspects of the use of informationtechnology proceed from an ideological base. all scholars have interests andvalues that influence the theories and explanations they construct. these interests are important not only in prescriptive work; they also figure markedly in thedescriptive and explanatory work in the field. by recognizing the fact that explanations are at least in part ideological, and that ideology is an essential andrequired component of social analytic work, we are able to òtriangulateó on a setof facts from several explanatory positions. this approach permits explainingsocial phenomena more comprehensively and precisely by gathering insight fromvarious points of view, and using contrasting elements from various perspectivesto test the intellectual coherence of alternative perspectives. the multipleperspectives approach leads to increased selfconsciousness during observation andexplanation, and increased precision, because explicit perspectives can be examined in light of the facts and other perspectives for explaining the facts.the dominant analytical perspectives in the computer and communicationsfield have traditionally been tied to the supplypush world of technical development, coupled with a rationaleconomic interpretation of managerial behavior.these explanatory perspectives have considerable power and have yielded usefulresults. however, they have distinct limits. technological determinism and narrow managerial rationalism do not explain the variance observed in the patterns andprocesses of adoption and routinization of information technology in various tasks,and they fall far short of explaining the considerable differences in successful use ofthe technology across organizations. indeed, such perspectives are at a loss toexplain the fact that òsuccessó in the use of information technology is singularlyelusive. as economist eliot soloway has stated so succinctly, the effects of theinformation revolution have shown up everywhere but in the profit figures.there certainly are technical and economicrational elements to be considfostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c209ered in understanding use of information technology in organizations. missing,however, are the more finely grained explanations of volition in shaping thebehaviors of those that adopt and use the technology, or that react to the effects ofits use. while it is clear that information technology has brought major opportunities for change to organizations, it is the individuals and features of the organizations within which they work that determine whether given technologies areadopted and how they will be absorbed into the complex of factors operating inmodern organizations. organizations are political, social, and managerial constructions that involve interactions among competing and cooperating groups,each of which seeks to pursue some mix of its own and common interests, withinthe framework of broader organizational and social constructions of what isappropriate and expected. since the true consequences of using informationtechnology are unforeseeable, the actions of individuals in organizations arealways based to some extent on faith, social pressure, perceived political advantage, and other factors, in addition to òcostbenefitó calculi covering applicationsto given activities.research requires a critical perspective. research indicates that there isoften a gulf between expectations and subsequent experience with the use ofinformation technology. it is important, therefore, that research proceed from acritical stance. it should be concerned with challenging existing ideas, examiningexpectations about technology and organizations, and counteracting unsubstantiated biases in both. it should focus particularly on the important role played byideology and expectations in the use of information technology. the expectations of managers and others in organizations influence the choices they make inadopting and using technology. managers who believe in technological solutionsare likely to introduce information technology on faith, while discounting otherconsiderations. and experiences with technology shape future expectations aboutthe efficacy of technology in meeting organizational needs. the ongoing relationship between expectations and outcomes is a crucial part of understanding thedynamics of use of information technology in organizations.in taking a critical stance, it is useful to start from common expectations andaccepted explanations, and then attempt to corroborate them with empirical evidence. when the corroboration is incomplete, explanations can be modified,expanded, or displaced in order to develop a more accurate fit of theory with thefacts. the combination of the critical stance and the multipleperspectives approach reveals biases inherent in popular claims and provides leverage to thinkcritically about alternative explanations.social analysis requires innovation in research design. the irvine schoolhas produced methodological as well as substantive contributions. most areinnovations in research design that are especially suited to social analysis. thebasic research strategy of the group is that the scale of research has to match thefostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210appendix cscope of the problem one seeks to address. large, complex, and multifacetedproblems require similar approaches. given customary constraints (shortage ofknowledge, resources, and talented people), one is challenged to focus both energy and effort.five recommendations can guide research. the first is to focus on leadingadopters of the technology when studying the effectiveness of policies for managing computing. this focus enables determination of what works and what doesnot in the process of innovating, and can lead to advice that will bring others upto the level of the leading performers. the second, when studying policies, is tosample sites at the extremes of policy application (e.g., high and low centralization, insignificant and extensive user training). this approach maximizes thevariance on the policies and provides a better indication of the basic direction inthe relationships. the third is to use census surveys to investigate the extent of atechnologyõs diffusion, the extent of its use, and the nature of its organizationalimpact. in addition to elimination of sampling bias, a census provides a goodindication of the distribution of patterns of diffusion throughout a population oforganizations. the fourth is to concentrate on longterm study of organizationaland social impacts. such impacts cannot be studied over the short term becausechanges occur slowly, the effects of the use of technology are indirect more oftenthan direct, and the organization and the technology are interactive. the fifth isto use a mix of methodsñquantitative and qualitative secondary data analysis,survey research, longitudinal research, international comparative researchñanda mix of measures in the research in an effort to achieve better measurement andto triangulate the results of various studies.