detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/6327internet access to the national library of medicine'stoxicology and environmental health databases44 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309062992 | doi 10.17226/6327catharyn t. liverman, carolyn e. fulco, and howard m. kipen, editors; committeeon internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology andenvironmental health databases, institute of medicineinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet access to thenational library of medicine™stoxicology and environmental health databasescatharyn t. liverman, carolyn e. fulco, andhoward m. kipen, editorscommittee on internet access to thenational library of medicine™stoxicology and environmental health databasesdivision of health promotion and disease preventioninstitute of medicinenational academy presswashington, d.c. 1998internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ł 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ł washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and theinstitute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report werechosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.the institute of medicine was chartered in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto enlist distinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public. in this, the institute acts underboth the academy™s 1863 congressional charter responsibility to be an advisor to thefederal government and its own initiative in identifying issues of medical care, research,and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.support for this project was provided by the national library of medicine, nationalinstitutes of health, under contract no. n01od42139. the views presented are thoseof the institute of medicine committee on internet access to the national library ofmedicine™s toxicology and environmental health databases and are not necessarilythose of the funding organization.international standard book no. 0309062993additional copies of this report are available for sale from the national academy press,box 285, 2101 constitution avenue, washington, dc 20055. call (800) 6246242 or(202) 3343313 in the washington metropolitan area, or visit the nap™s onlinebookstore at http://www.nap.edu.copyright 1998 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of america.the serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost allcultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. the image adopted as alogotype by the institute of medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient greece,now held by the staatliche museen in berlin.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on internet access to thenational library of medicine™s toxicology andenvironmental health databaseshoward kipen (chair), associate professor and director, division of occupational health, environmental and occupational health sciences institute, university of medicine and dentistry of new jerseyœrobert woodjohnson medical school, piscatawayjames cimino, associate professor of medical informatics in medicine,columbia university college of physicians and surgeons, new york, newyorkrobert copeland, jr., associate professor, department ofpharmacology, howard university college of medicine, washington, d.c.fred henretig, professor of pediatrics and emergency medicine, university of pennsylvania school of medicine, director, section of clinicaltoxicology, children™s hospital of philadelphiaeileen kraemer, assistant professor, department of computer science,university of georgia, athenslinda milgrom, network librarian, national network of libraries ofmedicine, pacific northwest region, university of washington, seattlemelanie mintzer, assistant professor, department of family medicine,university of north carolina school of medicine, chapel hillclifford mitchell, assistant professor, division of occupational andenvironmental health, school of hygiene and public health, johns hopkins university, baltimore, marylandlillian mood, director of risk communication and community liaison,environmental quality control, south carolina department of health andenvironmental control, columbiakathleen reed, program manager and senior technical specialist, oakridge associated universities, washington, d.c.barbara sattler, director, environmental health education center,university of maryland at baltimore school of medicinestaffcatharyn t. liverman, study directorcarolyn e. fulco, senior program officersandra au, project assistant/research assistantkathleen stratton, interim director, division of health promotionand disease preventioninternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthe iom staff and the committee wish to thank national library ofmedicine staff members jeanne goshorn, michael moore, and melvin spannfor providing the committee with insight and updates on the toxnet website. we appreciate the input provided by the individuals named in appendix awho took the time to search toxnet and to share their thoughts and searchexperiences with the committee.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proceduresapproved by the nrc™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist theinstitution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensurethat the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wishto thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of thisreport:bruce g. buchanan, university of pittsburgh;keith burkhart, milton s. hershey medical center;terry ann jankowski, university of washington;michael j. kosnett, university of colorado health sciences center;trace warner, washington state department of health; andm. donald whorton, m. donald whorton, m.d., inc., alameda, calif.while the individuals listed above have provided constructive commentsand suggestions, it must be emphasized that responsibility for the final contentof this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11introduction5study backgroundinput to the committeeoverview of the report2assessment of the current toxnet web site11selecting a databaseinputting the search strategydisplaying the search resultsmodifying the searchprinting or downloading the search resultsother issues3improving the toxnet web site17integrating toxnet into the overall nlm web sitedatabasessearch interfaceeducational componentsadded enhancements4raising awareness: training and outreach25trainingoutreachconclusionbibliographyappendixesaacknowledgmentsbsearch questionsinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summarythe growth of the internet, its widespread use, and its availability as aplatform for database searching has made it possible and practical for the national library of medicine (nlm) to provide internet access for many of its 40plus online databases. in 1997, the nlm decided to provide internet access toits extensive portfolio of toxicology and environmental health databases available on the toxicology data network (toxnet). during the developmentphase of the toxnet web site, the nlm requested that the institute of medicine (iom) conduct a study that would assess the usefulness and effectivenessof this new web site (http://www.toxnet.nlm. nih.gov).the iom committee on internet access to the nlm™s toxicology andenvironmental health databases was formed in early 1998 and was chargedwith seeking input from health professionals on their assessment of the website and with providing recommendations on the refinements necessary to facilitate toxnet database searches. the committee met twice in the course ofthe study and solicited input from a number of health professionals and otherinterested individuals on their experiences with searching the new interface. tomore fully capture the search process and identify the barriers that individualsexperienced, videotaping was used to record a small number of individualsearch sessions. in this way, the search process could be more carefully examined.the committee™s assessment of the current search interface found that improvements were needed to assist the user in all steps of the search process. ofparticular importance are: improved assistance in selecting which of the toxnet databases tosearch;internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. clarification of the options for viewing the search results, including theuse of the customized display option that narrows the display to specific contentareas (e.g., animal toxicity studies, emergency medical treatment, humanhealth effects); and improved mechanisms for providing ﬁhelpﬂ information (e.g., increaseduse of links to the help screens, development of a tutorial, and eventual use ofcontextsensitive help).the committee found that the current search interface is too complex forthe novice but does not offer the specificity and complexity needed by expertsearchers. this disparity indicates the need for more than one search interface,and the committee recommends the development of three levels: quick searchšthis option would consist of a single input box for entering all search terms. examples include the initial screens for alta vista andpubmed. search results would be less refined but would allow for searchingtoxnet information in a manner familiar to web users. stepbystep searchšthis interface would have detailed instructions towalk the searcher through each step of the search process and would be gearedto the novice or infrequent searcher who wants to have substantive retrieval butis not familiar with the databases. advanced searchšthis interface would offer the complexity needed toequal the specificity and the power of the command line interface and couldinclude a number of features such as simple and nested boolean searching,truncation, field searching, phrase searching, and proximity searching.additionally, several other longterm enhancements should be consideredto improve the quality and efficiency of the search process. these improvements include: development of crossdatabase searching capabilities, an online thesaurus and chemical dictionary, detailed search analysis screens, and extensive hypertext links within and among toxnet records and between toxnet records and medline and toxline records.to fully utilize the information contained in the toxnet databases, it iscritically important to integrate toxnet with other nlm databases, particularly medline and toxline. because medline is a standard source ofbiomedical information for health professionals, any links (or other methods of)connecting a bibliographic citation to the relevant information in the toxnetdatabases would greatly enhance the use of the toxnet information andwould provide an added service to medline searchers. it is hoped that theinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nlm will utilize both existing technologies and those in development to integrate the toxnet databases into the broader context of other nlm databases.this can be accomplished in the short term by adding links from pubmed andinternet grateful med to the toxnet web site. a more longterm goal wouldbe to integrate links to toxnet information directly into the bibliographicrecords of medline and toxline. this system of links could be similar tothose now available in pubmed between medline and the national centerfor biotechnology information™s entrez databases.although a goal of the toxnet web site should be to minimize thetraining required to effectively search the databases, a certain amount of training will still be necessary, at least initially. of particular importance are trainthetrainer sessions because participants can then further expand the capabilityby training others. the toxicology information outreach project, nlm™s regional medical libraries and the national network of libraries of medicine,and partners in information access for public health professionals can all beutilized to enhance training efforts. in addition, the committee recommendsthat a webbased tutorial be developed.to maximize outreach efforts and raise awareness of the toxnet website, it is important to take advantage of the many existing organizations,agencies, web sites, and publications that reach the varied audiences for toxicology and environmental health information. because environmental healthconcerns are frequently focused on local and regional issues, it is particularlyimportant to reach regional, state, and local environmental health organizations. outreach can take multiple forms including articles for newsletters, newscolumns, and journals; hypertext links from organization web sites totoxnet; brochures, news releases, and handouts; and presentations, seminars, and exhibits at conferences or meetings.reaching the numerous individuals and groups involved in environmentalhealth issues poses a challenge when resources are limited. however, the internet can go a long way in serving as a costeffective mechanism for marketingthe toxnet web site. key hypertext links within the overall nlm web siteare crucial, including links to toxnet from the homepages of nlm, internetgrateful med, and pubmed. additionally, it is important to have links fromother environmental health web sites to toxnet. although adding a link totoxnet is done at the discretion of the host site, the minimal time and costinvolved in adding a link makes it quite feasible. the challenge is to contact therelevant organizations and acquaint them with the wealth of information available on the toxnet web site.the committee believes that the toxnet databases offer information ofinterest to a broad range of individuals and organizations, and it applauds thespecialized information services division and nlm for expanding access totoxnet through the development of an internet web site. the committee™srecommendations for improving the web site and raising awareness of thisinformation resource are summarized in table es1. the release of thetoxnet web site offers an opportune occasion for raising awareness aboutinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the toxnet databases. the committee hopes that nlm will take advantage ofthis opportunity to broaden its outreach and training efforts. at the same time,it is hoped that the search interface will continue to evolve and that nlm willcontinue to integrate the toxnet information into its overall web site and itsplans for the future. table es1 summary of opportunities for the toxnet web siteshortterm opportunities improved assistance in selecting which of the toxnet databases tosearch clarification of display, print, and email options improved mechanisms for providing help information integration of toxnet into the overall nlm web site through links frompubmed and internet grateful medlongterm opportunities three levels of search interfacesšquick search, stepbystep search, andadvanced search further development of online help and tutorials crossdatabase searching addition of a thesaurus and chemical dictionary detailed search analysis extensive hypertext links within and among toxnet records and between toxnet records and medline and toxline recordstraining and outreach opportunities utilize existing programs (e.g., toxicology information outreach project) maximize outreach activities to raise awareness of the toxnet web site utilize the internet for outreach activities to reach national, regional, state,and local organizations and agenciesinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51introductionthe growth of the internet, its widespread use, and its availability as aplatform for database searching has made it possible and practical for the national library of medicine (nlm) to provide internet access for many of its 40plus online databases. use of the world wide web to search the medlinebibliographic database, through nlm™s pubmed and internet grateful medinterfaces, has seen outstanding success as an access point for health professionals and for the general public.one component of health information that continues to be at the forefrontof health concerns for a wide range of scientists and health professionals, aswell as the general public, is toxicology and environmental health information.to improve access to this kind of information, in early 1998, the nlm begandeveloping an internet web site to provide access to the extensive portfolio oftoxicology and environmental health databases located on nlm™s toxicologydata network (toxnet; table 1.1). this web site (www.toxnet.nlm.nih.gov)is the topic of this report.study backgroundnlm™s work in toxicology and environmental health information datesfrom the mid1960s with the establishment of the toxicology information program, now the toxicology and environmental health information program ortehip. in 1969, the national academy of sciences (nas) began providingadvice and oversight to the expanding toxicological information resources atnlm through the toxicology information program committee (tipcom). forover 25 years, the toxicologists, pharmacologists, chemists, and computerscientists oninternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6table 1.1 overview of the toxnet databasesdatabasesponsoringagenciesfactual orbibliographicsubject contentccrisncifactualresults of carcinogenicity,mutagenicity, tumor production,tumor inhibition studiesdartnlm,niehs,fda, epabibliographicliterature on teratology and manyaspects of reproductive toxicologyemicnlm,epa,niehsbibliographicliterature since 1991 published onsubstances tested for genotoxicactivityemicbacknlm,epa,niehsbibliographicpre1950 through 1991 literature onsubstances tested for genotoxicactivityeticbacknlmbibliographicteratology literature from 1950œ1989, continued by dartgenetoxepafactualresults from expert review of scientific literature on chemicalstested for mutagenicityhsdbnlm(previouslyatsdr)factualpeerreviewed summaries of thetoxicology of potentially hazardous substancesirisepafactualepa health risk and regulatoryinformation, includes carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic riskassessment datartecsnioshfactualtoxic effects including skin andeye irritation, carcinogenicity,mutagenicity, and reproductiveconsequencestriepafactualannual estimated releases of toxicchemicals to the environmentnote: atsdr = agency for toxic substances and disease registry; ccris = chemical carcinogenesis research information system; dart = developmental and reproductive toxicology; emic = environmental mutagen information center; emicback= emic back file; epa = environmental protection agency; eticback = environmental teratology information center backfile; fda = food and drug administration;genetox = genetic toxicology data bank; hsdb = hazardous substances databank; iris = integrated risk information system; nci = national cancer institute;niehs = national institute of environmental health sciences; niosh = national institute for occupational safety and health; rtecs = registry of toxic effects of chemical substances; tri = toxic chemical release inventory.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tipcom provided timely and relevant advice as nlm's toxicology and environmental health program grew. in 1995, nlm™s focus turned toward examining the medical relevance of these databases and the needs of clinicians andother health professionals for this kind of information. nlm requested a studyby the institute of medicine (iom) on those issues, and the resulting report(iom, 1997) addressed future directions for the nlm™s toxicology and environmental health information program to increase its utility and accessibility.major issues addressed by that report were increasing access to and effectiveuse of the toxnet databases by health professionals.in late 1997, nlm decided to make the toxnet databases available viaan internet world wide web site. during the development phase, nlm requested that iom conduct a study that would assess the usefulness and effectiveness of the new web site. the iom committee on internet access to thenlm™s toxicology and environmental health databases was formed in early1998. the committee was charged with seeking input from health professionalson their assessment of the web site and with providing recommendations onthe refinements necessary to facilitate searches of the toxnet web site byhealth professionals, scientists, educators, and the general public. the committee consisted of eleven members with expertise in medical informatics, environmental health, family medicine, poison control, medical librarianship,health communication and education, toxicology, and pharmacology. thecommittee met twice in the course of the study, solicited input from a numberof health professionals and other interested individuals, and invited individualswith different skill levels in database searching to conduct searches ontoxnet using the web interface.input to the committeethe committee sought the input of a number of individuals interested inthe content of the toxnet databases. recognizing that input should be solicited from individuals covering a broad range of expertise, the committee decided to utilize the following list of potential users of toxicology and environmental health information (iom, 1997):ł primary care professionals (e.g., physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners,and physician assistants) and pharmacists;ł specialists in occupational and environmental health (physicians, nurses,nurse practitioners, physician assistants, industrial hygienists, and safety officers);internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8ł emergency medicine and poison control center personnel (e.g., emergency room health professionals, emergency medical technicians, clinical andmedical toxicologists, and specialists in poison information);ł health science librarians and faculty at health professional schools(including medical, nursing, public health, pharmacy, and dental schools);ł environmental health researchers and scientists (including health physicists, epidemiologists, toxicologists, and forensic practitioners);ł patients, the general public, and community organizations (includinglocal emergency planning committees, public librarians, educators, and advocacy and activist organizations); andł health professionals in local public health departments or in state andfederal agencies (e.g., policy advisors, health educators, and public clinic personnel).the committee received input through videotaped search sessions, emailresponses, and by working through searches with colleagues and students. thisinput was structured to provide the committee with feedback and was not designed or conducted as a scientific study. the committee appreciates the inputof the individuals (appendix a) who searched the toxnet databases throughthe new web interface and provided comments on the problems they encountered in the search process as well as their thoughts on improving the searchinterface.videotaping was used to record a small number of individual search sessions to more fully capture the search process and identify the barriers that individuals experienced. in this way, the search process could be more carefullyexamined. participants were invited by committee members and staff to participate in a 30 to 45minute search session. in each session, the participants werefirst asked to fill out a short questionnaire to provide the committee with information on their occupation, use of toxicology and environmental health information, and extent of their prior internet and toxnet experience (appendixb). the participants were then asked to search the toxnet web site to answer two predetermined questions:ł what is the potential for vinyl chloride to cause liver cancer in humans?ł what are the potential health effects of working as a dry cleaner?in addition to searching for information to answer the two questions posedby the committee, most participants searched the toxnet site for informationon topics of their own interest. their queries were frequently related to subjectsthat they were currently studying or to subjects they knew well and wanted toexamine the nature and extent of information in toxnet. topics includedpfiesteria, tobacco smoke, aspartame, estradiol, malathion, and calcium channelblockers.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the computer screen was videotaped during the searches through a vgavideo converter (no audio was recorded), and participants were asked to talkthrough the search process with the iom staff member present. after thesearches were complete, participants were asked to answer questions about eachphase of the search process, to describe barriers to searching, and to suggestopportunities to refine the web site. similar videotaping processes have beenused in other studies as a means to analyze and record human/computer interactions (kushniruk et al., 1996; wang and tenopir, 1998).individuals who agreed to provide input via email were given the sameseries of questions and the web site address and were asked to search thetoxnet databases and provide information on their search experiences.in all 31 individuals provided email or videotaped input to the committee,15 individuals participated in the videotaped search sessions, and 16 peopleprovided email responses. the participant group consisted of 5 occupationaland environmental health professionals, 1 family medicine physician, 3 emergency medicine and poison control personnel, 7 librarians and informationspecialists, 5 environmental health scientists, 3 federal or state public healthprofessionals, 4 health policy professionals, and 3 students. participants included individuals who provided input through the workshop or responded tothe questionnaire in the previous iom study (1997) and other individuals whowere familiar with the current study. when asked about their internet expertise,19 noted they were advanced internet users, 10 rated themselves as having intermediate expertise, and two considered themselves as novices (having basic orminimal internet expertise and experience). sixteen of the individuals hadpreviously searched at least one of the toxnet databases. the search experiences and comments of the participants and the committee are described inchapter 2.committee members also received input on the interface by asking studentsand colleagues to search the databases via the web interface. working througha search with a colleague or student and discussing the search experience washelpful to committee members as they performed searches themselves and assessed the search interface. the committee then discussed the input receivedalong with their own search experiences.overview of the reportthis report presents the committee™s assessment of the toxnet web siteand provides the committee™s recommendations. chapter 2 summarizes theinput received by the committee and the committee™s assessment of the currentweb site. in chapter 3, the committee presents its recommendations for shortand longterm improvements to the toxnet web site, and chapter 4 discusses recommendations for raising awareness of this valuable informationresource. the committee hopes that its recommendations for refining theinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10toxnet web site will enhance its usefulness to health professionals, scientists, and interested members of the general public.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112assessment of the current toxnet web sitethe 1997 iom report on the utility of nlm™s toxicology and environmental health databases identified access and navigation as key barriers. at thattime, the databases were primarily available on a costpersearch basis (costsdepended on the amount of online time and the type of activity) that requiredregistration for an nlm password and provisions for billing. additionally, theprimary method for searching was through a command line interface, whichrequired knowledge of a complex search language and syntax (e.g., fieldnames, print commands). to those who frequently use that interface to searchthe databases (this option is still available), the command line interface can bea powerful tool for search retrieval, but to infrequent or novice searchers, it islargely impenetrable. while preinternet grateful med offered an additionalsearch option for most of the toxnet databasesšone with a more userfriendly interfacešit required purchase and loading of the software.the move to a free, webbased interface represents a major leap forward inproviding access to the toxnet databases. the committee believes that thisset of databases can provide valuable environmental health information to awide range of users. the committee applauds nlm and particularly the staff ofthe specialized information services division (sis) for their commitment toincreasing accessibility to the toxnet databases.the committee understood, as they began their deliberations, that the website was a work in progress, would continue to undergo changes during thecourse of the study, and would continue to evolve once launched on the internetfor public access. for the majority of the time that the committee was testingthe web site and seeking input, the site only provided access to five of the factual databases on toxnet (hsdb, ccris, iris, rtecs, and genetox).search screens have been added more recently for the bibliographic databasesšdart, emic, emicback, and eticšas well as for the tri datainternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12bases. as a result, the committee™s assessment is primarily focused on the factual database search screen. however, a number of the recommendations maybe generalized to the entire toxnet web site.this chapter summarizes the search experiences of the committee and ofthe individuals who provided input to the committee (chapter 1). most individuals searching the toxnet web site experienced similar problems. thoseproblems are highlighted in this chapter™s assessment of the current search interface and a number of refinements are noted.selecting a databaseone of the issues associated with the toxnet system, no matter what theinterface, has been the fact that it contains numerous specialized databases(e.g., dart and eticback that focus on the teratology literature), some ofwhich are familiar only to a focused user community. therefore, the novice orinfrequent user may have difficulty in determining which database to select tobegin searching.in most cases, searchers chose the default database, hsdb, as their initialselection. the committee agrees that hsdb should be the default database because it is has a wider range of information than the other factual toxnetdatabases. additional mechanisms are needed for informing the searcher aboutthe content of each of the databases. while, the current help screens do an excellent job of explaining each database and providing the searcher with information on its purpose and structure, few searchers in the committee™s experience took the time to read the help information (see later discussion). optionsfor improving assistance in database selection include:ł an opening screen with information on each database and guidance inselecting a database;ł a hypertext link to information about each database, integrating the helpinformation into the search screen; orł stepbystep screens that walk the user through the database selectionprocess (see chapter 3).inputting the search strategythe current search form for the factual databases provides one box to enterchemical/other names (e.g., chemical name fragment or registry number) andone box to enter subject terms. the form then provides a list of look foroptions for combining the subject terms and another list of options for displaying results.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there were mixed reactions to this search screen setup. some searchersfound it too complex, preferring one box to enter all search terms (e.g., yahooor pubmed). other searchers wanted to be able to perform complex booleansearching and would have preferred multiple boxes for entering chemicalnames and search terms (e.g., internet grateful med). thus, the committeeconcluded that the current search screen is too complex for simple searches butdoes not offer the specificity and complexity needed for advanced searching.this disparity indicates the need for several levels of search interfaces, frombeginner to advanced, to meet each individual™s search needs (see chapter 3).after entering chemical and/or related subject information, the next decision point in entering the search strategy is to choose how to combine thesearch terms. the current search interface has the following list of look foroptions:all subject terms within record (and)any subject terms within record (or)subject terms as phrase (near)subject terms in same occurrence (same).searchers were unsure about what those choices meant. the options are notlisted from broadest retrieval (or) to narrowest retrieval (near). even individuals familiar with boolean searching were not clear about the near andsame options and related concepts. searchers would have preferred to enterphrases encased by quotations rather than use the term near, which searcheswithin six words. additionally, because of the lack of understanding of the basic structure of the toxnet database records (discussed below), searcherswere not sure to what extent choosing the same option (same occurrence)would narrow their search. as in selecting a database, the help screens did offerexamples and additional information. those clearer explanations should beincorporated into the search screen either as hypertext links or as additionaltext on the search screen itself. the committee makes recommendations inchapter 3 for varied levels of search screens that would assist in addressing andclarifying these issues.displaying the search resultsone of the most difficult problems for searchers was in understanding thesearch resultsšboth how to display the information on the screen and how tointerpret the displayed information. most users (e.g., health professionals andstudents) are more familiar with searching bibliographic databases, particularlymedline, where searches on a chemical retrieve numerous citations. theywere not familiar with the term ﬁrecordﬂ or with the structure of the toxnetfactual database records. each record generally contains all the information inthe database on the chemical organized into numerous fields. searchers found itinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14helpful to have the search terms highlighted in the retrieved text. however,reading the search results on the screen required a great deal of horizontalscrolling on some computer monitors.other problems encountered relate to the five display or view options:chemical listing, exact term match (the default option), full record(s), customized display, or selectable list (all results). searchers did not understand thedifferences among these options. the following three examples illustrate common problems.for searchers who entered the term ﬁvinyl chlorideﬂ in the chemical namefield and kept the default display choice of ﬁexact term matches,ﬂ the retrievaldisplayed the message ﬁyour search found 1 recordﬂ with two lines of text(name and registry number) and the message ﬁend of resultsﬂ (box 2.1). thiswas disconcerting to many searchers who expected numerous ﬁhitsﬂ or records.additionally, many were unclear about why they only received two lines of text.novice searchers felt that the two lines of text retrieved were the extent of theinformation on vinyl chloride in that database (largely because of the message,ﬁend of resultsﬂ). they then proceeded to choose another database in the hopesof retrieving additional information.a second problem presented itself to searchers who chose the display option, ﬁfull recordﬂ and retrieved the first page of the record. they realized therewere multiple pages that followed but would have preferred to know the extentof the record (how many pages or bytes) without paging through the entire record to determine its length. further, most searchers were unfamiliar with thestructure of the record. they were not sure, for example, where human toxicityinformation would be found or if the database contained that information.searchers who confronted this problem would have preferred to have an outlinebox 2.1your search found 1 record in database: hsdbquery: ((name) vinyl chloride)page 11  hsdbname of substance vinyl chloridecas registry number 75014end of resultsinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the record or a hierarchical display of the major fields with hypertext links tosections of the search results.the third, displayrelated issue came up with searchers who were sent tothe middle of the record. these searchers frequently searched on both thechemical name and a subject term (e.g., vinyl chloride and liver cancer) andchose the display option ﬁexact term match.ﬂ in hsdb, the retrieved information on that search begins in the vinyl chloride record in the field on storageconditions, followed by a field for emergency medical treatment information,and then information on clinical effects. the searchers found this informationuseful in answering the search question, but they were not sure about the context of the information or what other information was available in the record.searchers were pleased to find or be told about the ﬁcustomized displayﬂoption; they felt that this option solved many of the problems described abovebecause it provided an overview of the record content and presented them withuseful options to narrow their search (e.g., human health effects, animal toxicity studies, emergency medical treatment). changing the default display optionto ﬁcustomized displayﬂ or presenting an outline or hierarchy of the databaserecord would be useful in familiarizing searchers with the content and structureof the database. ﬁcustomized displayﬂ is a valuable option that should be mademore visible to the searcher as most searchers did not understand all that thisoption has to offer.modifying the searchonce the initial search was performed and the searcher had assessed theresults, there was frequently a need to modify the search. it was clear to searchers that they could either return to the search screen by way of the back button on the web browser or by selecting the modify search button in theleft frame.several searchers wanted to work with only the subset of records they hadpreviously retrieved to further narrow the search results. currently, the searchcriteria can be modified, however, each search is run anew on the entire database. this problem is in part a function of the internet and the difficulties involved in storing sets for each search that can then be combined or manipulated(chu, 1998). further refinements are needed to allow searchers to have increased specificity in modifying their search (e.g., pubmed™s advanced search)and to work with stored sets of search results.printing or downloading the search resultsthe final step of the search process involved saving the search results inhard copy or online. printing the search results presented problems becauseinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16each page had to be viewed and printed individually. searchers would havepreferred the option to print specific fields or to print the entire search result.this is a problem of which the nlm staff is aware. however, it is difficult toaddress because it is largely a function of the database file structure. having thecapacity to print all or a specified part of the record would be optimal.searchers utilized the email option once they found that it was available.however, because it is currently listed under the redisplay options, it was notreadily apparent. it would be preferable to have more obvious buttons or linksat the top and bottom of the screen for displaying, retrieving via email, orprinting the search results. additionally, a download option (save to disk) wasrequested by many searchers.other issuesone of the advantages of the web is that it facilitates feedback. currentlythe toxnet web site offers searchers the opportunity to send an email totoxnet user support to discuss problems, request assistance, or providecomments or suggestions. this feedback is important and can be supplementedon occasion by seeking searcher input on specific features of the toxnet website.the use of frames, a topic of ongoing discussion (siegel, 1997), was an issue with a number of the searchers. the committee felt that frames did not addto the functionality of the toxnet web site. the left frame, containing options for modifying the search, new search, online help, and searches on otherdatabases, currently remains relatively static once the search has begun. depending on the computer monitor, the size of the right frame was limited andrequired constant horizontal scrolling to read the search results on screen.if a design decision to retain the frames is made, then they should be usedto enhance the site. examples of possible frame uses include providing contextsensitive help (chapter 3), listing the major sections of the database record(e.g., toxicity and biomedical effects, pharmacology), and providing links tojump to specific parts of the record. however, in the committee™s view, the sitewould be better served by removing the frames and adding buttons and links asneeded.other factors addressed by the searchers included positive experiences withthe response time of the search and a few problems with connections to theweb site. the move of the toxnet system in may, 1998 to a new hardwareplatform appears to the committee to have gone quite smoothly, and the newhardware system seems to have speeded up the search processing.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.173improving the toxnet web sitein addition to the shortterm improvements to the toxnet web site discussed in chapter 2, the committee focused on longterm goals for toxnet.this chapter discusses the committee™s recommendations for integratingtoxnet into the overall plan for nlm™s databases on the internet and thenlooks more specifically at the four major components of the toxnet web site:databases, search interface, educational components (i.e., help screens, onlinetutorials), and added enhancements to assist the user (e.g., thesaurus, linksbetween databases). beyond improving the web site, the committee believes itis crucial for nlm to increase awareness of the toxnet resources on the internet, and this issue is discussed in chapter 4.integrating toxnet into the overall nlm web siteto fully utilize the information contained in the toxnet databases, it iscritically important to integrate toxnet with other nlm databases, particularly medline and toxline. since medline is a standard source of biomedical information for health professionals, any links (or other methods) connecting a bibliographic citation to the relevant information in the toxnetdatabases would greatly enhance the use of the toxnet information andwould provide an added service to the medline searcher.the incredible pace of change in technology makes it potentially imprudent to speculate about distant goals for the nlm web site. however, thecommittee believes it is necessary to include the toxnet databases in anylongterm planning. one potential goal may be to provide a single entry pointinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18for searching all of the nlm databases. searchers would not be required toknow the specifics of each database to determine which one would best answertheir information queries; they would only need to become proficient in usingone interface. the committee did not explore this option in depth but discussedit as a distant goal that may be reached after a number of transitional steps arecompleted.in the near future, the committee urges nlm to utilize both existing technologies and those in development to integrate the toxnet databases into thebroader context of other nlm databases. this can be accomplished in the shortterm by adding links from pubmed and internet grateful med to the toxnetweb site. a more longterm goal would be to integrate links to toxnet information directly into the bibliographic records of medline and toxline.for example, medline abstracts on the health effects of vinyl chloride wouldhave links to the factual information on the chemical in the toxnet databases. such a system of links could be similar to the extensive linkages betweenmedline and the national center for biotechnology information™s entrez*databases now available in pubmed. additionally, future potential linkagescould include links among the factual data in toxnet, the bibliographic information in toxline and medline, and chemical structure images, as wellas the chemical identification files which include full records on the chemicalsynonyms (e.g., the chemid database).databasestoxnet is not a uniform set of databases because it has evolved, overtime, from multiple sources and for a variety of purposes. this complexity is achallenge to the designers of the toxnet web site. they need to create aninterface that masks differences and gives searchers both consistency and continuity in searching while allowing accessibility to the unique information ineach database.there are factors inherent in the structure of the toxnet databases thatcurrently limit the options for the internet interface. one example is the displayoption. it would be preferable for the displayed results to state exactly howmany pages are in the entire record and which page the display is currently on(e.g., ﬁpage 2 out of 6ﬂ). however, this change will require alterations to thedatabase file structure and is considered a longterm goal. *the national center for biotechnology information™s integrated database system,entrez, allows retrieval of molecular biology data and bibliographic citations throughthe linkages of databases including pubmed, dna sequences, protein sequences,genome and choromosome mapping data, and threedimensional protein structures.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee is concerned in the long term with the subject coverage ofthe toxnet system. although the committee is aware that some of thetoxnet databases are also available through commercial vendors, thecommittee urges the relevant federal agencies to continue the availability oftheir databases through toxnet. the free access available through thetoxnet web site will provide numerous audiences (e.g., students, communityorganizations) with access to this information that may not otherwise be available. if databases, such as nioshtic, become closed files and do not add newinformation, coverage of topics such as industrial hygiene and exposure assessment need to be expanded in hsdb and potentially in toxline as well.search interfacechapter 2 noted a number of specific improvements to the current searchinterface. however, it is difficult to have a onesizefitsall approach to databasesearching, and as expressed in the following quote, different types of searchinterfaces are needed to assist individuals with varying levels of expertise.the great law of usability: a user with appropriate knowledge or expertisein the area of application but having no experience with the system should beable to use it effectively without assistance or instruction.the lesser law of usability: the system should not substantially impede orinterfere with efficient and sophisticated use by experienced users(constantine and lockwood, 1997).nlm™s staff has recognized this need and has indicated that plans for additional search interfaces are under consideration. the committee has discussedthe varying audiences that could potentially use the toxnet databases andrecommends the development of three levels of search interfaces. the audiences served may vary in both the depth of knowledge of the subject and depthof expertise in database searching. the committee acknowledges that each websearch engine (e.g., pubmed, yahoo, alta vista) utilizes a different combination of search features and urges nlm to examine the tradeoffs of each feature. as noted earlier, an implicit criteria for selecting search features should bethe aligning of the toxnet interface with other nlm internet search interfaces so that the searcher can easily search all nlm databases on the internet.quick searchthe most basic interface would be a simple search or quick search option,which would consist of one input box for entering all search terms. examplesinclude the initial screens for alta vista and pubmed. this option could servethe needs of a number of different types of searchers, including new searchersinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20who want to initially explore the toxnet databases and students or otherswho have a simple query. the quick search option should support simpleboolean searching. the subsequent screens that display the search resultsshould provide simplified instructions and links to the other levels of searchinterfaces for more indepth searches. this option would work best as a onesearch that searches all of the toxnet databases at one time. the committeeenvisioned the quick search as being directly displayed on the toxnethomepage. the other two interfaces described below would be briefly describedon the homepage with links to the search screens for each interface.stepbystep searcha second type of search interface would be the stepbystep search, whichwould have detailed instructions to ﬁwalkﬂ the searcher through each step of thesearch process. this search level would be geared to the novice or infrequentsearcher who wants to have substantive retrieval but is not familiar with thedatabases. the first step of selecting the databases would clearly explain thestrengths and limitations of each database, the types of information available,and the types of queries best answered by each database. at the next step ofentering the search terms, the screens would explain all of the options for boolean searching and narrowing the search strategy (such as through the use ofthe customized display option). explanations would be provided for each of thedifferent display, printing, and downloading options. explanatory pages couldbe customized to each of the toxnet databases to allow for the most precisesearching possible. as the technological capabilities to handle natural languagesearching evolve, it will be important to add this component to the interface.advanced searchthe third level interface would be for the advanced search and would offerthe complexity needed to equal the specificity and the power of the commandline interface. in presentations to the committee regarding the web site, nlm™sstaff indicated that future plans include an advanced search screen. this interface may be structured like the internet grateful med interface, with multipleinput boxes for complex searching, or like the pubmed advanced search option, with simple but powerful capabilities. examples of search features to incorporate into this interface include:ł simple and nested boolean searching;ł chemical name fragment searching;ł field searching;internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ł fuzzy searching to compensate for typing and spelling errors;ł range and ordering options for numeric and date fields;ł truncation, including wild card, left, and right truncation to allow forvariations of a term, prefixes, suffixes, and characters within a word;ł phrase searching;ł proximity searching; andł numeric operators.educational componentsthe use of the internet opens up multiple opportunities for providing theeducational information that searchers need. in the case of the toxnet databases, two types of educational components are needed: those that provide further details on searching the toxnet databases to allow searchers to improvetheir search skills and those that provide further information on the subject oftoxicology and environmental health to allow searchers to better understand theinformation they are retrieving.online helpalthough there is a wealth of useful and relevant material in the currentonline help screens of the toxnet web site, it does not appear that they willbe fully utilized in their current format. one barrier for using the help information on this web site may be the term ﬁonline help.ﬂ searchers frequently didnot click the online help button because they thought it would have information that would be useful only for troubleshooting problems rather than forproactively assisting the searcher in planning and executing a search.the most useful format for help information would be contextsensitivehelp that would provide detailed assistance on the specific problem encountered. this approach may be considered a longterm goal because it will requiredetailed programming. a shortterm approach to solving this problem would beto integrate links to the help information directly into the search screens. forexample, the phrase ﬁdisplay results asﬂ or ﬁlook forﬂ could become a link tothe help information on the display options or boolean operators already available. creative use of links to the help information is vital to assist searchers innavigating through the toxnet search process.tutorialsthe specialized information services division has invested in the development of toxicology tutor (http://sis.nlm.nih.gov/toxtutr1). this webbasedtutorial offers an introductory collegelevel approach to the basic principles ofinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22toxicology. the committee believes that this tutorial serves an important purpose and urges that it be maintained and updated.additionally, the committee believes that an investment should be made ina tutorial that will introduce the toxnet databases and explain the stepsneeded to search the web site. although one of the goals of developing multiple levels of search interfaces, as described previously, is to assist the searcherat the time of the search process, a tutorial is frequently the best approach forproviding additional search assistance and serving outreach purposes (chapter4). thetutorial can serve as a readymade demonstration tool for instructors, librarians, community leaders, and others who want to increase awareness of thetoxnet databases and the information that is available. examples used in asearch tutorial should feature realistic scenarios and demonstrate searchingboth by chemical name and by health effect.linksthe committee believes that hypertext links on the toxnet web site toweb sites outside nlm should be used primarily to provide the searcher withaccess to other environmental health databases that are comparable to thetoxnet databases (e.g., the agency for toxic substances and disease registry™s hazdat [hazardous substance release/health effects], the environmental protection agency™s envirofacts, and the environmental defensefund™s chemical scorecard). additionally, links to web sites that provide educational information on environmental health issues should be considered andevaluated. chapter 4 discusses links from other web sites to toxnet.added enhancementsonce a number of the shortterm improvements to the toxnet web siteare implemented, several enhancements should be considered to improve thequality and efficiency of the search process. as internet capabilities and technologies improve, the committee hopes that the toxnet databases will beincluded in all enhancements.crossdatabase searching in toxnetas described previously as a distant goal for all the nlm databases, itwould be preferable for the user not to face the dilemma of choosing a database,internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but, rather, have the capability to search all of the databases at once. this samegoal of crossdatabase searching may be achieved first across the toxnetsystem. since the toxnet databases contain the common field of the chemical registry number, it has been possible in the menusearching mode tosearch several databases at once. it is important for crossdatabase searching toincorporate features to allow the searcher to eliminate duplicate records and toselect only the records that are unique (e.g., choose those records in dart thatare not in medline). crossdatabase searching is under consideration by thenlm staff as a future step for the toxnet web site, and the committee urgesefforts towards this goal.thesaurus and chemical dictionaryinherent difficulties in searches involving chemical names include thecomplexity of chemical terms and the numerous synonyms involved. thecommittee encourages all attempts to utilize internet technology to minimizethese complexities. nlm™s chemid database links the registry number to themultiple synonyms for that chemical and will be a useful feature when incorporated into the toxnet web site. to enhance toxnet searching to meet theneeds of health professionals and others, it will be important to include as manycommon term and brand name synonyms as possible.the committee urges the exploration of ways to utilize the umls (unifiedmedical language system) metathesaurus for searching the toxnet databases. this may involve expansion of the metathesaurus to further includechemical and environmental health vocabularies. since the toxnet recordsdo not contain mesh (nlm medical subject headings) terms, it is particularlyimportant for the toxnet searcher to be able to locate synonymous terms,identify hierarchical relationships among chemical terms, and see relationshipsamong subject terms. incorporation of the metathesaurus in toxnet, as currently available in internet grateful med and pubmed, would be an eventualgoal.search analysisa further enhancement to the toxnet web site would be a feature,similar to the pubmed and internet grateful med details screens, that providesan analysis of the search conducted. information is included on the number ofhits or citations found for each query term, and details are given on how thesystem translated the search terms. an analysis may offer suggestions for expanding or narrowing the search results and may feature an option for weighting the various search terms and synonyms (i.e., allowing the searcher to specify that one term is more important than another) such as that available in altavista™s refine option.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24hypertext links among recordsthe use of hypertext links among medline, toxline, toxnet, andother records can provide the searcher with additional information and paths topursue to locate related information without constructing a new search strategy.this use of linkages was discussed above as a way to integrate toxnet intothe overall nlm web site. linkages to consider include:ł links from the citations referenced in the toxnet database records tothe bibliographic records in medline or toxline;ł links from medline or toxline abstracts on specific chemicals tothe toxnet records on those chemicals;ł links among records for related chemicals; andł links from medline, toxline, or toxnet records to relatedchemical dictionary records.the committee believes that the use of the internet as a platform for thetoxnet databases opens up numerous possibilities for enhancing their accessibility and utility. it is hoped that resources will be made available to thespecialized information services division so that these opportunities can beexplored and implemented. further, as technology evolves, it is hoped thattoxnet will be integrated into plans for the overall nlm web site and included in the use of new internet technologies at the library.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254raising awareness: training and outreachthe toxnet web site offers information that is useful to a broad range ofhealth professionals, researchers, community organizations, and other individuals and groups. moving toxnet from a feebased, commandline systemto free access and searching via the internet greatly enhances accessibility ofthe information and offers the opportunity for expanding the audience. thecommittee hopes that nlm will take the opportunity presented by the newtoxnet web site to raise awareness about this valuable information resource.the goals for training overlap with the goals of an extended outreach programšto spread awareness of the toxnet web site and increase use of theinformation. to effectively increase training and outreach efforts for toxnet,additional staff are needed by the specialized information services division.trainingalthough a goal of the toxnet web site should be to minimize thetraining required to search the databases, a certain amount of training will stillbe necessary, at least initially. of particular importance are trainthetrainersessions because participants can then expand the capability to train others. thetoxicology information outreach project, nlm™s regional medical librariesand the national network of libraries of medicine, and partners in information access for public health professionals can all be utilized to enhancetraining efforts. in addition, the committee recommends a webbased tutorial bedeveloped.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26toxicology information outreach projectthe division of specialized information services began the toxicologyinformation outreach project with historically black colleges and universities(hbcus) in 1991. this project initially provided hardware, software, training,and access to the toxnet databases at nine hbcus. since then, the projecthas expanded its training focus and, in joint training sessions with the agencyfor toxic substances and disease registry (atsdr), has provided training ontoxicology and environmental health information resources for over 44 hbcus.it is hoped that future plans for this outreach project will include sessions thatinform instructors and students about the new toxnet web site and providetrainthetrainer sessions.regional medical libraries and thenational network of libraries of medicinenlm works with and through an extensive regional and local medical library network. the eight regional medical libraries (rmls) and the over4,500 medical libraries in the national network of libraries of medicine(nnlm) provide an outstanding resource for outreach and training opportunities. utilization of this network can be enhanced by training sessions for rmland nnlm librarians and by focused funding to rmls that would provide resources for exhibiting the toxnet web site at regional and local environmental health meetings.partners in information access for public health professionalsa cooperative project has been developed among nlm, the association ofstate and territorial health officials (astho), the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), the national association of county and city healthofficials (naccho), and the national network of libraries of medicine(nnlm) (partners in information access, 1998). the goal of this project, partners in information access for public health professionals, is to provide publichealth professionals with access to the information resources they need. specific activities to date have included regional training programs on publichealth information resources, development of distance learning materials, anddevelopment of a web site and links among the sponsoring organizations. thispartnership offers the opportunity to reach a group of health professionals whointernet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.work directly on environmental health issues. the committee believes thattraining on toxnet is a natural fit with the mission of this partnership andhopes a number of activities and links will be developed and implemented.tutorialsas mentioned in chapter 3, it is important to have a readymade tutorial,available via the internet, that can be utilized by teachers, librarians, individuals making presentations to community groups, and others. this tutorial couldoffer several scenarios focused on realworld environmental health issues andcould demonstrate the types of information available in the toxnet databases. such a tutorial would make it easy for community groups, health professionals, and others to put together a presentation and would be a valuable toolin outreach and training efforts.outreachto maximize outreach efforts and raise awareness of the toxnet website, it is important to take advantage of the many existing organizations,agencies, web sites, and publications that reach the varied audiences for toxicology and environmental health information. because environmental healthconcerns are frequently focused on local and regional issues, it is particularlyimportant to reach regional, state, and local environmental health organizations. outreach can take multiple forms including articles for newsletters, newscolumns, and journals (including internet journals); hypertext links from theorganization™s web site to toxnet; brochures, news releases, and handouts;and presentations, seminars, and exhibits at conferences or meetings.reaching the numerous individuals and groups involved in environmentalhealth issues poses a challenge when resources are limited. however, the internet can go a long way in serving as a costeffective mechanism for marketingthe toxnet web site. as mentioned in chapter 3, key hypertext linkageswithin the overall nlm web site are crucial, including links to toxnet fromthe homepages of nlm, internet grateful med, and pubmed. additionally, it isimportant to have links from other environmental health web sites totoxnet. although adding a link to toxnet is done at the discretion of thehost site, the minimal time and cost involved in adding a link makes it quitefeasible. the challenge is to contact the relevant organizations and acquaintthem with the wealth of information available on the toxnet web site. inaddition to the following bulleted potential linkages, nlm should considerasking all web sites that link to pubmed or internet grateful med to add a linkto the toxnet web site.the committee did not make an exhaustive list of all of the organizationsthat should be contacted for outreach efforts, but it did start a list that can beinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28expanded. outreach efforts can be targeted to reach each group as most appropriate, either via the internet, printed materials, presentations, or exhibits. organizations to involve in outreach efforts for toxnet include:ł academic and public libraries (nlm has recently announced a pilot project with 37 public libraries across the united states to increase awareness ofinternet health resources [http://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/pressreleases/access.html]);ł high schools and universities;ł federal agencies involved directly in environmental and occupationalhealth issues and specific programs within those agencies, such as the environmental protection agency (epa), agency for toxic substances and diseaseregistry (atsdr), national institute for occupational safety and health(niosh), national institute of environmental health sciences (niehs), occupational safety and health administration (osha), and epa™s environmentaljustice advisory council and advisory subcommittees;ł state and local environmental and public health agencies, the environmental council of states;ł nonprofit organizations and networks (e.g., environmental defensefund, national wildlife federation, league of women voters, nature conservancy, righttoknow network, sierra club);ł industry and related organizations (e.g., chemical manufacturers association, pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america); andł professional associations (e.g., american academy of clinical toxicology, american academy of pediatrics, american association of occupationalhealth nurses, american association of poison control centers, american barassociation, american college of emergency physicians, american college ofmedical toxicology, american college of occupational and environmentalmedicine, american industrial hygiene association, american public healthassociation, association of occupational and environmental clinics, association of teachers of preventive medicine, national science teachers association, society of environmental journalists).conclusionthe committee believes that the toxnet databases offer a wealth of information to a broad range of individuals and organizations, and it applauds thespecialized information services division and nlm for expanding access totoxnet through the development of an internet web site. there are a number of short and longterm changes to the toxnet web site that, if implemented, will increase the ease of searching the databases and will increase thesearcher™s efficiency in retrieving the information he or she requires.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.establishment of the toxnet web site offers an opportunity to raiseawareness about the toxnet databases. the committee hopes that nlm willtake advantage of this opportunity to broaden its outreach and training efforts.at the same time, it is hoped that the search interface will continue to evolveand that nlm will continue to integrate the toxnet information into itsoverall web site and its plans for the future.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bibliographyalberico r, micco m. 1990. expert systems for reference and information retrieval.westport, ct: meckler.baecker rm, grudin j, buxton was, greenberg s. 1995. readings in humanœcomputer interaction: toward the year 2000. san francisco: morgan kaufmannpublishers.chu h. 1998. internet search services vs. online database services. proceedings of thenineteenth national online meeting. medford, nj: information today. pp. 69œ75.constantine l, lockwood l. 1997. inspecting web designs for usability. presentationfor web design and development ™97. washington, dc. october 1œ3, 1997.hartson hr. 1997. trends in humancomputer interaction research and development. in:national research council. more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nation™s information infrastructure. washington, dc: national academy press. pp. 221œ240.hix d, hartson hr. 1993. developing user interfaces: ensuring usability throughproduct and process. new york: john wiley.iom (institute of medicine). 1997. toxicology and environmental health informationresources: the role of the national library of medicine. washington, dc: national academy press.kushniruk aw, patel vl, cimino jj, barrows ra. 1996. cognitive evaluation of theuser interface and vocabulary of an outpatient information system. in: cimino jj,ed. proceedings of the american medical informatics association annual fallsymposium. philadelphia, pa: hanley & belfus. pp. 22œ26.national library of medicine. 1998. from 7 million to 70 million searches. gratefullyyours marchœapril 1998.national research council. more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces tothe nation™s information infrastructure. washington, dc: national academypress.partners in information access. 1998. partners in information access for public healthprofessionals. [world wide web document]. url http://www.nnlm.nlm.nih.gov/partners/ (accessed july 1998).siegel d. 1997. creating killer web sites, 2nd edition. indianapolis, in: hayden books.wang p, tenopir c. 1998. an exploratory study of users™ interaction with world wideweb resources: information skills, cognitive styles, affective states, and searchingbehaviors. proceedings of the nineteenth national online meeting. medford, nj:information today. pp. 445œ454.internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix aacknowledgmentsthe committee expresses its appreciation to the following individuals whoprovided input to the committee.raymond agiusuniversity of edinburghedinburgh, scotlandsanjay baligainstitute of medicinewashington, dcgeorges c. benjaminmaryland department of healthand mental hygienebaltimore, mdmaryanne blakeuniversity of washingtonseattle, wakeith burkhartcentral pennsylvania poisoncenterhershey, padale campernational institute for occupationalsafety and healthcincinnati, ohmiriam davissilver spring, mdsusan fourtnational research councilwashington, dcgiuliano francouniversity of modenamodena, italygregory fulcowashington, dcherbert garrisoneast carolina universitygreenville, ncinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kate louise gottfriedu.s. department of health andhuman serviceswashington, dcbuck grissomagency for toxic substances anddisease registryatlanta, galyla hernandezinstitute of medicinewashington, dcmonty herrlawrence livermore nationallaboratorylivermore, cadenise laflammewashington state department ofhealtholympia, wabarbara landrethnational institute for occupationalsafety and healthmorgantown, wvnina mathesonjohns hopkins universitybaltimore, mdjanet normandyu.s. department of energybethesda, mdangela nunleyhoward university college ofmedicinewashington, dcpeter orriscook county hospitalchicago, ilmichael pahnwashington, dckim richardsonhoward universitywashington, dcdiane rodillhealth resources and servicesadministrationwashington, dcrose ann solowayamerican association of poisoncontrol centerswashington, dcchristina sullivanwashington universityst. louis, moanthony surudauniversity of utahsalt lake city, utcarrie ingalls szlyknational committee for qualityassurancewashington, dcjames m. vailamerican petroleum institutewashington, dcpeter waldarco medical departmentlos angeles, caken wallaceuniversity of minnesotaduluth, mninternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bsearch questionspresearch questions1. please check the one category below that best describes you:primary health care professionalhealth professional specializing in occupational/environmental healthemergency medicine or poison control specialisthealth sciences librarianenvironmental health researcher or scientistpatient or community organization memberlocal, state, or federal public health professionalother (please specify)2. your age 3. how would you describe your level of experience with the internet? none/basicintermediate advanced4. please indicate your online searching experience.no online searchinggeneral world wide web search engines (e.g., yahoo, alta vista)medline primarily but occasionally other online databasesmedline onlynumerous online databasesinternet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5.if you use databases to locate toxicological and environmental healthinformation, which ones do you use? please check all that apply.i haven™t used databases to find toxicological/environmental health informationmedline through internet grateful medmedline through pubmedmedline through other sourcestoxlinenioshticpoisindex/tomestoxnet databases:ccrishsdbgenetoxirisrtecsother (please specify)6. please check the main ways you use toxicological/environmental healthinformation. please check all that apply.patient careteaching/educationclinical researchpolicy decisionsbasic researchrisk analysisworker safetyretrieve information for others (e.g., library searching)concerns about my family™s healthconcerns about my healthconditions in my workplacecommunity/advocacyschool workconditions in my area/neighborhoodother (please specify)internet access to the national library of medicine's toxicology and environmental health databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.search scenariosplease conduct searches of the new interface to answer questions 1 and 2below. also conduct a third search using a toxicology/environmental questionof your own choosing. as you search, please explain to the iom staff memberwhat you are doing and note any problems you are experiencing or ideas youhave on improving the search interface. thanks!1. what is the potential for vinyl chloride to cause liver cancer in humans?2. what are the potential health effects of working as a dry cleaner?3. your choice: please write down your search question.postsearch questions1. the problems i experienced were (please be as specific as possible):general problemspecific details selecting a database composing a searchstatement or searchstrategy displaying the searchresults on the screen modifying/rewording thesearch strategy printing search results evaluating the searchresults other