detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/6451applying advanced information systems to ports and waterwaysmanagement66 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309063807 | doi 10.17226/6451committee on maritime advanced information systems, national research councilapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.applying advanced information systems toports and waterways managementcommittee on maritime advanced information systemsmarine boardcommission on engineering and technical systemsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.1999applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard forappropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approvedby a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences, thenational academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance ofscience and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the chartergranted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federalgovernment on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the nationalacademy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in itsadministration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciencesthe responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of thenational academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to securethe services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matterspertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the nationalacademy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and,upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i.shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 toassociate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõs purposes of furtheringknowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policiesdetermined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services tothe government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr.william a. wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.this study was supported by contract dtma9194g00003 between the national academy ofsciences and the maritime administration of the u.s. department of transportation. any opinions,findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s)and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for theproject.international standard book number 0309063809limited copies are available from marine board, commission on engineering and technical systems, national research council, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., washington, d.c. 20418.additional copies are available from national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w.,lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washingtonmetropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.educopyright 1999 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiicommittee on maritime advanced information systemsh. thomas kornegay (chair), port of houston authority, houston, texaswilliam a. wallace (vice chair), rensselaer polytechnic institute, troy, new yorkanne d. aylward, volpe center, cambridge, massachusettswilliam o. gray, gray maritime company, darien, connecticutjerrol larrieu, port of new orleans, louisianarobert g. moore, coastwatch, inc., vashon, washingtonjohn s. niederhauser, puget sound pilots, seattle, washingtonf.d.r. posthumus, sealand service, inc., elizabeth, new jerseysteve valerius, hollywood marine, inc., houston, texase. cameron williams, massachusetts maritime academy, buzzardõs bayrussell woodill, council of american master mariners, inc., charleston, south carolinaliaisons of sponsoring agencieswilliam a. bergen, u.s. army corps of engineers, washington, d.c.millington lockwood, u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.michael onder, u.s. department of transportation, washington, d.c.john pisani, u.s. department of transportation, washington, d.c.j. michael sollosi, u.s. coast guard, washington, d.c.marine board liaisonbernhard j. abrahamsson, independent consultant, superior, wisconsinmarine board staffpeter a. johnson, director, marine boardcarla moore, administrative assistant (until july 1996)delphine glaze, administrative assistant (july 1996 to may 1997)theresa m. fisher, administrative assistant (from may 1997)gary baham, consultantlaura ost, consultantapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.marine boardjames m. coleman (chair), nae, louisiana state university, baton rougejerry a. aspland (vice chair), the california maritime academy, vallejobernhard j. abrahamsson, consultant, superior, wisconsinlarry p. atkinson, old dominion university, norfolk, virginiapeter f. bontadelli, california department of fish and game, sacramentolillian c. borrone, nae, port authority of new york and new jerseybiliana cicinsain, university of delaware, newarksylvia a. earle, deep ocean exploration and research, oakland, californiabilly l. edge, texas a&m university, college stationjohn w. farrington, woods hole oceanographic institution, woods hole, massachusettsmartha grabowski, lemoyne college and rensselaer polytechnic institute, troy, new yorkr. keith michel, herbert engineering, san francisco, californiajerome h. milgram, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgejames d. murff, exxon production research company, houston, texassteven t. scalzo, foss maritime company, seattle, washingtonmalcolm l. spaulding, university of rhode island, narragansettrod vulovic, sealand service, inc., charlotte, north carolinae. g. òskipó ward, texas a&m university, college stationstaffpeter a. johnson, directordana caines, financial associatesusan garbini, senior staff officertheresa m. fisher, administrative assistantdonna henry, project assistantivapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vrecent advances in information technology could greatlyimprove the safety and efficiency of the u.s. maritime industry and the daily operations of ports and waterways.advanced maritime information systems, singly or in combination, could ameliorate many problems faced by mariners if economic and other barriers to their implementationcould be overcome. improvements are already evident inother nations that have invested heavily in ports, advancedmaritime information systems, and supporting infrastructures, leaving the united states at a growing disadvantage.the committee on maritime advanced information systems was established under the auspices of the marine board ofthe national research council to identify systems and theirinfrastructures that could promote safe and effective vessel transits through u.s. ports. in 1996, the committee released aninterim report on a variety of issues related to the u.s. coastguardõs vessel traffic services program that set the stage forstudies of additional safety and waterways management systems, as well as issues related to the efficiency of maritimecommerce and the movement of cargo through u.s. ports.in this final report, the committee has attempted to accomplish the following tasks:¥identify ways that advanced maritime information systems could ameliorate current shortfalls and maintainor improve environmental protection and waterwaysafety¥describe how those systems could minimize the costsand problems of adapting to changes in transportationand contribute to maintaining the nationõs competitiveposition¥provide a vision of the future showing how advancedinformation management systems could enhance vesselsafety and waterway efficiencyprefaceafter collecting a substantial amount of background information from the literature and stakeholders,1 the committee, with sponsor concurrence, decided to focus on information systems that promote navigation safety and improvevessel traffic management. improvements in the systemsoffer the greatest benefits for improving u.s. port operations. the committee recognized that information systemsthat promote transportation efficiency are also important, butmany effective systems are already in use or are under development, primarily in the private sector, to meet rigorouscommercial demands for efficiency and customer service.the committee assessed these systems only insofar as theycontribute to maritime safety. the committee also understands the critical role of information systems and information mapping in the context of intermodal transportation eventhough limitations of time and resources prevented the committee from focusing on this area.eleven of the original 15 committee members carried outthis second phase of the study. members were selected fortheir scientific, technical, economic, policy, and practicalexpertise. committee members include users of maritimeinformation systems, developers of technologies and systems, specialists in information architecture, individuals withexpertise in key sectors of the maritime industry, and otherstakeholders in port operations. biographies of committeemembers are provided in appendix a. the committeeõswork was facilitated by liaisons from the sponsoring agencies and the marine board.the committee met eight times during the twoyear period of this study. individual committee members or subgroups visited 10 u.s. ports and several foreign ports whereadvanced information technology is used to enhance themovement and safety of vessel traffic and cargo handlingoperations. since the publication of its interim report, thecommittee has held three meetings and two meetings of asubgroup, one in charleston, south carolina, and one in seattle, washington, to investigate existing information systems and identify critical needs for improvements orchanges. the information collected by the subgroup and1 in this context, a stakeholder is a person or group with a vested interestin a project, proposal, or venture.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viprefaceother background material are presented in the appendices tothe report.the committee received substantial assistance from a number of federal, state, and local agencies, as well as from privatecompanies. the committee would particularly like to thankthe following federal liaisons for providing essential data andadvice: michael sollosi, u.s. coast guard; frederick ganjonand millington lockwood, national oceanic and atmosphericadministration; john pisani, maritime administration; andmichael onder, u.s. department of transportation. in addition, the following experts made valuable presentations to thecommittee: gordon fink, its america; john allen, sealandcorp.; william habeck, tie logistics, inc.; roger nortillo,maher terminals; brian fitzgibbon, atlantic tonnage center; timothy huckbody, maersk, inc.; capt. richard softe,puget sound marine exchange; mark walker, microsoft, inc.;cdr david mckenzie, u.s. coast guard, puget sound; robert pavia, national oceanic and atmospheric administration,seattle; stan norman, washington office of marine safety;joseph nortz, washington state ferries; douglas ward,american president lines; and janice granberg, port of seattle. these individuals and many others contributed to thecompleteness and quality of this report.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspective and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrcõsreport review committee. the purpose of this independentreview is to provide candid and critical comments that willassist the institution in making the published report as soundas possible and to ensure that the report meets institutionalstandards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:bernhard j. abrahamsson, consultant; larry p. atkinson,old dominion university; john p. basilotto, texas transportation institute; peter f. bontadelli, california department of fish and game; martha grabowski, lemoyne college and rensselaer polytechnic institute; donald g. iselin,u.s. navy, retired; warren g. leback, consultant; and jamesg. wenzel, marine development associates, inc.while the individuals listed above have provided constructive comments and suggestions, it must be emphasized thatresponsibility for the final content of this report rests entirelywith the authoring committee and the institution.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiacronyms....................................................................................................................ixexecutive summary................................................................................................11need for improved navigation information systems................4barriers to expanding information systems, 5historical perspective on u.s. ports, 6trends in maritime transportation, 10summary, 11references, 112federal, state, and private roles...........................................................13relationship between safety and efficiency, 13growing importance of nonfederal stakeholders, 14evolution of publicprivate role sharing, 16need for strong federal leadership, 16summary, 17references, 173enhancing navigation safety information systems...................19waterways management, 19nautical charting, 20ports and òports lite,ó 20automatic identification systems, 22new perspective on vessel traffic services systems, 23summary, 29references, 294vision of the future and how to achieve it.......................................30the vision, 30realizing the vision, 31references, 335conclusions and recommendations.......................................................34providing an information infrastructure, 34tracking hazardous cargo, 34improving vessel traffic management, 35universal carriage requirements, 35contentsapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiicontentsappendicesabiographies of committee members.......................................................39bexcerpt from the national dialog on vessel trafficservices, april 1997............................................................................................41cmaritime advanced information systems, puget soundregion......................................................................................................................45dmaritime information systems, port of charleston,south carolina..................................................................................................49earrivaltodeparture information exchange...............................54figures and boxesfigures11history and forecast of waterborne foreign trade through u.s. ports, 731status of ports implementation (october 1998), 2132pwass project conceptñvts system based on automatic identification system (ais), 2533u.s. coast guard riskbased port selection process, 2734vessel traffic management hierarchy, 27boxes11nautical charts provide the sole means of òseeingó underwater and dead ahead, 812definition of vts, 921tracking hazardous materials, 1422listening to stakeholders, 1531how ais works, 2232information systems and partners in san francisco bay, 24applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacronymsaisautomatic identification systemapaamerican pilots associationcoptcaptain of the portdgpsdifferential global positioning systemdwtdeadweight tonsecdiselectronic chart display and information systemfccfederal communications commissiongmdssglobal maritime distress and safety systemgpsglobal positioning systemialainternational association of lighthouse authoritiesicwminteragency committee on waterways managementimointernational maritime organizationisminternational safety managementitosinternational tug of opportunity systemla/lblos angeles/long beachmaradmaritime administrationndsnational distress systemnimanational imagery and mapping agencynoaanational oceanographic and atmospheric administrationpawssports and waterways safety systemportsphysical oceanographic realtime systemrnaregulated navigation areateutwentyfoot equivalent unitusaceu.s. army corps of engineersuscgu.s. coast guardvtcvessel traffic centervtisvessel traffic information servicesvtsvessel traffic servicesapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11the future safety of maritime transportation in the unitedstatesña major factor in the nationõs international trade andeconomic wellbeingñwill depend heavily on the quality ofport and waterways information systems. many formal studies, as well as informal discussions among port users, havedetailed the shortcomings of existing maritime informationsystems and called for quick remedies. the demands forimprovements are becoming increasingly urgent as only scattered, minimally funded system upgrades are made andoceanborne trade continues to grow.some of the most urgent needs of mariners are for accurate, realtime information about harbor and waterway conditions (e.g., water depth, weather, currents, and tides);voiceless communications systems that provide navigationand traffic data, as needed, without causing undue distractions; a consistent operating environment nationwide interms of rules and equipment standards; effective vessel traffic management schemes that can deal with congestion andemergencies; and systems that promote quick responses tocargo spills and other hazards. the requisite technologiesare available to meet all of these needs and have alreadybeen implemented in some foreign ports.many u.s. ports and waterways lack adequate information services, although certain elements of advanced systemsare now available in some locations. barriers to improvements in information systems include the division of responsibilities for waterways management among multiple agencies at all levels of government, a lack of coordination amongthe federal agencies responsible for waterways management,inadequate budgets for some critical maritime programs, thehigh costs of some specialized technologies, stakeholderopposition to user fees, limited access to certain key data,the incompatibility of many independently developed systems, and the absence of standards for some attractive technologies.in this report, the second phase of a threeyear study bythe committee on maritime advanced information systemsof the national research council, a strategy is presented forovercoming the major barriers and deficiencies and providingexecutive summarya minimum level of maritime safety information nationwide.in this phase of the study, the committee concentrated onmaritime information systems that promote safety, which isthe area of greatest need. the committee did not examine indetail the relationship between navigation safety and maritime transportation efficiency or evaluate informationsystems that promote efficiency; the committee believes,however, that these issues deserve further attention.public and private roles for maritimeinformation systems that promotesafetyfederal leadership, backed by input and support from theprivate sector, will be required to enhance maritime safetyinformation systems. despite the growing number and diversity of port stakeholders participating in local, regional,and national planning and other activities that affect maritime commerce, the role of the federal government is critical. stakeholder involvement is now considered essential tothe design, implementation, and operation of appropriate information systems, partly because of the unique needs ofeach port, but mostly because recent federal budget cutbackshave resulted in the delay or cancellation of the deployment,upgrading, and operations of some maritime safety information systems. nonfederal support is being sought throughpublicprivate partnerships for some federally developedsystems, such as the national oceanographic and atmospheric administrationõs (noaa) physical oceanographicrealtime system (ports).1although growing stakeholder involvement is a positivetrend, it is important to remember that the federal government has an acknowledged historical mission to ensure navigation safety. the willingness of local stakeholders to pay1 ports gathers wind, current, wave, and other data from sensors installed on buoys and transmits the information in real time to central stations and individual users. full systems are installed in five u.s. ports.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementfor ports, for example, may not be the best measure ofwhether the national interest in maritime safety is beingserved. only the federal government can ensure a consistentoperating environment nationwide, enforce u.s. laws, andrepresent the united states at international standardssettingconventions.effective federal leadership will require improved coordination among agencies. in the past, federal allocations forwaterways have not been fully coordinated among agencies,and projects have not been subjected to interagencyprioritization. this fragmented approach may have exacerbated the gaps in the information infrastructure. for example,many stakeholders have suggested that the recent federal emphasis on vessel traffic services (vts), which is the responsibility of the u.s. coast guard (uscg),2 has overshadowedthe longstanding need for a more basic toolñaccurate nautical chartsñwhich is the responsibility of noaa. the keyconcern is that the underlying data represented on these charts(paper or electronic) be accurate, timely, and reliable.noaa has developed a plan to accelerate surveying andcharting but predicts that, at current funding levels, it will take25 to 30 years to eliminate the existing backlog of outdatedhydrographic surveys. moreover, noaa can digitize only asmall amount of data in a way that meets international standards for the most advanced electronic charts. other agenciesresponsible for providing waterways information include theu.s. army corps of engineers, which maintains federal navigation channels, and the national imagery and mappingagency, which publishes notices to mariners and is responsible for several other maritime information systems.in 1995, recognizing the need for better communicationsamong agency programs responsible for waterways and theiruse, the key federal departments and agencies formed the interagency committee on waterways management. this committee offers a mechanism for coordinating federal fundingpriorities with regard to nautical charting; electronic chartsand other systems for delivering data to users; ports andother systems for collecting and disseminating realtime dataon weather, currents, and tides; conventional aids to navigation (e.g., buoys, lights, and markers); electronic navigationsystems, such as the differential global positioning system3;and electronic informationexchange systems. the interagency committee, which is chaired by a uscg division chiefand includes representatives of five federal departments andagencies, was formed to òidentify, evaluate, develop, and promote the implementation of federal policies and programs toensure effective management of federal waterways.ó one ofits objectives is to coordinate overlapping functions.key opportunities for maritimeinformation systems to promotesafetyin the committeeõs judgment, three types of informationsystems offer the greatest nearterm potential to enhanceoverall maritime safety: hazardous cargo tracking systems,vts systems, and automatic identification systems (ais).a number of steps would have to be taken to maximize thebenefits of these technologies, each of which is at a differentstage of development.the committee also believes the full potential of maritimeinformation systems will only be realized if significant national attention is paid to upgrading and maintaining the underlying infrastructure including: reliable and accurate waterwaysdata, common standards for technology, adequate training forpersonnel, and effective communications networks. thisinfrastructure is primarily a federal responsibility.hazardous cargo tracking systemsalthough petroleum and other hazardous commodities arefrequently carried by vessels transiting u.s. waters, theuscg does not have an electronic information system fortracking hazardous cargo. instead, it relies on paper recordsand the assistance of vessel and shipping terminal personnel.a number of port closings and other shipping delays havebeen caused by the difficulties in identifying cargoes fromspills, fires, or other incidents. the only federal agency thatcurrently operates an electronic cargotracking system, theu.s. customs service, does so for purposes of enhancingtransportation efficiency, not safety, and is not a traditionalmaritime agency. these systems include electronic manifests from most cargo vessels sailing within, or planning toenter, u.s. waters.the uscg has explored the possibility of accessing theu.s. customs service records on hazardous cargo, but aworkable informationexchange system has yet to be arranged. the development of such a system, whether basedon this data or some other mechanism, would clearly improve emergency responses to incidents on board vessels andin port terminals.vessel traffic servicesthe uscg is in the process of implementing a new program to meet the needs of key u.s. ports and waterways thatdo not have adequate vts systems while also satisfying theconcerns of local port stakeholders. formal, objective criteria for selecting ports with the greatest need for vts, however, have yet to be developed. moreover, the uscg hasnot achieved consistency among the eight existing vts systems it operates or among the various vessel traffic information services (vtis) operated by a variety of otherorganizations (e.g., federal, state, and private entities and2 in general, the uscg is responsible for the enforcement of maritimelaw, port safety and security, providing aids to navigation, and search andrescue operations.3 the dgps enables civilian mariners to fix their vessel positions veryaccurately by using data broadcast by the uscg to correct signals from amilitary radio navigation system that uses satellite transmissions.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3combinations thereof). mariners needñand wantña consistent operating environment internationally, which willrequire the establishment of uniform guidelines for both vtsand vtis systems. the need for consistency is heightenedby the prevalence of foreign vessels and crews in u.s.waters.the effectiveness of vts and vtis systems would bemaximized if they all provided the capabilities judged to bemost essential to navigation safety and they included compatible equipment designed to the highest standards. thecommittee does not believe it is necessary, or even desirable,for all systems to use the exact same technological tools.automatic identification systemsais promises significant safety benefits, simplicity ofoperation, voiceless communications, and compatibility witha range of traffic management schemes (including vts).4ais enables mariners and vts watchstanders to identify anddistinguish specific vessels that otherwise appear as identical òblipsó on a video display or radar overlay.5 anotherimportant advantage of ais is the low cost (relative to manyother technologies) of the equipment carried by participating vessels. ais and similar systems have been used inprince william sound, alaska, as well as in canada, sweden, and the united kingdom. the uscg has recently initiated an ais demonstration in the new orleans region ofthe lower mississippi river.for ais to be effective as a safety measure, all vessels (orat least vessels of certain sizes using specific waterways)would have to carry the same basic information systems andoperate them according to uniform standards. many portstakeholders and the uscg support universal standards andcarriage requirements for ais. the requirements could begeneric, but the international character of the shipping industry and the prevalence of foreignflag vessels in u.s.waters argue for systems that meet international standards.recommendationsrecommendation 1. the interagency committee on waterways management should coordinate the efforts of theu.s. coast guard, the national oceanic and atmosphericadministration, the u.s. army corps of engineers, and thenational imagery and mapping agency to develop an integrated, comprehensive plan for maintaining the navigationinformation infrastructure for all significant u.s. ports andwaterways and should solicit consistent, longterm support(public and private) to implement the plan.recommendation 2. the u.s. coast guard and u.s. customs service should develop a system to disseminate electronic information on hazardous cargo automatically fromthe customs serviceõs cargotracking database for the purpose of improving emergency responses to spills, fires, andother incidents.recommendation 3. the u.s. coast guard should continue to move forward, in consultation with local port stakeholders, with its comprehensive national effort to implementvessel traffic services in key u.s. ports and waterways wheresuch systems are needed. periodic assessments of port safetyshould be made to keep plans up to date. the u.s. coastguard should also provide a uniform national system of traffic management implemented through coordinated federalvessel traffic services and locally adopted vessel traffic information services systems. specifically, the u.s. coastguard should take the following steps while moving forward with the overall program:¥develop, standardize, and implement objective criteriafor selecting ports to be served by federally funded vessel traffic services while upgrading existing systemsand implementing new systems that are urgently needed¥develop training, certification, watchstanding, and operating standards for vessel traffic services applicableto all services regardless of whether or not they are federally operated¥as the competent authority, ensure that all shorebasedvessel traffic management activities, regardless of whooperates them, comply with established internationalstandards¥facilitate communication among ports regarding lessons learned about the implementation of these systemsrecommendation 4. the u.s. coast guard should workexpeditiously toward the implementation of internationalcarriage requirements for electronic navigation andidentification/location systems for all major vessels usingu.s. ports and should continue to take expeditious actions toprovide communications frequencies to ensure that automatic identification systems are internationally compatible.4 ais is one of various technological tools available for, and used in,vts installations. for example, radar and closedcircuit television, whichhave traditionally been used by traffic managers for the surveillance ofcongested waterways, do not require that vessels carry special equipment.newer technologies, such as ais, can provide more precise vessel identification and position information but require that vessels carry transponders.5 ais consists of a shipboard transponder operating in the vhf maritime band that can automatically send vessel information (e.g., identification, position, heading, length, beam, type, draft, and hazardous cargo carried) to other ships, as well as to shore. the receiving stations can displaythe locations of all transponderequipped vessels on an electronic chart orradar screen.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways management4the united states has a compelling national interest inmaintaining the safety and efficiency of its ports and waterways. the nationõs global competitiveness and domesticprosperity depend in large measure on the degree to which itcan accommodate waterborne trade and ensure safe and efficient marine transportation. many maritime safety initiatives have been launched in recent years, both in the unitedstates and abroad, including a phasedin requirement fordouble hulls on oil tankers and targeted, comprehensive inspections of potential highrisk vessels by the u.s. coastguard (uscg). in addition, significant changes have beenmade in the culture of the shipping industry, as evidenced bythe recent adoption of the international safety management(ism) code 1 by the international maritime organization(imo).2 these efforts are expected to improve maritimesafety, and evidence suggests that they already have (nrc,1994a). in addition, numerous initiatives to enhance tradeefficiency have been pursued by the federal government(ito6 task force, 1996) and the shipping industry(aylward, 1996).despite this progress, a number of factors still contributeto persistent safety risks. for example, human error, a causeof 80 percent of maritime accidents (uscg, 1995a), remainsa difficult problem to overcome. concerns have also beenexpressed about the aging of commercial fleets and recurring anecdotal reports of substandard foreignflag ships andcrews (nrc, 1994a). most of the deepocean commercialtraffic in u.s. waters consists of foreignflag ships.3 theunited states exercises control over equipment and standards1need for improved navigation information systemson these vessels primarily through the enforcement of international agreements.similarly, the efficiency of maritime transportation varies greatly in u.s. ports because of the diversity among portsin terms of governing and funding structures, local shippingpatterns, services provided, and geography and environmental conditions. in general, however, the infrastructure of u.s.ports lags behind the most sophisticated ports in europe andasia (nrc, 1993, 1996). although some u.s. shipping terminals have very modern cargohandling equipment, theirapproach channels and berths are often too shallow to accommodate the deepestdraft ships (nrc, 1993; vulovic,1995). the expansion and maintenance of channels is also aproblem; high costs and technical difficulties in handlingcontaminated sediments often slow the pace of dredging(marad, 1994; nrc, 1997).heavy traffic and a multiplicity of vessel types in someports,4 as well as the hazardous nature of much of the cargo,creates safety concerns. the costs of shipping accidents andpublic concerns about the potential environmental impact ofaccidents are also significant. the aging infrastructure ofu.s. waterways can compromise safety and efficiency in anumber of ways. for example, because some ports cannotaccommodate the deepestdraft ships, offshore lightering iscommonly used to transfer petroleum from large ships tosmaller vessels that can proceed into shallow harbors or waterways. although the safety record of lightering operationsis excellent (nrc, 1998), the number of cargo transfers isincreased, which also adds to the costs of petrochemical1 the ism code lays the foundation for a new operational and culturalframework for ship management, requiring that policies and actions be consistent within an organization and focusing attention on human factors.2 a specialized agency of the united nations, the imo is the leadinginternational forum for cooperation on issues affecting maritime safety.3 in 1992, 24,000 vessels of 1,000 gross tons or more were in operationworldwide. of these, only 603 were registered in the united states, andapproximately onethird of those were government owned (u.s. bureau ofthe census, 1994).4 except for the oil trade, vessel movements in u.s. waters are poorlydocumented (research and special projects administration, 1995), so it isnot possible to acquire sufficient reliable data to demonstrate recent trendsin vessel traffic. however, the following 1994 statistics for new yorkharbor reflect the traffic situation at one busy port: 163,664 vessel movements, including 89,075 by ferries; 52,626 by tugs or tows; 6,945 by cargovessels; 12,545 by tankers; 1,708 by public vessels; and 45 by vessels carrying hazardous materials. furthermore, almost all cargo vessels carry smallamounts of packaged hazardous materials (uscg, 1995b).applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.need for improved navigation information systems5products. lightering also increases the number of trips required to deliver cargo to terminals, and, thus, increases thevolume of traffic that must be accommodated safely.congestion has increased in some ports because competition for intermodal trade and shifts in trading patterns have ledto the concentration of cargo at fewer ports (nrc, 1993). congestion is also exacerbated by ongoing and projected changes inship size and other characteristics (discussed later in this chapter). if u.s. ports fail to accommodate these changes, then cargomay be shifted to nearby foreign ports. unfortunately, u.s.terminal upgrades are often delayed because of declining support from state and local governments and a variety of otherreasons (marad, 1994). thus, although it is difficult to determine actual performance levels because of inadequate data, especially data related to safety,5 continued attention to the safetyand efficiency of u.s. ports and waterways is essential to thenationõs economic wellbeing.for all of these reasons, the need to enhance maritimeinformation systems in the united states is growing. a number of recent studies have detailed the shortcomings of existing systems and planned upgrades (gao, 1996a, 1996b;intertanko, 1996; national performance review, 1996;nrc, 1994a, 1994b, 1996). the national stakeholder discussion group convened by the uscg in 1997 and 1998 tohelp develop new plans for vessel traffic services (vts) confirmed the need for immediate attention to maritime information issues (national dialog on vessel traffic services,1997; see appendix b). it was also apparent that recentfederal efforts to develop and fund maritime safety information systems have not met marinersõ needs.the demand for better maritime information systems isexpected to grow as a result of trade patterns and trends.forecasts predict continued growth in oceanborne trade, including oil imports to the united states (api, 1996). thecondition of the u.s. maritime information infrastructure hasimplications for the nationõs economy, both in terms of providing an attractive environment to shippers and in terms ofhandling a potential overload of information in a costefficient manner. information systems also have environmental implications because, if properly designed and used,they can help mariners prevent and respond to accidentrelated spills. furthermore, information systems can helpaddress concerns raised by the prevalence of foreignflagvessels in u.s. waters, a pattern that mariners say heightensthe need for standardized navigation safety systems.the remainder of this chapter outlines barriers toexpanding maritime advanced information systems, theshortcomings of u.s. ports, and relevant trends in maritimetransportation.barriers to expanding informationsystemsrapid advances in information technology in recent yearscould greatly improve business operations in the u.s. maritime industry and in the daily operations of ports and waterways. advanced maritime information systems, used singlyor in combination, could ameliorate many of the problemsfaced by mariners. available systems include radio navigation aids that permit individual vessels to determine theirpositions with a high degree of accuracy, vts systems thatmonitor shipping in specific waterways, and automatedcargotracking systems that serve individual terminals. national systems, such as the massive u.s. customs servicedatabase, which links dozens of port users with federal agencies, are also in operation.although the technology is available to meet virtuallyevery need, the implementation of these systems across theu.s. has been inconsistent, at best. barriers to the widespread use of advanced information systems include the division of responsibilities for the management of u.s. waterways among multiple agencies at all levels of government,inadequate budgets for some critical maritime programs, thehigh costs of some specialized technologies, stakeholderopposition to paying for services that have traditionally beenprovided at no cost, limited access to certain key data, theincompatibility of many independently developed systems,the absence of standards for some attractive technologies,and the wide range and diversity of available systems. ingeneral, the critical importance of the infrastructure (e.g.,accurate realtime data and the training and qualification ofsystem users) necessary to use these technologies effectivelyhas not been appreciated. by contrast, many foreign maritime nations have been investing heavily in their ports, advanced maritime information systems, and supporting infrastructures (intertanko, 1996; nrc, 1996).some u.s. maritime information systems are designed,funded, and operated by federal agencies; some are developedin house and used by ship operators, shipping terminals, portauthorities, or pilots; and some are marketed by private vendors. some systems are paid for by users, whereas others aregovernment funded or are supported by a combination of funding sources. some information stored in these systems iswidely shared, but much of it is accessible only to a limitedaudience. many systems have been developed and implemented in isolation and are not interconnected, or even compatible with, other databases. few systems are accessible toall potentially interested users, which has left vast resourcesuntapped and important needs unmet. the effectiveness ofmany systems is often compromised by an outmoded or inadequate supporting infrastructure.the lessons that can be learned from the commercial use5 accident data maintained by the uscg, principally through the marineinvestigation module (part of the marine information system for safetyand law enforcement), are of limited utility for broadscale analyses. thevalue of the data is compromised by several factors, including the integrityof the locally generated accident information and inaccuracies (researchand special projects administration, 1995). information about nearmissesis also inadequate.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementof advanced information systems by foreign ports are, inmost cases, not directly applicable to the united states because foreign systems are typically configured for the centralized management of both waterway and port operations.in its interim report, the committee investigated the development and implementation of information systems in somemajor foreign ports and discussed the differences betweenthe management of u.s. and foreign ports. the committeefound that in most major ports in europe and the far east acentral authority is responsible for traffic management andfor the collection and dissemination of information regarding operational safety and efficiency. these central authorities provide mariners with standardized, consistent navigational information. in u.s. ports, however, these functionsare usually not the responsibility of a centralized management authority but are provided by several federal agenciesand a number of state and local authorities. nevertheless,u.s. ports have the same need for safety and efficiency asforeign ports. the challenge in the united states is to exploit systems that can serve a variety of institutional structures and the common goals of safety and efficiency with nocentral focus for management and funding.historical perspective on u.s. portsports and waterways are key elements of the u.s. infrastructure that support international and domestic trade, commerce, and recreation. they are also nodes in a globaltransportation system that must accommodate diverse vesseltypes and varying shipboard operating skills. historically, theresponsibility for infrastructure has been split among federal,state, and local governments and commercial interests. thedivision of responsibility developed pragmatically and hasgenerally served the nation well. the federal government, forexample, is chiefly responsible for the development and maintenance of, and safe operation in, shipping channels. thisresponsibility includes ensuring that all vessels that use u.s.waterways adhere to minimum international operating andsafety standards. protection of the environment is also a keyfederal responsibility; however, environmental protection isalso a responsibility of state and local agencies whose effortsmust be coordinated with those of the federal government.federal responsibilities are spread among several agencies.the maritime administration (marad) promotes the development and utilization of ports and facilities and providestechnical information and advice to other agencies and organizations concerned with ports. the uscg is responsible forenforcing maritime laws, ensuring port safety and security,providing aids to navigation, and providing search and rescueoperations; the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) is responsible for maintaining accurate nautical charts (and more importantly the underlying data); and theu.s. army corps of engineers (usace) is responsible formaintaining federal navigation channels. local and stategovernments and the private sector are responsible for portmanagement and development, and local measures that promote safety and efficiency vary greatly.this regime alone makes the effective management ofu.s. waterways a unique challenge. with no cohesive visionfor coordinating and prioritizing tasks, the maintenance andmodernization of the infrastructure has fallen woefully behind those of other nations. the problems are mostly basic,arising from mismatches between the growing needs of commerce and the static dimensions and capabilities of the supporting waterways, shoreside facilities, and intermodal connections. there are also deficiencies in the timeliness andaccuracy of available navigation data.economic importance of portsports and waterways play a critical role in transportation,trade, and employment. for example, the united states leadsthe world in the value of imports and exports (wto, 1996),which were valued at almost $1.2 trillion in 1994 (u.s.bureau of the census, 1995). commodity exports rose from5 percent of the gross domestic product in 1984 to 7.5 percent in 1994 (u.s. bureau of the census, 1995). ports andwaterways handle almost all u.s. overseas trade by weightand about half by value (u.s. bureau of the census, 1995).in 1997, waterborne transportation of all commoditiestotaled more than two billion metric tons, about half domesticand half international trade (usace, 1997). some 145 ports(including inland ports) handled more than one million metric tons of cargo each in 1996 (dot, 1998).changes and increases in the volume and complexity ofvessel traffic in u.s. ports and waterways have highlightedthe need for information systems that can provide port andvessel operators with tools to manage the system safely andefficiently. total u.s. waterborne trade has increased dramatically over the past few decades from more than one billion metric tons in 1965 to more than two billion metric tonsin 1996. about onehalf of that trade is domestic. the dramatic growth of foreign trade in recent years is expected tocontinue. figure 11 shows that the waterborne foreign tradeof about 875 million metric tons in 1990 grew to 1,050 million metric tons in 1997 and is projected to reach 1,350 million metric tons by 2001 (marad, 1998).this sizable growth has been concentrated in a few majoru.s. ports. more than half is concentrated in 20 ports, andmore than a quarter (575 million metric tons in 1996) ishandled by just five ports. the 50 leading u.s. ports handlealmost 90 percent of all waterborne commerce.certain segments of waterborne trade, such as the containerized cargo trade, are also substantially concentrated.in 1997, 25 ports handled 98 percent of the foreign containercargo, and the leading 10 ports accounted for 80 percent,with the los angeleslong beach port complex handlingnearly onethird of all container traffic. container cargo hasalso increased dramatically, an increase of more than 10 percent from 1996 to 1997.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.need for improved navigation information systems7in addition, in certain ports and waterways, other traffichas grown substantially at the same time that the volume oftrade and traffic by major commercial vessels has been growing and becoming more concentrated. this includes tug andbarge traffic in the major gulf of mexico ports; ferryboattraffic in large ports, such as san francisco, seattle, and newyork; pleasure craft traffic in all ports near major metropolitan areas; and cruise ship traffic in southern ports with access to the caribbean.shipments of oil and petroleum products constitute amajor component of u.s. trade. the nation imports morethan half the oil it consumes, and imports have been growingsteadily (api, 1996). the contiguous 48 states receive about1.4 million metric tons of crude oil and petroleum productsper day by water, primarily from foreign sources and alaska.waterborne domestic trade in petroleum products, such asvehicle and aviation fuels, is also significant. the prevalenceof these commodities along u.s. coasts poses a risk ofaccidentrelated spillsña persistent environmental, economic, and social concern.shallowdraft tug and barge traffic constitutes a uniquesegment of u.s. maritime commerce. according to theamerican waterways operators, barges handle more than600 million tons of commerce annually. apart from its rolein domestic commerce, barge traffic is also a critical link ininternational trade. for example, more than half of all u.s.grain exports, as well as 300 million tons of coal, 1 billionbarrels of petroleum, and 450 million barrels of liquid chemical products, are transported annually by shallowdraftbarges. bargetows vary in size from one barge and onetowboat carrying 10,000 barrels of liquid chemicals to onetowboat and 35 barges carrying more than 50,000 tons ofmixed commodities. as a result, barges are often the mostprevalent vessels in many harbors and inland waterways.u.s. seaborne international trade is now carried largelyby foreignflag vessels. in 1997, about 98 percent of u.s.foreign trade by tankers and 85 percent by cargo liners wascarried by foreignflag vessels (dot, 1998). to accommodateexpanding trade in the past few decades, oceangoing shipshave grown considerably in size, complexity, and speed.tankers carrying crude oil imports are commonly 100,000to 400,000 deadweight tons (dwt).6 container ships nowcarry from 4,000 to 6,000 20footequivalent units (teu),7and even larger vessels are planned. many other specializedvessels have evolved for specific cargoes or trades, particularly the petrochemical industry. some of the petroleum andchemical cargoes carried by these vessels (as well as bargesand container vessels) can be complex and highly toxic tohumans and animals, increasing the public health and environmental risks from accidents.shortcomings of u.s. portschanges in vessel characteristics, combined with otherrecent trends, have created demands that are beyond the capabilities of the infrastructures of many existing u.s. portsand waterways. these trends include changes in the patternsof vessel traffic and cargoes, a growing dependence on foreign sources of oil, changes in the nature and location of theu.s. industrial base, and the advent of justintime inventorymanagement, which requires reliable scheduling. some u.s.ports have been modernized in recent years, but others havenot. in general, the emphasis has been on upgrading thelandside infrastructure and the handling and transshipmentof cargoes. less attention has been paid to the supportingwaterways.the lack of improved waterways has created serious problems, especially for the petroleum trade.8 many u.s.figure 11history and forecast of waterborne foreign trade through u.s. ports. source: maritime administration.6 deadweight tons is a measure of a vesselõs total carrying capacity,including the weight of the cargo, stores, fresh water, fuel, and crew. thelarger crude oil carriers commonly call at deepwater offshore ports or arelightered offshore.7 teu (20foot equivalent units) is the standard unit of measure for thecontainercarrying capacity of a vessel (the standard container is 20 feet long).8 for a discussion of tankerrelated issues, see intertanko (1996).1,6001,4001,2001,00080060040020001990199219941996199820002002yearmillions of tonsapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementrefineries and petrochemical complexes are located inland andcan be reached only by lengthy river passages, dredged channels, or canals. although the idea of opening new deepwaterports was studied in the late 1960s and early 1970s, only onedeepwater terminal for crude oil was developed, the louisiana offshore oil port. increasingly large tankers are nowbeing crowded into existing u.s. ports and waterways wherethey must share the congested waters with a large volume ofother commercial traffic and a growing number of recreationalboaters. nevertheless, if mariners had access to timely, accurate, and reliable information, they could safely and efficientlynavigate congested ports and accommodate shortfalls thatwould otherwise impose costs and increase risks to vesselsand to the environment. unfortunately, some of the key shortfalls are related to inadequate information systems.one fundamental problem is the paucity of authoritative,accurate, uptodate information about harbors and harborapproaches. both vessel safety and transportation efficiencydepend on the availability of hydrographic9 data and trafficmanagement information (see box 11). mariners are forcedto operate with incomplete or outdated hydrographic data,conflicting information published by various governmentagencies, and delays in publishing the most recent information(nrc, 1994a, 1994b). outdated nautical charts and poordata on environmental conditions (i.e., weather, tides, andcurrents) create significant risks. in many cases, tidal, current, and waterdepth predictions are based on informationdating as far back as the turn of the century (nos, 1995).u.s. coastal waters have never been completely surveyed,and about 60 percent of the nautical charts prepared bynoaa are based on pre1940 data collected with obsoletetechnologies (nrc, 1994a).10 coupled with the decentralized responsibility and authority for disseminating information at a given port, this situation creates confusion (particularly for masters of foreignflag vessels) just when, forsafetyõs sake, they most need accurate information on environmental and waterway conditions. noaa has preparedplans to accelerate surveying and charting in critical regionsbut predicts that, at current funding levels, the existing backlog of outdated hydrographic surveys will take more than 25years to eliminate (noaa, 1996).outdated surveys and funding limitations have precludedthe use of the most advanced charting systems in u.s. waters. electronic charts11 of various types are available butbox 11nautical charts provide the sole means of òseeingó underwater and dead aheaddespite recent technological advances, nautical charts are still the only means for detecting what lies underwaterimmediately ahead of a vessel. depthsounding sonar can detect fish, submarines, and obstacles directly beneath avessel and can even measure the speed of large tankers. sidescan sonar can provide accurate information on waterdepths and measurements from the bottom of a vessel to underwater wrecks and obstructions. but these technologieswork only at short ranges in modes where the known inaccuracies are small and acceptable. they cannot be used toòseeó an object one to two miles ahead or determine how far it lies below the surface to within two or three feet. suchfine distinctions in the interpretation of sonar returns would be possible if the sonar beam were a very thin, absolutelystraight line both from the sonar to the obstruction and, after reflection, from the obstruction to the sonar. soundwaves do travel in straight lines in water with uniform sound speedñbut, that requires a very special condition ofdensity, salinity, and temperature that rarely occurs near the ocean surface, where commercial and recreational vesselsoperate.substantial military and industrial resources have been devoted to research on òunderwater obstacle finders,ó andsome devices have been placed into service. but these devices do not have the desired lookahead range and/or therequired fine angular resolution (1 part in 4,000). in one tanker development project, for example, the technology tolook ahead with the required performance was discussed but never produced, possibly because of high cost estimatesof several million dollars per ship (rafael gutierrez, astilleros espazoles technology center, personal communication,june 10, 1998). mariners today, as in centuries past, must depend on either paper or electronic nautical chartsshowing water depths and the positions of reefs, shoals, and wrecks. if the information is inaccurate, then the vesselis at risk.9 hydrography deals with the measurement of the bottom topography ofwaters and their marginal land areas, with specific reference to the elementsthat affect safe navigation, and the publication of information in a formsuitable for use by navigators.10 mariners often cite new surveys as a critical safety need (nrc, 1996).11 an electronic chart is a digitized version of a nautical chart, withgraphic representation of water depth, shorelines, topographical features,aids to navigation, and hazards (national research council, 1994b, andreferences therein). an electronic chart is no better than a paper chart unless it is combined with additional information, including, at a minimum,the vesselõs position and planned track.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.need for improved navigation information systems9are only as accurate as the underlying hydrographic data,and electronic charts in the format specified by the international community are prerequisites for the use of electronicchart display and information systems (ecdis),12 whichhave been characterized as òthe best navigation advance tocome along since radar was inventedó (ecker, 1993). thewidespread use of ecdis in u.s. waters will require thedevelopment of a hydrographic database that meets established international standards. noaa is developing a standardized, fully attributed electronic chart for use in ecdis,but progress has been slow (nrc, 1994b).another notable gap in harbor safety information systemsconcerns the tracking of hazardous cargoes. if a spill orother accident occurs, then emergency response teams needto know what material they are dealing with, or else thecleanup efforts may fail and new hazards may be created.13the uscg does not operate any electronic systems that canquickly notify its officers or others about hazardous cargoes.in puget sound, for example, notifications are made usingpaper records (see appendix c). in general, electronic information about hazardous cargoes is maintained only byu.s. customs service and some individual ports, and accessto this information is typically very limited. in the busy portof charleston, south carolina, the local customs networkincludes information about hazardous cargoes, but the portpolice and local firefighters, who would respond to an emergency, cannot access the system directly (see appendix d).instead, they must rely on lists of hazardous cargoes printedout and provided by terminal personnel upon the arrival ofresponse teams.foreign ports are much more advanced in this respect.when the committee visited rotterdam, the netherlands, in1996, plans were being made to link the elaborate vts to anelectronic notification system for vessels carrying dangerous cargoes (nrc, 1996). the system included the necessary information for mounting an effective response to anincident. some movement toward this kind of òone sourceóapproach has been made in the united states. for example,emergency response teams in the delaware river region canobtain hazardous cargo information from a local system thatcaptures electronic manifests for all imported waterbornecargoes transiting the river for dissemination to the u.s.customs service and port customers. the system includes apilot system for tracking sensitive cargo, which provides instant information on petroleum and chemical cargoes to theuscg and other government and spill response agencies.14vessel traffic management systems also have shortfalls.although vts systems operated by the uscg have beenestablished at a number of ports, the justification for themhas largely been related to safety, and, consequently, theyhave not been fully integrated into overall port operations.in addition, vts systems have not yet been installed in all ofthe ports that need vessel traffic management (nrc, 1996).in some areas, vessel traffic information services (vtis) thatare not operated by the uscg have been established. mariners are often unaware of the differences in services andauthority conveyed by the two sets of initials (see box 12).finally, a variety of communications problems continueto plague mariners. critical information links, both shiptoshore and shiptoship, are primarily based on voice radio.the oral exchange of important safety and commercial information is subject to error, the risk of which is often exacerbated by language difficulties, including colloquialismsand regional accents.15 mariners report frequent interference on bridgetobridge communications channels, particularly in geographically complex, heavily traveled areas, suchas the lower mississippi river (duffy, 1995). communications are often impeded by unauthorized or inappropriate use12 ecdis receives position data from radionavigation instruments andintegrates them with a voyage plan and an òofficialó hydrographic databaseto provide a realtime display of the vesselõs position with respect to thechart and voyage plan; electronic positioning is required, and a radar overlay is optional (nrc, 1994b).13 petroleum cargoes, for example, have different volatility, density, andtoxicity characteristics that affect the materialõs behavior after a spill orduring cleanup operations.14 this system was conceived by the maritime exchange for the delaware river and bay and is now supported by a publicprivate partnershipthat provides capital for new technology. the port authority, pilots, and thestate all support it.15 see comments by the president of the international maritime pilotsassociation (walsh, 1997) and cushing (1994), who addresses communications problems in aviation that are also applicable to maritime commerce.box 12definition of vtsthe present report uses the imo definition for vts,which is a òservice implemented by a competentauthority designed to improve safety and efficiencyof vessel traffic and protect the environment. theservice shall have the capability to interact with thetraffic and respond to traffic situations developingin the vts area.ó under the imo definition, theòcompetent authorityó is considered to be the national or local agency responsible for maritimesafety.the term vtis has not been defined by the international community, but in the united states it isapplied to vtslike systems operated by organizations other than the uscg. these organizationsonly provide information and do not have the authority to respond to traffic situations.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementof marine radio frequencies; overloading is common duringadverse weather or in heavy traffic, when communicationsare most needed (nrc, 1994a). a number of solutions, including increased use of databased systems, such as transponders, have been proposed or initiated. the uscg isbeginning a pilot project with a transponderbased automatedinformation system (ais) as the basis for vessel traffic management in the lower mississippi river.the full benefits of the latest technologies cannot be exploited until the uscgõs shortrange communications system has been upgraded and modernized. the backbone ofthe current system is the national distress system (nds),16which provides vhffm coverage in coastal areas and navigable waterways used by commercial and recreational vessels. the current system, which consists of about 300 siteswith remotely controlled vhffm analog transceivers, isoutdated, does not provide complete coverage, and does notsatisfy current needs. moreover, nds does not provide elements needed for the global maritime distress and safety system (gmdss), which was recently established by the imo.a cornerstone of the gmdss is automated listening watchesby shore stations on vhffm channel 70 for communicating in coastal regions. by february 1999, vessels will berequired to have a channel 70 capability, but the unitedstates will not have a listening system in place by that time.gmdss should be compatible with the operation of aiss.trends in maritime transportationthe future of maritime transportation is being shaped bysubstantial projected growth in marine commerce. the aggregate tonnage moving through u.s. ports is projected totriple over the next 30 years (intelligent transportation systems joint program office, 1996), which will certainlychange historic vessel traffic and patterns of port use andintroduce new vesselrelated problems. the growth in tradeis being supported by major advances in vessel technology.in addition, u.s. ports are making major new investments infacilities. public ports reported a record level of investmentof $1.5 billion in 1997 and are projected to invest more than$7.7 billion in the next five years (dot, 1998). in combination, these trends are expected to increase demands on thealready overburdened u.s. maritime infrastructure. unlessthis infrastructure, including information systems, is improved, patterns of commerce may shift in ways that will bedetrimental to the u.s. economy.the trend toward very large container ships of 6,000 to8,000 teu capacity will put serious pressures on many u.s.ports. the issues range from the high costs and delays associated with dredging to the lack of space for additionallongshore facilities to the need for improved rail and roadcorridors to and from ports (dot, 1998). adequate spaceand intermodal connections are becoming more and moreimportant as corollaries to justintime inventory management and the general trend toward reducing the resourcesassociated with goods in transit. to accommodate these concerns, goods must be handled promptly on shore, and shipsmust move in accordance with advertised schedules underall weather conditions and harbor traffic conditions. information technologies are key to maintaining schedules andmanaging complex cargo flows.other technological advances will also change waterwayuse. for example, the development of highspeed ferries,coupled with improvements that permit vessels to operate athigher speeds and lower costs, have reduced costs per passenger mile to levels that are competitive with other forms oftransportation. ferries may, therefore, become a preferredalternative to driving on congested highways, especially inareas with growing populations. the washington state ferrysystem, the largest ferry system in the united states, nowoperates 25 vessels that make a total of approximately 500trips per day (see appendix c). the systemõs managersproject a 72 percent increase in demand on major routes inthe next 20 years. passenger services offered by privatefirms may also increase if water transportation proves to bea viable way of relieving highway congestion. there is apotential downside, however. in some crowded ports, suchas new york and san francisco, highspeed ferry operationshave raised safety concerns.17 ferry traffic poses safety risksregardless of its speed because it often crosses shippinglanes. the risks from highspeed ferries are even higher.thus, sound vessel traffic management will be extremelyimportant.another trend that requires continuing attention is theapparent increase in the proportion of tugbarge combinations relative to deepwater vessel traffic in many areas.when vessel information and traffic services are establishedand improved, it is important to ensure the participation ofall tugbarge units and other types of vessels. participationin the delaware bay and river vtis, for example, is voluntary and generally limited to large commercial ships and vessels that use the services of a state pilot (nrc, 1996). fromthe standpoint of navigation safety, barges and ships willrequire similar equipment and mariner qualifications to takeadvantage of advances in technology and participate in16 the nds was built to provide the uscg with a means of monitoringthe international vhffm distress frequency (channel 16), coordinatingsearch and rescue response operations, and communicating with commercial and recreational vessels. the secondary function of nds is to providecommand, control, and communications for uscg units performing maritime safety, law enforcement, national security, and environmental protection missions.17 safety concerns were described in a paper by a uscg officer(mckernan, 1997) presented at the april 1998 meeting of the marine boardof the national research council. the safety of highspeed vessels has alsobeen a topic of discussion at imo meetings.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.need for improved navigation information systems11advanced vts systems. if shoaldraft users do not participate, the effectiveness of waterways management systemsmay be compromised. one solution to this problem is torequire that all vessels using certain waterways carrytransponders. another, which has been instituted in the portof houstongalveston, is the establishment of shallowdrafttraffic lanes for certain vessels.other changes are taking place in vessel crews, operational practices, and navigation technology. the trend is toreduce the size of vessel crews and rely more on automatedequipment. reliable electronic information systems are,therefore, becoming increasingly important. with smallercrews, resources previously available for ancillary shipboardtasks, such as chart maintenance, will no longer be available.shorebased emergency response teams will be needed toassist with onboard fires and hazardous cargo spills, heightening the need for the uscg and others (e.g., local policeand fire departments and spill response teams) to have access to electronic cargo information. at the same time, theadministrative workload will increase, partly as a result ofnew standards for training and qualifying mariners. thisworkload will be accompanied by a need for uptodate information on a wide variety of topics to keep pace with theproliferation of cargo and workrelated regulations. tocomplicate matters, crew size is being reduced at the sametime that agreements initiated by the international labororganization and governmental regulations are limiting atsea work hours and establishing crew rest criteria.eventually, bridge watchstanders on deepdraft ships mayface the same burdens already experienced by crews on tugbarge combinations, where singleperson watches have become the rule rather than the exception. the trend towardfewer watchstanders handling increased workloads underscores the importance of the american pilots associationõs(apa) efforts to improve information exchange betweenmasters and pilots. 18 the availability of accurate, uptodate information about waterways conditions is essential,particularly in ports that do not have suitable anchorages andin areas where passages must be coordinated with tides toensure adequate underkeel clearance.a concern related to the prevalence of foreignflag deepdraft ships in u.s. waters is the increase in vessel personnelwho may not be fluent in english. frequent anecdotal reports have been made of the inability of crew membersaboard many foreignflag ships to communicate withonboard pilots and with vts and other shore stations. thegrowing trend toward drawing crews of all grades from developing countries will increase the time required for mariners to exchange information. one partial solution to thisproblem would be to make essential transitrelated information available in written form while the ship is still at sea.information can also help mariners deal with severe andgrowing problems with channel maintenance. it is becomingincreasingly difficult to fund new dredging projects to expand and deepen existing waterways, partly because the permitting process involves lengthy environmental reviews andpartly because the costs of dredging, and the disposal of theresulting spoil, have increased almost exponentially (nrc,1997). one way to minimize dredging requirements is toensure that accurate, uptodate bathymetric data are available to mariners, together with realtime information on water depths. similar data will be required for vessels to exploit the navigational and passage management features ofecdis, which may be essential for meeting transit schedules consistently in all weather conditions.summaryenhanced maritime information systems should be integral to the modernization of u.s. ports to accommodate shipping trends, including projected growth in international tradeand the development of larger and faster vessels. crucialshortcomings in maritime information include the lack ofaccurate, realtime information about water depths and underwater obstructions in harbors and approaches; outdatednautical charts; the limited availability of electronic charts;inadequate systems for tracking hazardous cargoes; the incompatible designs of vts systems; overreliance on voicecommunications; and chronic shortfalls in federal budgetsfor information systems that promote navigation safety.referencesapi (american petroleum institute). 1996. petroleum facts at a glance.washington, d.c.: api.aylward, a. 1996. intelligent transportation systems and intermodalfreight transportation. report prepared for the its joint program office by the u.s. department of transportation, research and specialprograms administration, cambridge, mass.: volpe national transportation systems center.cushing, s. 1994. fatal words. chicago: university of chicago press.dot (u.s. department of transportation). 1998. status of the nationõssurface transportation system: conditions and performance report.report to congress. washington, d.c.: government printing office.duffy, g.e. 1995. testimony by george e. duffy, chairman of thegovernorõs task force on the maritime industry for the state of louisiana. pp. 25ð26 in hearing before the subcommittee on coast guardand maritime transportation of the committee on transportation andinfrastructure, u.s. house of representatives, 104th congress, firstsession, june 29, 1995. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.ecker, w.j. 1993. u.s. electronic chart display and information systemtest and evaluation program review, march 2, 1993. kings point,n.y.: u.s. merchant marine academy.gao (general accounting office). 1996a. intermodal freight transportation: projects and planning issues. gao/nsiad96159. washington,d.c.: gao.gao. 1996b. marine safety: coast guard should address alternatives as itproceeds with vts 2000. gao/rced9683. washington, d.c.: gao.intertanko. 1996. u.s. port and terminal safety study: a discussionpaper. oslo, norway: intertanko.18 the best practices summary, adopted by the apa in 1997, recognizes that the proper exchange of information between masters and pilots iscritical to safe navigation.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementintelligent transportation systems joint program office. 1996. intermodalfreight symposium participant workbook. washington, d.c.: u.s.department of transportation.ito6 task force. 1996. report for the government information technology working group of the national information infrastructure taskforce, information technology initiative number six. washington,d.c.: office of the vice president.marad (maritime administration). 1994. a report to congress on thestatus of the public ports of the united states 1992ð1993. washington,d.c.: u.s. department of transportation. october.marad. 1998. a report to congress on the status of the public ports ofthe united states 1996ð1997. washington, d.c.: u.s. department oftransportation. october.mckernan, c.v. 1997. industry and government study group focuses onoperational safety issues confronting operators of highspeed ferries.paper presented at spring meeting of the marine board, national research council, washington, d.c., april 3, 1998.national dialog on vessel traffic services. 1997. summary of guidancefrom the national dialog on vessel traffic services. available fromthe marine board, national research council, 2101 constitution ave.,n.w., washington, d.c., 20418. tel. 2023343119.national performance review. 1996. access america: reengineeringthrough information technology. washington, d.c.: national performance review and the government information technology servicesboard.nos (national ocean service). 1995. safe passage into the 21st century:modernizing noaaõs navigational services. silver spring, md.: national oceanic and atmospheric administration, nos.noaa (national oceanic and atmospheric administration). 1996. thenautical charting plan. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.nrc (national research council). 1993. landside access to u.s. ports.prepared by the transportation research board, national researchcouncil. washington, d.c.: maritime administration, u.s. departmentof transportation.nrc. 1994a. minding the helm: marine navigation and piloting. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 1994b. charting a course into the digital era: guidance for noaaõsnautical charting mission. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 1996. vessel navigation and traffic services for safe and efficientports and waterways, interim report. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.nrc. 1997. contaminated marine sediments: assessment of management,technologies, and remediation. washington, d.c.: national academypress.nrc. 1998. oil spill risks from tank vessel lightering. washington,d.c.: national academy press.research and special projects administration. 1995. waterways management research and planning baseline analyses: project overview. prepared for the u.s. coast guard and u.s. department of transportation.interim report. washington, d.c.: research and special projects administration, april.usace (u.s. army corps of engineers). 1997. waterborne commerce ofthe united states, calendar year 1996. new orleans: u.s. army corpsof engineers.u.s. bureau of the census. 1994. statistical abstract of the u.s.: 1995(114th ed.). washington, d.c.: u.s. bureau of the census.u.s. bureau of the census. 1995. statistical abstract of the u.s.: 1994(115th ed.). washington, d.c.: u.s. bureau of the census.uscg (u.s. coast guard). 1995a. prevention through people, quality action team report, july 15, 1995. washington, d.c.: u.s. departmentof transportation.uscg. 1995b. u.s. vessel traffic services. washington, d.c.: u.s. coastguard.vulovic, r. 1995. world trade, container ships, and ports: a study incommercial symbiosis. paper presented to the marine board, nationalresearch council, washington, d.c., june 21ð23, 1995.walsh, g. 1997. piloting and vts. professional mariner 27:53ð59.wto (world trade organization). 1996. 1995 international trade: trendsand statistics. geneva, switzerland: wto.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal, state, and private roles13132federal, state, and private rolesmaritime commerce supports both international trade andnational security and, therefore, has long been consideredessential to the nationõs wellbeing. historically, the federalgovernment has provided and operated aids to navigation,developed and maintained waterways, and exercised oversight over matters of maritime safety. today, safetyñincluding protection of the environmentñis considered theprincipal concern of the federal government. efficiency ismost often considered the concern of the commercial sectorand, therefore, less deserving of federal funding (nrc,1996a). however, defining the appropriate role for government can be difficult because of the often blurry line between safety and efficiency.policy decisions about federal support for services arenotalways based on objective analyses of their impact onthe nation as a whole, or even on analyses of the beneficiaries of a particular service and, therefore, who should pay forit. the rationale for policy decisions tends to be more subjective. an example is the reduction in funds for chartingthe nationõs waterways at the same time the overall fundingfor noaa, the responsible agency, was increased (nrc,1994a, 1994b)1 and despite the broad international recognition that uptodate charting is critical to improving waterway safety. because of these budget cutbacks, some maritime safety information systems have not been deployed,upgraded, or operated (nrc, 1996a). the obvious negativeeffects on safety have raised questions about the federalgovernmentõs fulfillment of its responsibilities in the nationalinterest.nevertheless, cutbacks in the federal budget can also beseen as part of the larger goal of transferring some responsibility to the state and local levels or the private sector (nrc,1996a). although the merits of this goal were not assessedby the committee, this policy should be scrutinized carefullywith regard to its shortterm and longterm consequences.recently, insufficient federal funding has led to efforts bygovernment agencies to secure private support, throughpublicprivate partnerships, for some systems developed bythe federal government. for example, ports (the physicaloceanographic realtime system)2 was developed by noaaand installed by the government in several major ports fordemonstration purposes. but local private interests mustnow find ways to fund its continued operation and maintenance.this chapter discusses the best way to achieve an appropriate balance between public and private responsibilities.topics include the relationship between maritime safety andefficiency, the increased importance of nonfederal stakeholders, the evolution of role sharing, and the need for strongfederal leadership.relationship between safety andefficiencyat the macrolevel, maritime safety and efficiency are often intertwined, and when the current study began the committee intended to examine opportunities for improving bothsafety and efficiency. on closer examination, however, differences emerged. the development and implementation ofinformation systems designed to promote efficiency appeared to be progressing satisfactorily because electroniccargotracking and other information systems, which aresupported by the commercial sector, have been proliferatingthroughout the industry. at the same time, the federal government has been backing away from funding systems thatwould clearly improve safety. the committee, therefore,1 the budget for nautical charting (taking inflation into account) declined by nearly 50 percent between the mid1970s and the early 1990s;during the same period, noaaõs fleet of hydrographic survey ships declined from 11 to 5 (nos, 1998).2 ports gathers wind, current, wave, and other data from sensors installed on buoys and transmits the information in real time to central stations and individual users. system locations are noted in chapter 3.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementdecided to focus its limited time and resources on opportunities for enhancing maritime safety, which emerged as themore serious public problem.the committeeõs next challenge was to differentiatesafety issues from efficiency issues, or at least to define theirrelationship, for purposes of this analysis. is a safer port alsoa more efficient port? during numerous meetings and sitevisits, the committee observed that port stakeholders generally support proposals that would enhance safetyñbut oftenconsider them too expensive, especially if they must be supported by user fees. port directors and shippers generallywant to maximize cargo efficiency for economic reasons and,therefore, prefer that safety regulations not be too onerous,which sometimes conflicts with the uscgõs attempts tocarry out its mission. private companies, however, also recognize that ports and companies with reputations for frequent accidents may lose their public stature, as well as business. thus, there seems to be a useful and creative tensionbetween the uscgõs efforts to promote safety and the private sectorõs efforts to promote efficiency, which could leadto an appropriate balance between them.there also appears to be a dynamic relationship betweensafety and efficiency, although it is difficult to define. thecommittee did not dwell on this issue but believes it deservesfurther attention. however, at least one area of overlap wasnoted. the implications for both safety and efficiency oftracking hazardous cargo has not been fully recognized bythe federal government.for more than 10 years, the u.s.customs service has maintained an automated system thatallows carriers to transmit electronic manifest data on allimported cargo while en route to the united states so thecustoms service can determine, prior to arrival, whether toexamine the cargo or release it. almost 75 percent3 of shipsentering u.s. ports now use this system, which is linked tomore than 1,500 trade participants, including ocean carriers,data processing centers, port authorities, and inland ports(aylward, 1996). the uscg, however, does not use thissystem for tracking hazardous cargo, relying instead on paper records and portspecific notification of emergency response teams (see appendix c and appendix d). the committee has heard anecdotal reports of instances in whichmajor ports had to be closed for hours at a time while mysterious hazardous cargoes were being identified. the uscgmight be able to use information about hazardous cargoesfrom the electronic manifests in the u.s. customs databasein nearreal time if certain adjustments were made in thesystem. although previous discussions of this possibilityfailed to produce a solution (see box 21), the issue is important enough to warrant further examination in another venue.the confidentiality of the data probably could be maintained,but substantial funding might be required to establish auscg system that could perform necessary translations andkeep track of the data.growing importance of nonfederalstakeholdersthe convergence of public and private roles in maritimetransportation is based on common interests, four of whichare pertinent to the present study:¥ensuring the safety of lives and cargo, avoiding3 this figure was obtained from the u.s. customs web site (http://customs.ustreas.gov), august 1998.box 21tracking hazardous materialscarriers, terminal operators, port authorities, andservice centers provide automated manifest data tothe u.s. customs service for cargo arriving in, ordeparting from, u.s. ports. in recent years, theuscg and customs service have explored the feasibility of using these data for hazardous materialnotifications but have concluded that the datalacked sufficient detail for this immediate application (kim santos, project leader for field operations, u.s. customs, personal communication,july6, 1998). some of the customs service dataprovide records for hazardous material descriptionsand class code entries. however, reporting thequantity, weight, and other details of a cargo is notcurrently mandatory, so these data have limitedvalue to the uscg.another possible mechanism for hazardous material notification is the ship notice/manifest transaction created for the procurement process of the electronic commerce program office of the u.s. department of defense. from these data, a detailedlist of the contents of a shipment and descriptionsof their physical characteristics can be obtained andsent to one or more selected receivers. hazardousmaterial code qualifiers allow shippers to use u.s.department of transportation or imo identifiers ascargo descriptors. if the customs service were tointegrate this transaction set into its new database,the automated commercial environment, then acommon mechanism might be established for reporting details on cargo shipments that could satisfy the u.s. customs service, the u.s. departmentof defense, and the uscg.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal, state, and private roles15environmental damage, reducing the costs of accidents,and promoting law enforcement and national security¥moving vessels and cargo in and out of ports efficientlyunder all conditions4¥ensuring the smooth flow of goods from one mode oftransport to another to save time and reduce costs¥fostering economic growth, creating jobs and prosperity in the processhistorically, issues of safe navigation have been the exclusive province of seamen, shipowners, and government.today, a great many other stakeholders are actively involved.in response to a series of disastrous events, most notably theexxon valdez oil spill in alaska in 1989, the general publicis now demanding a voice in ensuring that the movement ofpotentially polluting cargoes is as safe as possible. the public demand has been manifested in a number of ways, suchas the expanded role of state governments in navigationalmatters. four statelevel organizations dealing with marinesafety issues are: (1) the statesb.c. task force (which coordinates measures for the prevention of marine pollutionand response activities of the four west coast states [california, oregon, washington, and alaska] and the canadianprovince of british columbia); (2) the office of oil spillprevention and response in california; (3) the spill prevention preparedness and response division5 of the washington state department of ecology; and (4) the alaska department of environmental conservation.public port authorities also maintain high profiles, oftenbecause their charters extend significantly beyond their responsibilities for piers and wharfs to acting as catalysts foreconomic development for entire regions. the port of seattle, for example, functions in that role for all of kingcounty, a geographic area larger than some eastern states.because the port is supported by taxes levied on all countyproperty owners, concerns about port activities and issuesaffecting the port are much more widespread than one mightexpect.vessel operating companies also have a large stake innavigational issues because they bear the costs of terminaldevelopment and operation. for example, a container linethat makes a multimilliondollar investment in a stateoftheart terminal would rightly demand a voice in decisionsabout the navigational systems that support vessel movementto and from that terminal. petroleum carriers have even morereason to participate both to protect their investment and toavoid delays in transits to and from refineries that couldaffect public health and welfare. deepsea operators carrying containers and petroleum recognize that safe passage inand out of harbors is a responsibility shared by vessel crewsand shoresupplied services, such as vts.overall, the number and diversity of stakeholdersñincluding both regular users of ports and waterways and thegeneral public, often represented by government agenciesñparticipating in local, regional, and national planning andother activities that affect maritime commerce have grownconsiderably. examples include the national dialog on vtsinitiated by the uscg and the seven public òlisteningsessionsó held in the spring of 1998 by the uscg and cooperating federal agencies (see box 22). on the one hand,user involvement is now considered an essential element formarshaling support and funding to establish and operatenavigation systems, and broad stakeholder participation expands the base of support. on the other hand, stakeholderparticipation tends to make the process arduous and frustrating because their input can be emotional or selfserving. arguments and evidence provided by stakeholders must becarefully assessed to avoid giving undue weight to narrow,parochial positions. stakeholder participation should be related to sources of funding; for example, if tax revenues areused to fund services, then taxpayers (i.e., the general public) have a right to participate in the decisionmaking process. a recent report on risk management advocates a4 although allweather operations is a goal for certain ports that mustmaintain tight schedules, it may not always be economically feasible.5 this division was created in july 1997 when the washington stateoffice of marine safety was merged into the department of ecology.box 22listening to stakeholdersfederal agencies held a total of seven listeningsessions in the spring of 1998 at various locationsalong the u.s. coasts, great lakes, and inland waterways to gather input from state and local governments, industry, waterways users, service providers, and other interested parties. these sessionswere part of an attempt initiated in late 1997 bythe uscg and marad, in cooperation with approximately 10 other units of the federal government, to support a safe, environmentally sound,worldclass waterways system that would improveu.s. global competitiveness and national security.the results of the regional sessions were presentedat a national meeting in november 1998, whencritical issues deserving the attention of nationalpolicy makers were identified. the initiative is expected to improve coordination and cooperationamong all stakeholders. federal agencies plan tocontinue this exchange of information at periodicfuture sessions.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementthoughtful balance between analysis and deliberation in riskyenterprises (nrc, 1996b).although it is important that all stakeholders participatein the decisionmaking process, the federal government isthe only entity responsible for safeguarding national interests, enforcing maritime law, negotiating and carrying outinternational agreements, and responding to the wishes ofthe entire citizenry (as represented by the u.s. congress).at the same time, the uncertainty of budgets and the necessity of meeting budget priorities have made it difficult forfederal agencies to enact and carry out consistent policies.evolution of publicprivate rolesharingthe federal government has taken a strong leadership rolein the development, funding, and operation of navigationsafety systems, whereas the private sector has led the development and operation of cargo management systems. whenever these two areas intersect or gaps appear, publicprivatepartnerships, a concept supported by both users and outsideanalyses, have been the solution of choice (gao, 1996;nrc, 1996a). the weaknesses in the present arrangement,noted earlier, include inadequate budgets for federal agencies to carry out their safety responsibilities and the tendencyto develop standalone information systems featuring limited collaboration and information sharing (e.g., the generalfailure by federal agencies to provide existing electronic dataon hazardous cargoes to appropriate public safety offices).publicprivate partnerships, a concept that remains in itsinfancy in the maritime arena, have also experienced someògrowing pains,ó and representatives of privatesector stakeholders have raised a number of concerns about these arrangements. the most frequent complaint is that federalagencies cannot make longterm commitments of resourcesto partnerships. another common concern is that privatesector interests may be overridden by federal goals. some ofthese concerns could be addressed by clarifying how partnerships should function and establishing formal definitionsof public and private roles. experience with successful partnerships will also raise confidence levels. the classic example of a successful publicprivate partnership continuesto be the vtis serving the los angeleslong beach harborcomplex, a cooperative effort of the local marine exchange,the state of california, and the uscg. this partnership wasdescribed in the committeeõs interim report (nrc, 1996a).finally, problems have also arisen about role sharingamong federal agencies. some members of the user community expressed concerns to the committee about the federal emphasis on vtss (a responsibility of the uscg),which seemed to obscure the need for a more basic toolñaccurate nautical charts (a responsibility of noaa). theseprivatesector stakeholders believe that federal money wouldbe better spent on improvements other than vtss. in thenational dialog on vessel traffic services (1997), the needfor other types of systems was also emphasized. the frequency with which these concerns have been raised underscores the reality that federal allocations have not been wellcoordinated among agencies.in an attempt to address this problem, the interagencycommittee on waterways management (icwm) was established in 1995 to identify, evaluate, develop, and promotethe implementation of federal policies and programs to ensure effective waterways management.6 the icwm seemsto be an appropriate vehicle for dealing with the issues raisedin the present report because its vision calls for òfederal infrastructure,7 systems, and services that will fully supportthe current use and anticipated growth in the use of the waterways with a high degree of efficiency and safety.ó inaddition, the icwmõs objectives include promoting safe, environmentally sound use of waterways and coordinatingoverlapping management functions. the committee, whichmeets three times a year, is chaired by the uscg assistantcommandant for marine safety and environmental protection. the members include representatives from the u.s.departments of commerce, defense, interior, and transportation, as well as the environmental protection agency.need for strong federal leadershipas the roles of various stakeholders are being sorted out,it is important that the federal responsibility, which is broaderand more complex than is usually appreciated, be kept inmind. the role of the federal government in maritime safetyis broad and well established. most ocean and inland shipping is international or interstate, and there is a vested national interest in ensuring economic, environmental, and national security. a strong federal role is also essential formariners if they are to benefit from a common operatingenvironment in national and international waters. all stakeholders recognize the dual need for portspecific systemstailored to local conditions and national standards that wouldenable the same equipment to be used in any port or waterway (national dialog on vessel traffic services, 1997).areas of government responsibilities are described below:¥safe vessels. the federal government ensures that vessels are built and maintained at acceptable levels ofsafety by reviewing designs, setting standards, and inspecting vessels. because most oeangoing vessels in6 the origins of the interagency committee on waterways managementdate to a 1993 interagency conference on coordinating research and development of federal waterways navigation, at which it was recommended thatthe idea of a committee be explored as a means of coordinating policyissues and program development.7 infrastructure includes physical infrastructure, navigation support systems and services, and information delivery systems and services.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal, state, and private roles17u.s. waters are foreignflag vessels, government agencies (the uscg in particular) rely heavily on international rules and standards, which requires close coordination with other governments, international agencies,and classification societies. information systems arekey to ensuring vessel safety through surveillance andenforcement.¥safe crews. through the licensing and drug testing ofmariners, vessel inspections, and accident investigations, the federal government, through the uscg, ensures that crews of u.s. vessels are capable of safe operations. because of the prevalence of foreignflagvessels and foreign crews, however, international regulations and coordination are critical to ensuring thatcrews operate safely. because of the need for consistent standards, the federal government alone should beresponsible for establishing and monitoring personnellevels, standards, and qualifications. the training andqualification of mariners are as important to safe operations as hardware and information systems are tomaintaining oversight.¥hydrographic and bathymetric information. onfebruary 10, 1807, the u.s. congress passed an actauthorizing president thomas jefferson òto cause asurvey to be taken of coasts of the united states, inwhich shall be designated the islands and shoals andplaces of anchorage . . .ó since that time, the federalgovernment, currently through noaa, has gatheredcoastal data and created, published, and sold nauticalcharts. predictions of tidal currents and water depthhave also been published, as have compendiums of general information about u.s. waterways. although authoritative static information is still important, the needfor realtime information about navigation variables(e.g., water depth and currents) is growing. increasesin vessel sizes, without commensurate increases inchannel dimensions, have raised safety concerns aboutunderkeel clearances since there is a strong commercial interest in loading vessels to the maximum draftpossible.¥operating rules. many operating rules govern themovement of vessels. although some rules are portspecific, based on waterway configurations and otherfactors, most rules are codified both nationally and internationally. both mariners and the public should beconfident that these rules are being followed and, ifnot, that prompt remedial action will be taken. enforcement is a fundamental responsibility of government,principally the uscg, that requires a regulatory framework supported by accurate information about port andwaterway conditions and activities.the proper determination of the federal role in maritimeinformation systems must take into account many factorsbesides the beneficiaries of individual decisions. the complex issues raised by rapidly evolving technologies haveunderscored the need for a central arbiter acting in the national interest. for example, a balance must be establishedbetween the needs of local ports and the need to provide aconsistent maritime operating environment among ports andnations. deciding how to meet common needs and how todevelop, implement, and enforce the technical and operatingstandards on a global basis is a complicated matter that isbecoming even more complicated in light of the growingcosts and increasing complexity of advanced technologies.summarybecause federal funding for maritime safety technologiesand operations has been declining, some federal responsibilities are being shifted to other stakeholders and to publicprivate partnerships. the reduction in the federal governmentõs support forñand therefore its role inñmaritimesafety appears to be driven exclusively by budgetary considerations and has been undertaken unilaterally without appropriate input from mariners, industry, or the general public.the current trend toward publicprivate dialog and partnerships is a positive step toward redressing this problem butcould be enhanced by a clear articulation of public and private roles, including a description of the comprehensive federal responsibilities in marine transportation. the federalresponsibility for maritime safety systems and services extends beyond the oftensubjective issue of who will benefit.only the federal government can promote the adoption andimplementation of national and international standards, coordinate efforts with other nations, enforce national maritime laws and regulations, and balance local interests withthe national need for a consistent operating environmentfrom port to port.although the effects on maritime safety of the changingpublic and private roles are not known precisely, the perception is widespread that safety is being compromised and that,because budgeting for all federal maritime agencies is notcentrally coordinated, the limited federal dollars allocatedfor maritime safety are not always spent on the highestpriority needs.the relationship between maritime safety and efficiencyis dynamic and difficult to define. however, there is clearlysome overlap with respect to hazardous cargoes. the u.s.customs serviceõs extensive electronic system for trackingall cargo in u.s. waters could be tapped to provide realtimeinformation to emergency response teams.referencesaylward, a. 1996. intelligent transportation systems and intermodalfreight transportation. report prepared for the its joint program office by the u.s. department of transportation, research and specialprograms administration. cambridge, mass.: volpe national transportation systems center.gao (general accounting office). 1996. marine safety: coast guardapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementshould address alternatives as it proceeds with vts 2000. gao/rced9683. washington, d.c.: gao.national dialog on vessel traffic services. 1997. summary of guidancefrom the national dialog on vessel traffic services. available fromthe marine board, national research council, 2101 constitution ave.,n.w., washington, d.c. 20418. tel. 2023343119.nos (national ocean service). 1998. hydrographic data acquisition planfor nautical charting. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce, national oceanic and atmospheric administration.nrc (national research council). 1994a. minding the helm: marine navigation and piloting. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 1994b. charting a course into the digital era: guidance for noaaõsnautical charting mission. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 1996a. vessel navigation and traffic services for safe and efficientports and waterways, interim report. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.nrc. 1996b. informing risk in a democratic society. washington, d.c.:national academy press.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems19193enhancing navigation safety information systemsthe principal opportunities for improving maritime information systems involve existing or emerging technologies that promote navigation safety. a basic understandingof trends and needs in this area is necessary for clarifyingpolicy and funding issues, this chapter examines information systems that promote overall port and waterways safety,including the safety of navigation and vessel transits throughharbors.safety systems for general navigation are the basic toolsused by mariners to fix vessel position, obtain informationabout the physical environment and operating conditions,and communicate with other vessels and shorebased personnel. these òfoundationó systems also include databasesused for safetyrelated policy making and decision making.foundation systems include the global positioning system(gps) and differential gps (dgps),1 other navigationalaids, hydrographic data, nautical charts, portspecific andgeneral information about waterways, and data on tides andcurrents. shorebased components and systems are generally designed, funded, and operated by federal agencies forthe benefit of all mariners. however, onboard equipmentmust be purchased and operated by the users. thus, nationalor international standards and requirements may be necessary to ensure that systems function effectively. the effective application of technology also requires that users have aminimum level of training.the next section is a brief discussion of the role of technology in waterways management, which relies heavily onpeople and rules. the remainder of the chapter describesfour key technology suites that could be improved or morewidely deployed: noaaõs plans for updated hydrographicsurveys and nautical charts; the current status of ports;prospects for ais2; and a new perspective on vts systems.waterways managementtechnology alone cannot guarantee maritime safety.people, working according to rules governing safe vesseltransits, are necessary to any effective waterways management system. information is useless unless it gets to theright people at the right time. vessel safety is influencedby a great many individuals: the master and crew, who areultimately responsible for handling the vessel and whoknow its capabilities and limitations; system operators, whoprovide navigation information to vessels; marine pilots,who need accurate and timely information on local harborsor waterways; vts personnel, who must make decisionsbased on the conditions and other traffic in the area; localservice providers, such as tug masters and shipping agents;and mariners on other vessels in the area. in many foreignharbors, the activities of all of these individuals are coordinated by a central authority. in the united states, this isseldom the case, although marine exchanges or agentssometimes coordinate the flow of some information amongthe key players.recognizing the need for vessel masters and pilots to havecontinuous access to accurate, realtime information, boththe uscg (national dialog on vessel traffic services,1997) and intertanko (1996) have recommended thatwaterways management systems be defined for each u.s.harbor based on continuous input from local harbor safetycommittees, whose members would include pilots and otherfrequent users of local waters. the safety committees wouldmake recommendations to the uscg regarding system1 the gps, a military radionavigation system that uses transmissionsfrom satellites, provides accurate and continuous worldwide position fixesin three dimensions. for civilian users, the gps provides horizontal accuracy to within 100 meters 95 percent of the time. differential corrections togps range measurements are provided by the dgps, which is currentlyaccurate to within 10 to 15 meters.2 although ais has only recently become a popular initiative in certainareas in the united states, it has a long history of promotion, development,and testing in the international maritime sector.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementelements, such as navigation regulations, anchorage procedures, traffic separation schemes, and improvements in thetypes and locations of navigation aids. information needsand flows would be defined according to local needs, but thedelivery methods and equipment would adhere to international standards.a regime of appropriate rules, widely followed (and enforced as necessary), would make the operating environmentorderly and predictable and is, therefore, a significant safetymeasure. considerable documentation supports this thesis,including studies that credit a passive system of rules withsignificantly reducing traffic accidents in the port of london(nrc, 1996). strong anecdotal evidence shows that similarresults have been achieved by harbor safety committees incalifornia (marsh and richards, 1996). selfpolicing can behighly effective, but it requires oversight coupled with theauthority and capability to enforce rules. for example, adramatic improvement was observed in selfpolicing in losangeleslong beach once the captain of the port had accessto a surveillance systemña vtis operated by the marineexchange with oversight by the local harbor safety committee (nrc, 1996).nautical chartingsome progress has been made in updating hydrographicsurveys and nautical charts of u.s. waters. since 1994,approximately 5,000 square nautical miles designated asòcritical needs areasó have been surveyed using modernmethods (i.e., multibeam depthsounding equipment thatcan cover the entire seafloor and dgps for determininglocation); another 38,000 square miles judged to be criticalneed areas remain to be surveyed (noaa, 1997a, 1997b).about 60 percent of the critical backlog is in alaska (nos,1998).in response to a congressional mandate, noaa recentlyfinalized a plan for reducing the backlog of requests for hydrographic surveys (nos, 1998). the plan specifiesoutsourcing of at least 50 percent of its hydrographic services to private contractors. in the next 5 to 10 years, noaaplans to contract out most of the data acquisition in the gulfof mexico and the pacific coast of the mainland (nos,1998). the agency will also operate its own three surveyships, provide quality control, maintain nautical databases,ensure nationwide coverage, provide leadership in settingand meeting international standards, and work with the private sector and other federal agencies to develop new surveytechnologies. even so, noaa estimates that, at fiscal year1998 annual funding levels, it will take 25 to 30 years toeliminate the existing survey backlog (noaa, 1997b).noaa recognizes that maintaining a level of capabilityand expertise entails more than facilitating contracting efforts. the government must also retain expertise and competency in order to meet its international and other responsibilities. the public nature of these responsibilities cannot bereadily transferred to, and are not appropriate for, the privatesector (nos, 1998).in a complementary effort, the noaa office of coastsurvey has developed a plan for accelerating nautical chartupdates for the busiest commercial ports and trade routes, asdetermined by the tonnage of goods that moves through them(noaa, 1997a). other highpriority areas include somecoastal and cruise ship routes that have never been adequately surveyed. if resources continue to be severely limited, charts of lower priority areas will be published less frequently than in the past. the agencyõs fy 1998 budget willsupport the production of 360 new chart editions, 30 percentof the charts for u.s. waters (noaa, 1997a). but many ofthese òupdatedó charts will not include new survey information because none is available.noaa is moving toward the production of imocompliant,fully digitized vector charts as rapidly as budgets allow(lockwood, 1998). the agency plans to release 190 electronic navigation charts by the end of 1999 and will increasethe number of electronic navigation charts as resources permit. noaa will also continue to maintain raster charts andthe raster chart notice to mariners update service.3ports and òports liteóbecause ports has proven to be effective, users, at leastin some areas, have agreed to help pay for its operation.ports is a sensorbased system, developed by noaa, thatgives vessels access to realtime data on currents, tides,winds, waves, temperatures, and salinity. the system helpsmariners avoid collisions and groundings, assists in planning safe passage, and enables mariners to ascertain thedrafts their vessels must maintain when transiting ports andwaterways. nautical charts show only minimum chartedchannel depths, but mariners need realtime water depthscorrected to allow for changes caused by severe weather orabnormal tides.ports is operational in tampa bay, new york harbor,san francisco bay, and galveston bay. six candidate areashave been identified for future systems (see figure 31).smaller systems, known as òports lite,ó are operationalin nikisiki and anchorage, alaska; seattle and tacoma,washington; baltimore, maryland, and hampton roads,virginia. all ports systems are operated and maintainedwith local funding; noaa provides only the initial prototypes and overall quality control. although this funding approach has enabled ports with active local initiatives to enjoy the benefits of this safetyenhancing system, it does notensure safety benefits for all vessels that may need ports.3 noaa plans to continue to rely heavily on raster charts, which wereinitially created by passing paper charts through a scanner. the features inthese raster charts cannot be deleted or manipulated individually. in contrast vector data consist of individual position and attribute information foreach feature on the chart.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems21figure 31status of ports implementation (october 1998). source: noaa.portsexisting houston/galveston new york/new jersey san francisco tampaports liteexisting anchorage baltimore hampton roads nikisiki seattle tacomapotential corpus christi jacksonville los angeles/long beach philadelphia providence valdezpotential boston fall river new havenapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementautomatic identification systemssupport is growing among u.s. port and waterways usersfor ais (see appendix b, for example), an emerging technology that could have significant safety benefits, is simpleto operate, and is compatible with a range of traffic management schemes. one advantage of ais is that it enables mariners and vts watchstanders to identify and distinguish specific vessels that otherwise appear as anonymous identicalòblipsó on a video display or radar screen (see box 31).another advantage is the low cost of the equipment (relativeto many other technologies) carried by participating vessels.developmental ais or aislike systems have been used in anumber of operational systems, including in prince williamsound, alaska, and ports in canada, sweden, and the unitedkingdom. the uscg began an ais demonstration with 50vessels in the lower mississippi river in 1998.the effectiveness of ais as a safety measure dependslargely on the proportion of vessels that participate and theability of ais to function in the shiptoship mode. existingsystems are limited to a few specific vessels or a local coverage area or only a shiptoshore mode. however, manystakeholders support the universal use of ais (national dialog on vessel traffic services, 1997). international effortsto upgrade and promote the application of this technologyare under way, and the uscg now supports the completionof universal shipborne ais standards and the establishmentof carriage requirements for vessels nationally and internationally as early as july 2002.ais can be used as a standalone system to provide vessellocation and identification data to mariners on the manywaterways that do not have shoreside traffic managementsystems. ais can also be combined with radar or vts systems, depending on local needs and choices.4 universal requirements for the carriage of ais transponders cannot beimplemented until an agreement has been reached on standards and requirements.5 in general, this emerging technology appears to meet the vessel traffic management needs inmany situations and will probably be adopted more widelybox 31how ais worksmaritime ais is similar to the technology used (in conjunction with radar) by air traffic controllers to keep trackof aircraft. the basic maritime ais technology is a shipboard transponder that operates in the vhf maritimeband and is capable of sending a variety of vessel information (e.g., identification, position, heading, length,beam, type, draft, and cargo) to other ships and to shore.the receiving stations can display the locations and identity of all transponderequipped vessels on an electronicchart. because the data transfer is automatic, there is noneed for extensive voiceradio communicationsña majorbenefit because it frees mariners for other duties andreduces what some perceive as the intrusiveness of vtssystems.a complete ais system consists of a vhf transmitter, afrequencyagile vhf receiver, an accurate positioning system, and a display of ship vector and other informationon an electronic chart. (a single vessel that has a complete system on board can both transmit its own signalsand receive and display information from other vessels.)position information is usually derived from dgps. operational requirements are for 2,000 reports per minutewith updates every two seconds.a functional example of a shipshore tracking system isthe international tug of opportunity system (itos), whichis designed to prevent drift groundings of disabled vesselsin the puget sound area. the local marine exchange maintains a database of the location and capabilities of localtugboats outfitted with transponders. the tug nearest to avessel in need can be located within seconds of enteringthe vesselõs location into the itos system. the system isentirely funded by industry (smart forum, 1997), butvisual readouts of the identification, location, course, andspeed of each tug are displayed at uscg offices.4 the various technological tools available for, and used in, vts installations are discussed in the committeeõs interim report (nrc, 1996). forexample, radar and closedcircuit television have traditionally been used bytraffic managers for surveillance of congested waterways and do not requirethat vessels carry special equipment. newer technologies, such as ais,would provide more precise vessel identification and position informationbut would require that vessels carry transponders.5 a performance standard describing the operational requirements for shipboard ais transponders was adopted by the imo maritime safety committeein may 1998. (the final standard is expected to be available soon on the imoweb site, http://www.imo.org). the standard is based on a recommendationmade in 1996 by the international association of lighthouse authorities(iala), which has been the primary organization sponsoring and coordinating the development of ais. in 1997, at the request of the united states andother countries, iala hosted a working group of ais manufacturers andadministrators to decide on a standard technology for ais transponders thatmeets the imo performance standard. the working groupõs recommendation was submitted to the international telecommunications union, which isnow defining the telecommunications protocol for ais.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems23in the next several years. however, some technical problems, such as the allocation of standard worldwide radio frequencies for ais operation, must still be resolved.the united states will not be able to dedicate eitherwideband or narrowband vhf channels to ais anytimesoon, although it should be able to designate an availablechannel locally for ais purposes. the national telecommunications and information administration has been askedto develop a nationwide ais frequency plan based on theresults of a forthcoming decision by the federal communications commission (fcc).6new perspective on vessel trafficservices systemsthe most contentious debates about public and privateroles in navigation information systems have centeredaround the funding and operation of vts systems. theuscg has established and operates eight vts systems. theinformation generated by these systems, and their trafficmanagement, also benefit commercial interests at the affected ports (nrc, 1996). however, the commercial benefits have probably not been maximized because much ofthe data cannot be accessed easily by all potential users.because both private interests and the public benefit fromvts systems, questions have been raised about who shoulddesign and operate these systems and whether the costsshould be borne by the federal government alone or shouldbe shared by system users.proposals for user fees have sparked controversies aboutoverall system costs and capabilities. if users are asked topay, then they want maximum utility from the vts information at the lowest possible cost. the uscgõs plans to installvts systems in as many as 17 ports were canceled in late1996 when congress eliminated funding for the procurementprogram, which was criticized by some as overly expensiveand not suitable for all local port communities (u.s. houseof representatives, 1996).various means of reconciling these conflicting concernshave been suggested. one solution is publicprivate partnerships, exemplified by the los angeleslong beach (la/lb)vtis, where users cover the costs of operation, and theuscg uses the system to carry out its responsibilities. toensure that authority is properly exercised, uscg personnelare assigned as watchstanders. the cost of their services iscurrently borne by users, but the uscg is seeking federalfunds to pay for its watchstanders. the la/lb vtis is themodel for partnerships being developed in the san franciscobay region (involving federal, state, and private entities) andthe port of san diego (involving the u.s. navy and the port).box 32 describes the partnership evolving in san francisco.the overall approach to vessel traffic management is stillevolving. the port and waterway safety system (pawss)project, which is being developed by the uscg with inputfrom the national dialog group, is currently building a vtssystem in new orleans and other locations (see figure 32),and locations for new vts systems will be selected using aprocess based on risk analyses. the pawss approach envisions traffic management as a fivestage hierarchy, with traditional aids to navigation providing the most basic safetybaseline. at the next level, which provides additional securityand controls, is vesseltovessel ais. the third level is enhanced ais, which includes additional shorebased sources ofinformation. the fourth level is vtis. the top level is fullvts (24houraday shorebased surveillance and advisoryactivity under the direct authority of the uscg).in the meantime, the private sector has often stepped inwhere no formal vts systems exist. a few vtslike systemsare operated by pilots, some of whom carry laptop computersthat combine electronic charts with satellite positioning systems. although these private systems are narrower in scopethan uscgoperated vts systems, the laptop devices offerseveral important benefits, including independence of shipboard equipment, training focused on a single device, andgrowing confidence with ongoing use of the same equipment(nrc, 1996). (these benefits may be outweighed by the tendency to exclude the master and bridge management teamfrom the navigational process, which could encourage reliance on separate systems.) growing confidence in and increasing use of dgps systems might allow more vessels to bemoved under a wider range of conditions, but only if systemlimitations are known and users have been adequately trained.the previous report of this committee (nrc, 1996),called for the definition of a ògeneric, baseline systemó inresponse to the uscgõs original plans to use a single systems integration contractor for all new vts systems. thoseplans were canceled, however, and the uscg and the maritime community have adopted a cooperative approach todefining specific user needs and the most effective roles ofkey stakeholders.it has now become apparent to stakeholdersñand to thiscommitteeñthat the process of identifying ports and waterways that require vts systems, and determining their capabilities, will be more complex than was originally recognized.the basis for the original plans, the costbenefit analysis inthe port needs study (maio et al., 1991), focused only onpreventing and avoiding oil spills, whereas the current selection and design criteria have many more dimensions. moststakeholders now believe that a comprehensive approach tomaritime safety should extend far beyond vts systems.6 the 1997 world radio conference designated two worldwide channels for ais, channels 87b and 88b. in the united states, channel 87b isused for òpublic correspondenceó coast stations, and channel 88b is a federal land mobile frequency designated for use by all government agencies.the conference decided to remove public correspondence designations fromboth channels 87b and 88b. in august 1997, the uscg petitioned the fccfor two duplex channels from the vhf maritime band for the ais transponder. the fcc incorporated the uscg petition as a comment in pr docket92257.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementelements of vtsbased on new information and perspectives since the interim report, the committee has identified five factors thatshould be considered in decisions regarding the establishmentof vts systems: (1) the conditions requiring vessel trafficmanagement and the role of vts in ameliorating them;(2)funding mechanisms for vts installations and operations;(3) the operating government agency or private entity; (4) theextent of the services; and (5) the selection of technologies.other factors, which have been identified elsewhere,should also be taken into account (national dialog on vesseltraffic services, 1997). first, many waterways do not require a vts to achieve an appropriate level of safety. vtsis only one of many factors involved in maritime safety, andother systems may be more critical to safety in a particularwaterway. representatives of a wide range of port communities have noted that assigning proper priorities is critical.second, vts is not a synonym for òhigh technology,óalthough it does require technological tools to perform itsintended functions. vts is a systematic regime for managing a waterway. in the committeeõs judgment, overemphasis of vts technology could overshadow the considerationof other management tools.third, vts is not a new concept. it is a proven, internationally accepted tool that enhances vessel safety, promotesthe efficient movement of vessel traffic, and helps protectthe environment. until the 1990s, the united states had heldback from the conceptual development and application ofvts. a positive consequence of this delay is that the unitedstates can now benefit from vts developments by european nations and others.redefining the federal role in vtsthe new perspective on vts requires that the federal rolebe redefined, based in part on evolving international standards. the imo is in the late stages of incorporating vtscapabilities, requirements, and operations into a regime ofinternationally accepted standards. to date, the imo hasbox 32information systems and partners in san francisco baythe san francisco bay region features a vts system,ports, laptop navigation and identification units carriedby pilots, a cooperative marine information service,noaaõs prototype electronic charts, and a variety of ongoing waterways management experiments. the benefits of these systems are being maximized through thecooperative efforts of many entities, including five federal agencies,* the state office of oil spill prevention andresponse and the department of boating and waterways,and private sector organizations, such as the san francisco marine exchange, marine pilots, and tug and ferryoperators. one of the notable aspects of this partnershipis that federally funded research and developmentprojects were expanded to fill the urgent needs of otherlevels of government and the private sector.the goal of the evolving partnership is to provide mariners with timely, accurate information about hydrographic and meteorological conditions in san franciscobay, together with near realtime information about vessel traffic and harbor construction and dredging projects.this comprehensive information will be distributedthrough ais and the internet.the marine exchange will serve as the information òhub.óto facilitate the flow of information, it could be colocatedwith the vts vessel traffic center (vtc), which would haveto be modified to accommodate both operations. vtcequipment would have to be adapted to display informationgenerated by ais on vessel movements. transpondershave been installed in tugs and ferries operating in thebay, and pilots will carry portable ais units when on boarddeepdraft ships. the use of ais in the total system couldallow the uscg to reduce its staffing, which would freepersonnel for transfer to other duties. the marineexchange currently provides a web site with ports dataand other, more general information. the bay area vtcimage will be added to the web site and updated frequently using data available from ais and the vts.the two california state agencies will fund the operation, as well as maintenance of the ports system, fortwo years and will contribute funds to the ais program.responsible parties plan to seek legislative authorizationto implement user fees to support longterm operationsof the overall information system, including ports.a project known as smartbridge sponsored the development of an integrated vts and intelligent pilot carryaboard system that was installed at the vts for evaluation during 1997ð1998.* in addition to the uscg and noaa, the u.s. geologicalsurvey is using ports data in hydrodynamic models; amarad grant was used to test the portable pilot units;and usace is working with noaa on experiments todetect variations in ship drafts in real time using dgps(marsh and richards, 1996).applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems25figure 32 pwass project conceptñvts system based on automatic identification system (ais).established guidelines for vessel traffic services7 andguidelines for the recruitment, qualifications and trainingof vessel traffic service operators.8 it has also defined vtsas òa service implemented by a competent authority, designed to improve safety and efficiency of vessel traffic andto protect the environment. the service has the capability tointeract with the traffic and respond to traffic situations developing in the vts area.ó9in the committeeõs judgment, based on interactions withstakeholders, a significant percentage of the u.s. maritimecommunity has no personal experience with vts becausethey do not exist in many u.s. ports. consequently, manyu.s. mariners do not fully understand the role of a vts andtwo elements of the imo definition are sometimes misinterpreted. competent authority has been defined as òthe authority made responsible, in whole or in part, by thegovernment for the safety, including environmental safety,and efficiency of vessel traffic and the protection of the environment.ó10 the phrase òinteract with traffic and respond totraffic situationsó is interpreted by the imo to mean theability of a vts to recognize, analyze, and intervene in asituation that might otherwise lead to an accident, and,through its intervention, prevent incidents from developinginto accidents.comprehensive guidelines for establishing and operatingvts are included in a manual published by the internationalassociation of lighthouse authorities (iala) (1993). theiala membership consists of government agencies frommany countries responsible for aids to navigation, includingvts. the manual, therefore, represents an international consensus, which, in the absence of binding international conventions, has become a de facto standard. the imo is expected to seek greater standardization for vts and relatedactivities, and operator qualifications will undoubtedly be7 imo resolution a.857(20), adopted november 27, 1997.8 imo resolution a.857(20), adopted november 27, 1997.9 as adopted by the subcommittee on safety of navigation, 39th sessionof the imo, london, november 27, 1997.10 annex 20 to msc67/22, guidelines for vessel traffic services.vessel dataprocessing systemradar data*weathercurrentsdepthalertsposition datawatchstander*only where appropriateemergencyinformationportstakeholder'sinformationvessel provides:id, position, course, heading,and speedvessel receives:information on vessels, portdata, and hazardsvtcapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementadded to the international convention on standards fortraining, certification and watchstanding, 1978. other aspects of vts requirements will be brought within the framework of the international convention on the safety of lifeatsea.federal government as competent authoritythe committee considers the federal role in vts as having two dimensions. the first is to serve as competent authority and fulfill the associated duties and responsibilities.the second is to provide vessel traffic managementñandfundingñin areas where the national interest would beserved by vts.although arguments can be made for individual statesassuming the role of competent authority for vts systemsthat operate wholly within their waters, maritime safety isbest served in a consistent operating environment amongports and among nations. consistency can be maintainedonly if standards, operator qualifications, and procedures areuniform, nationally and internationally. most vts areas ofresponsibility extend beyond state waters to ensure that vessels are entered into the system before they reach congestedport approaches. for these reasons, the role of òcompetentauthorityó should be reserved for the federal government andshould be carried out exclusively by the uscg, the nationõsprimary maritime safety organization.the role of the competent authority is primarily to establish standards for vts operations, including the training and certification of operators and monitoring to ensurethat standards are met. this role should be extended to thedevelopment of a process for formally authorizing nonfederal vtis systems to ensure that they have adequatesupport infrastructures.establishing vts to serve the national interestfrom a national perspective, the committee identified fourpossible reasons for establishing a vts to serve the nationalinterest. first, the uscg may determine that a vts is necessary in a port for the fulfillment of its responsibilities formaritime safety as articulated in the ports and waterwayssafety act (p.l. 95474). this determination would belikely, for example, for a port or waterway where a maritimeaccident might result in a òspill of national significance.ó 11second, a formal traffic management capability may berequired for reasons of national security, includingconducting naval operations and logistics support for majormilitary deployments, or to fulfill uscg mission requirements. a port that is home to a large number of navy shipsoperating on a cycle that causes peaks of congestion mightdevelop problems related to safety or affect the movement ofcommercial vessels.third, a formal traffic management capability may be required for national economic reasons. the committee identified two representative situations. ports that are critical tothe transport of heating fuel could, in the winter, be considered essential to the public welfare. ports that serve as hubsfor container shipments could be critical to the economy.fourth, traffic management requirements of an international waterway could necessitate the participation of morethan one nation. an example is the strait of juan de fuca,where traffic is comanaged by the united states and canada.if a port or waterway meets one or more of these criteria,a vts system could be justified, and installation and operation of the system could be considered the responsibility ofthe federal government.12 the uscg has begun a process(see figure 33) of evaluating risks at individual ports todetermine their safety needs. a fivetier hierarchy of safetyenhancements has also been developed, with a full vts system as the top tier (see figure 34). the process is a combination of a risk assessment, a costbenefit analysis, and consultations with stakeholders, including selected agencies ofthe departments of transportation, commerce, and defense.planners would also do well to involve port authorities, vessel operators, pilot organizations, and other portrelated entities that would be affected by changes in the traffic management regime.as part of the process, the uscg could conduct analysesto identify the ports that warrant federal vessel traffic management based on national economic importance. theuscg could use noaaõs identification of priority areas forsurveys and charting as a basis for some analyses. the u.s.department of defense could also be asked to identify areaswhere defense considerations require traffic managementcapabilities. to obtain the greatest benefit from limitedfunds, the analyses should be appropriate to the situation.where simple, inexpensive systems can be implemented,only simple analyses are necessary to justify them.to ensure that the process is consistent and fair, a standard set of questions could be used to determine the requirements for vts. for example, the following questions weredeveloped by the national dialog on vessel traffic services(1997):¥what existing local navigational management systemsare in place and how effective are they?¥what are the existing or likely future conditions in the11 commandant instruction 16465.1, spills of national significance response management system, summarizes the factors for determining if aspill has national significance. the factors include the extent of the potentially affected area; the probable impact on public health and welfare andthe economy; the period of time over which the pollutant would be discharged or that would be required for cleanup; the level of public concern;and the level of political and public interest.12 whether the systems were funded from general revenues or user feeswould, according to the current approach, depend on their safety functionsas compared to improvements in efficiency.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems27port with respect to traffic density, traffic patterns, andcomplexity of traffic or vessel movements?¥what are the sizes, types, and numbers of vessels operating in the port area?¥what is the history (including the causes) of accidents,casualties, pollution incidents, and other vessel safetyproblems within the port area?¥what are the physical limitations of the port?¥what types and amounts of hazardous or environmentally sensitive cargoes are transported within the port?¥what are the prevailing conditions and extremes ofweather and oceanography in the port?¥what are the environmental, safety, and economic consequences of having or not having a vts within a givenport?the dialog group did not consider uscg missions, suchas national security and law enforcement, which should alsobe included.figure 33 u.s. coast guard riskbased port selection process.figure 34 vessel traffic management hierarchy.vtsvtisenhancedaisaistraditionalnavigation aidsperformpreliminaryport selection usingavailable informationhave risk factorsbeen adequatelyaddressed?developassessmentprocessapply processto selectedportsapply uscgvessel traffic management toolsin ascending orderstopinvestigate nonuscgvessel traffic management tools.install vtssystemimplementneeded changesyesnononoyesyesshould avtssystem beinstalled?can risks beaddressedwithout avts system?applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementnonfederal vtisin some areas, a federal vts may not be warranted butregional or local interests would support a traffic management scheme. the legislature of the state of california, forexample, has identified waterways for which environmentalprotection is a matter of significant state interest.13 some ofthese waterways were not even evaluated in the port needsstudy and hence were not identified as being of national significance.when considering the establishment of a vtis, the issuesto be considered include: whether or not a system is reallynecessary; who would pay for its installation; who wouldoperate it; and who would be liable if the vts contributed toan accident. the need for the system can be determined bystate or local governments (such as port authorities) or theuser community; the uscg, the competent authority, shouldparticipate in the process. the uscg would determine ifnational interests, including support for its own missions,would be served by federal involvement in the establishmentor operation of the system, and, if so, to what extent.defining a baseline systemin its interim report, the committee recommended that thecoast guard select ports with the greatest safety needs forvts and define a minimum generic baseline system thatwould meet national safety needs as well as coast guardmission requirements. the committeeõs description of aògeneric, baseline systemó can now be modified in terms ofits updated perspective on vts. the tools needed to providevts capabilities will vary from place to place depending onwaterway shape and dimensions, vessel traffic patterns, andother considerations. the capabilities, however, will be generally the same for all waterways. it can be argued that national safety needs are subsumed within the statutory responsibilities of each captain of the port (cotp) for ensuringvessel safety, waterways management, and environmentalprotection. it follows, then, that the national vts baselinefor federal systems can be defined in terms of the capabilities required by cotps to discharge their statutory responsibilities. in some cases, a vts may be justified based on theuscgõs mission and not directly related to commercial vessel safety (e.g., law enforcement or national security). thecatalog of capabilities can be used to select the technologicaltools appropriate for each port on a casebycase basis, giving due consideration to relevant policy issues and costs.a portbyport definition of system requirements wouldhelp minimize costs and maximize the benefits of investments in vts by tailoring each system to meet the needs ofa specific port. some tools, of course, will be useful for allports regardless of the complexity of the system or the volume of traffic. certain communications technologies, forexample, will be useful in all areas.as an example of how the necessary tools can be derivedfrom general capabilities, consider the issue of enforcingcompliance within a regulated navigation area (rna). obviously, the necessary tools will depend on the requirementsimposed in the rna. for example, in hampton roads, virginia, rules have been established for vessel movement andanchorage (33 cfr 165.501). in tampa bay, the requirements deal only with communications (33 cfr 165.753).the hampton roads rna may require surveillance, whereasthe tampa bay rna may require only monitoring and recording of vhffm channel 13 transmissions.all federal vts systems must support the full range ofuscg mission areas, including search and rescue operations,law enforcement, and maritime defense. if costeffectiveenhancements can support these missions without compromising the uscgõs primary focus on safety and environmental protection, then the additional capabilities should beprovided. it is also appropriate for a traffic service to address the needs of the commercial port community for trafficmanagement and information exchange. the commercialaspects of vts will undoubtedly vary by port, however, andcan best be determined through partnerships between the portcommunity and the uscg. the user community should alsobe involved in the development of portspecific operatingrules and procedures. the california harbor safety committees provide useful models for this process.14the technical components of a baseline system would bedetermined on a portbyport basis. for example, the benefits of ais may warrant the incorporation of this technology into all future and existing federal vts systems. theservices provided by a vtis should be tailored to supportthe needs of the sponsor(s), subject to the approval and oversight of the uscg (the competent authority). like federalsystems, vtis systems might be improved by the incorporation of ais.technology selectionthe selection of vts technology is an important exercisebecause it will substantially influence the effectiveness andcost of the system. the committee identified several considerations that may be helpful in the selection process. first,system capabilities should be defined before the technology13 see the lempertkeeneseastrand oil spill prevention and responseact of 1990.14 the requirements for these committees, including membership andresponsibilities, are spelled out in the lempertkeeneseastrand oil spillprevention and response act of 1990, section 8670.23. a key provisionrequires the development of harbor safety plans that address the safe movement of all vessel traffic in ports covered by the plans.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enhancing navigation safety information systems29is selected to prevent the system design from being drivenby equipment vendors or the acquisition process rather thanactual needs. second, the components should not increasethe workload of vessel crews unnecessarily. from this standpoint, the best technology is one that limits verbal radio exchanges to critical matters, minimizes the need to exchangefixed data, and enables mariners to extract the right data atthe right time. third, onboard equipment should meet bothinternational carriage requirements and domestic standards,so the operating environment is consistent, training requirements can be standardized, and costs to vessel operators canbe controlled. it is assumed that the equipment will meetappropriate standards of performance and interfacing.another key issue is the cost of the infrastructure requiredfor mariners to benefit from a new technology. for example,the combination of dgps and ecdis promises to enhanceboth maritime safety and efficiency; however, several majorinfrastructure issues (e.g., upgrading nautical charts to thesame level of accuracy as the positioning system) must beaddressed before these benefits can be fully realized.intelligent transportation systemsnew technologies for the enhancement of rail and highway traffic efficiency and safety have been the subject ofresearch carried out by the intelligent transportation systems office of the u.s. department of transportation. someof the research areas have included electronic tracking tags,identifiers, position locators, and other automated systemsthat could perform the laborintensive operations in trafficmanagement. a recent review of these systems as applied tointermodal freight transportation listed applications rangingfrom smart cards and bar codes to cargo tracking using dgpsand transponder identifiers (alyward, 1996). the uscgshould monitor this research to take advantage of the latestinnovations in transportation technology to help solve waterways management problems.summarywaterways management depends fundamentally on welltrained personnel following rules for safe vessel transits.however, technology can also contribute substantially to navigation safety. a number of opportunities exist for enhancingthe effectiveness and application of technologies in the unitedstates. the greater availability and use of electronic charts,ports, and ais could enhance safety in many u.s. ports andwaterways, if reliable funding can be arranged and carriagerequirements can be established for transponders.determining where vts systems should be installed andthe specifics of their design is a complex process. thecommitteeõs vision calls for uniform vts standards and capabilities across the nation, but the technological tools foreach system would be selected on a portbyport basis. thefederal government is responsible for maritime safety, ensuring a consistent operating environment and compatibletechnologies, and enforcing regulations. therefore, the federal government should be the competent authority for vtssystems and should provide vessel traffic management inareas where this would serve the national interest. the process for identifying ports that require new or enhanced vtssystems and for selecting the technologies to be used in eachsystem should be updated and formally adopted. this process should take into account all of the uscgõs missions.referencesaylward, a. 1996. intelligent transportation systems and intermodalfreight transportation. report prepared for the its joint program office by the u.s. department of transportation, research and specialprograms administration. cambridge, mass.: volpe national transportation systems center.iala (international association of lighthouse authorities). 1993. ialavessel traffic services manual. st. germain en laye, france: iala.intertanko. 1996. u.s. port and terminal safety study: a discussionpaper. oslo, norway: intertanko.lockwood, m. 1998. noaa. presentation to national dialog on vesseltraffic services, washington, d.c., may 20, 1998.maio., d., r. ricci, m. rossetti, j. schwenk, and t. liu. 1991. port needsstudy. report no. dotcgn01911.2, three volumes, prepared byjohn a. volpe national transportation systems center. washington,d.c.: u.s. coast guard.marsh, p., and t. richards. 1996. maritime technology in the san francisco bay region. pp. 6ð15 in proceedings of the marine safety council, u.s. coast guard, julyðseptember, 1996. arlington, va.: u.s. coastguard national maritime center.national dialog on vessel traffic services. 1997. summary of guidancefrom the national dialog on vessel traffic services. available fromthe marine board, national research council, 2101 constitution ave.,n.w., washington, d.c. 20418. tel. 2023343119.nos (national ocean service). 1998. hydrographic data acquisition planfor nautical charting. silver spring, md.: national oceanic and atmospheric administration, nos.noaa (national oceanic and atmospheric administration). 1997a. thenautical charting plan, 3rd ed. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.noaa. 1997b. noaaõs hydrographic survey plan, draft. silver spring,md.: noaanrc (national research council). 1996. vessel navigation and trafficservices for safe and efficient ports and waterways, interim report.washington, d.c.: national academy press.smart forum. 1997. forum on safe marine transportation (smart),february 27, 1997, university of washington, seattle, washington.unpublished report.u.s. house of representatives. 1996. congressional record, september16, 1996. h10398. washington, d.c.: government printing office.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways management304vision of the future and how to achieve itin the long recorded history of navigation, many important advances have been made in marinersõ ability to travelthe seas with safety, speed, and reliability. from the beginning, improvements in information and in the knowledge ofhow best to use it have been at least as important to marinersõ survival in perilous seas and crowded harbors as improved vessel design, construction, and materials or themany other advances in seafaring.the earliest charts of land masses, currents, wind patterns, and a few hand soundings, for example, apprised succeeding generations of seafarers of the conditions and hazards their predecessors had encountered. with advancingknowledge of the positions and movements of heavenly bodies, expert sailors using astrolabes (the predecessors of sextants) could approximate their position. a rudimentary compass was used to keep the vessel on course even when theheavens were obscured. a critical breakthrough was the invention of the harrison chronometer, which for the first timeprovided accurate and reliable time so that longitude couldbe determined to within a few miles. for nearshore piloting, increasingly sophisticated visual and audible navigationaids were developed over a period of several centuries.more recent breakthroughs, mostly resulting from military research and development, have included the gyrocompass, radio aids to navigation (from radio directionfinders to loran and decca), and satellite navigation. all ofthem have improved a navigatorõs ability to determine thevesselõs location and physical challenges, including shoals,reefs, tides, water depths, currents, and weather conditions.radar, a world war ii breakthrough, in combination withthe vhf radio, has improved the sailorõs ability to identifythe challenges posed by other vessels. despite all of theseadvances, however, if visibility was poor or traffic veryheavy, none of these systems assured mariners that they hadaccurate and complete information or the technical capabilityof solving their navigation and traffic problems.1most of these problems can now be solved, at least conceptually. furthermore, a common vision of the future isemerging within the maritime community, both in the unitedstates and abroad, in which computers, satellites, and electronics will be deployed wisely and widely to provide a newlevel of navigational safety. this chapter describes the vision and the elements the united states must have in place torealize it.the visionenvironmental conditionsin the future, existing and emerging technologies will provide mariners with timely warnings of obstacles in surrounding waters and accurate predictions of inclement weather.highly accurate information will be available in various formatsñelectronic displays, by radio, or on the internet. mariners will also be able to fix their positions quickly, easily,and accurately.basic hydrographic information, regularlyupdated, will be available for geographic regions of interestto all types of users. the technical means are already available to acquire all types of data, but adequate resources arelacking for updating obsolete data. the information willinclude geographic positions of land masses, shoals, andimportant features to the accuracy standard of 5 to 10 metersnow set by dgps.realtime hydrographic and meteorological data are essential for large, fast vessels entering dredged channels withminimum underkeel clearance. the technical means forobtaining these data have been proven effective by the success of the ports and other systems. once the issue ofchronic underfunding has been addressed, either through increased budgets or through partnerships, these vital information systems will realize their full potential.data will be available to users in many formats, rangingfrom updated paper charts to the most advanced electroniccharts, which will be written to international specificationsand will enable many users to take advantage of full ecdis1 reliance on imperfect technology can even introduce new hazards,like òradarassisted collisions,ó for example. (nrc, 1994).applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision of the future and how to achieve it31capability. tides, currents, and coast pilottype information will be published in hard copy and on the internet andupdated through electronic transmissions in varying degreesof detail (e.g., more detailed for big commercial ships andless detailed for recreational boats). however, because shipboard systems are not likely to match the speed of landlinedata connections (now 28,800 bits per second) in the nearfuture, some files, especially long or graphicsladen documents, may take too long to download from the internet tobenefit mariners.precision electronic navigation technology, such asdgps, has already proven to be extremely accurate. in thefuture, fixing positions in all weather will not only be possible (as it is today) but will also be reliable. prudent mariners, however, will continue to fix their positions by multiple, independent means when their vessels are close to hazards or in constricted waterways, especially when visibilityis poor.2 in other words, the mariner of the future will notrely solely on any one technology but will continue to exercise his or her critical judgment and will have the necessarytraining and qualifications to do so.other vesselsin the future, mariners will be able to detect the presenceand determine the position of other vessels quickly and accurately, regardless of weather or location. they will alsohave the tools to make sound decisions about taking evasiveaction, if necessary. all vessels will be equipped with ais,which will be linked to shorebased vts systems in busyharbors.ais, in combination with precision navigation systems,will become a critical tool for detecting other ships and selecting anticollision strategies, especially in low visibility.this technology suite will enable mariners on the bridges oftwo or more vessels to identify each other and exchange information silently and immediately on their courses andspeed. òsilent, bridgetobridge vtsó will be tested in aprototype installation in the ais pilot project on the lowermississippi river. similar systems in alaska, canada, andeurope have demonstrated their usefulness in closequarterssituations and in avoiding collisions.this òvts of the futureó will have many advantages overradar (which cannot òseeó around corners, such as islands)and will enable mariners to interact over dedicated frequencies that are not blocked by competing or extraneous transmissions. silent, screentoscreen interactions will enablemariners to communicate when and how they choose, eliminating the distraction of constantly monitoring vhf channels from several vessels and sometimes from shore.the success of the òvts of the futureó will depend on allvessels (or at least all vessels above a certain size) carryinginternationally compatible transponders and other equipmentand all operators being trained in their use. the equipmentwill be internationally interchangeable and not dependent onunique or proprietary technology. future vts systems willbe easy to use and affordable. fortunately, the proliferationof electronic equipment and the tendency for prices to decline over time suggests that this vision of the future can beachieved.traditional systems, such as radar, automatic radar plotting aid,3 and vhf radio, will continue to be used for redundancy and to ensure reliability. furthermore, in most heavilytrafficked harbors, an information link to a shorebased vtssystem will provide both information and active traffic management by the appropriate authority, when necessary.realizing the visionrealizing the vision described above will not be easy. afirm foundation will first have be laid so that the most effective systems can be widely deployed in the united states. thecommittee identified eight elements of this firm foundation.coordinated national policy on the maritimeinformation infrastructureat least four federal agencies are currently responsiblefor various types of information and data critical to the navigation of vessels. usace is responsible for channel maintenance and inland waterway operation, including locks onfederal systems; noaa is responsible for hydrographic surveys, charts, bathymetric data, coast pilot information, andweather information; the uscg is responsible for aids tonavigation, notices to mariners, navigational broadcasts,list of lights, and vts; and the national imagery and mapping agency is responsible for rebroadcasting some information from notices to mariners, keeping track of mobiledrilling rigs and acts of violence directed against shipping,the navigation information network, and sailing directions.the effective use of the data depends on the capability ofthese agencies to coordinate their activities, set common priorities for collecting and disseminating data, and cooperatein the delivery of services to users. too often mariners mustevaluate a variety of services and sources to determine whichone is most accurate and reliable in a given situation. acoordinated policy on the development and support of themaritime information infrastructure would eliminate, or atleast lessen, this uncertainty. coordinated planning couldprovide mariners with the most accurate data on a timelybasis in a useroriented format.3 automatic radar plotting aid is a computer that quickly and automatically plots radar targets based on information about the target vesselõs courseand speed. it is used to assess passing or overtaking situations and can helpprevent collisions.2 dgps has some limitations when used in constricted waterways(uscg, 1997).applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementmechanisms for identifying and responding tostakeholder needsidentifying all stakeholders in port and waterways operations, let alone cataloging and satisfying their needs, can bedifficult. nevertheless, stakeholdersõ needs must be met in away that enhances safety for all users, not just the most vocalones or a select group. if improving efficiency is the goal,then competing interests should be balanced to raise the overall threshold, not just the efficiency of one sector at the expense of others. in some ports, organized stakeholdergroups, such as harbor safety committees, are already inplace and can provide a mechanism for making decisions. inothers, federal agencies should encourage the formation ofstakeholder organizations and decisionmaking procedures.technical, operational, and performancestandardsstandards for data exchange, component interfaces, anduser interfaces with critical navigation systems are all essential for creating a uniform operating environment among allports and waterways. other standards may also be necessary for mariners to act confidently on the basis of safetyinformation, other types of data, instructions, or guidance.centralized, consistent, reliable sources of navigational information will provide a solid foundation for realizing thefuture vision. responsible parties should move forward expeditiously with the development, especially in the international arena, of technical standards and carriage requirementsfor essential navigational technology, including ecdis andais. the federal government has sole authority to act onbehalf of the nation in setting international standards.appropriate and predictable fundingalthough adequate and predictable funding are not always available at the federal level, the future vision can onlybe realized if support is somewhat predictable. the minimum level of support could plausibly be ensured through acombination of public and private funds through partnershipsto fund and operate systems.development and maintenance of the maritimeinformation infrastructurefederal agencies must develop and maintain the basic infrastructure necessary for navigational safety. the infrastructure must include the following essential elements:¥uptodate charts of all waterways essential to u.s.commerce must be available in both hard copy and electronic form, with chart data identical to those of gpsand as accurate as those of dgps. electronic formatsmust meet the international standards for use withecdis.¥realtime data on tides, currents, wave heights, andweather conditions for all waterways essential to u.s.interests must be electronically accessible (with backuphard copy) to vessels far enough offshore to plan a safepassage.¥uptodate, portspecific navigational data (e.g., information now available in coast pilots, light lists, andnotices to mariners) must be made available to mariners electronically (with backup hard copy) sufficientlyfar offshore to enable the planning of safe passage.¥vessels must be equipped with a mechanism for electronic vesseltovessel and vesseltoshore exchangesof information essential to emergency responses andnavigational safety.¥maintenance of conventional aids to navigation mustbe continued.¥an electronic system, accessible by the uscg andemergency response teams, must be in place for keeping track of hazardous cargoes carried by vessels inu.s. waters or stored at u.s. marine terminals.appendix e describes the necessary data and formatsfrom the point of approach to the departure from a port. thisdescription could be used to guide all agencies or organizations that coordinate and deliver information services.silent, automated systems for informationexchangeinformation should be delivered in ways that do not interfere with or distract shipboard personnel, particularlybridge watchstanders, from the performance of their duties. thus, the reliance on voice communications shouldbe drastically reduced, and the availability of realtimedata, on an asneeded basis, should be greatly expanded.two necessary advances will be an internet service thatenables mariners to access and print out information directly, as needed, thus eliminating the need to maintain anonboard library of preprinted and corrected hard copies,and ais for the exchange of selected data on vessel movements and other information.strict compliance with rules for waterwayoperationsmechanisms should be established to ensure that all mariners and vessels transiting u.s. waterways comply with established rules and regulations so that everyone can enjoythe benefits of safe, consistent, and orderly operations. enforcement methods may vary among ports and regions, butthe federal responsibility for this function is well established.in addition to traditional uscg enforcement, economicapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision of the future and how to achieve it33incentives might be used to reward, and thereby encourage,the use of advanced safety systems and practices. anotherenforcement technique would be to create peer pressure forcompliance through forums, such as harbor safety committees. if nonpunitive measures do not result in consistent compliance, punitive action should be taken.referencesnrc (national research council). 1994. minding the helm: marine navigation and piloting. washington, d.c.: national academy press.uscg (u.s. coast guard). 1997. differential gps mission needs analysis: harbor entry and approach. alexandria, va.: uscg navigationcenter.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways management345conclusions and recommendationsadvanced information systems are needed to ensure therapid, accurate exchange of vital information related to navigation safety. to provide a safe operating environment inu.s. ports and waterways and support the nationõs economicand national security in the future, a variety of navigationinformation technologies, strategies, and practices will haveto be improved and integrated. rather than focusing on specific changes that should be made in individual informationsystems, the committee defined the general steps the government should take to make u.s. ports and waterways as safeas possible.information systems that promote navigation safety arealready being used by a number of federal agencies to carryout their missions. these systems also contribute to the national goals of protecting the environmental and humanhealth. the federal government has a responsibility to takethe lead in the development and implementation of thesesystems to promote navigation safety. at the same time, thegovernment should take into account stakeholder needs andshould attempt to secure private sources of cofunding, wherever it is appropriate or essential to operations. cooperationamong federal agencies and partnerships of public and private stakeholders are emerging mechanisms for improvingnavigation safety.providing an informationinfrastructurethe navigation information infrastructure includes nautical charts (based on timely, accurate underlying data); systems for delivering chart data to users; systems for collectingand disseminating realtime data on weather conditions, currents, and tides; conventional aids to navigation (e.g., buoys,lights, and markers); electronic navigation systems (e.g.,dgps); and electronic information exchange systems. someof the nationõs most vital water transportation links do nothave an adequate navigation information infrastructure oraccessible, accurate, realtime data.most federal agencies with responsibilities in these areashave already defined infrastructure needs, but no integratedimplementation plan or arrangement for ensuring consistentsupport has been developed. furthermore, many of the federal responsibilities are shared with other public or privateentities; areas of responsibility often vary from port to port.conclusion 1. the federal government should strengthenits commitment to providing the basic infrastructure necessary for navigation safety and environmental protection. thebest way to promote the consistent implementation of critical infrastructure elements is to develop a national plan, withlocal input and periodic reassessments of the needs of particular ports and waterways. the development of a nationalplan will require strong leadership from both the government and port stakeholders to justify the necessary publicand private investments.recommendation 1. the interagency committee on waterways management should coordinate the efforts of theu.s. coast guard, national oceanic and atmospheric administration, u.s. army corps of engineers, and nationalimagery and mapping agency to develop an integrated,comprehensive plan for developing and maintaining thenavigation information infrastructure for all significant u.s.ports and waterways and should secure consistent, longtermsupport (public and private) to implement the plan.tracking hazardous cargothe uscg does not operate any electronic systems fortracking hazardous cargo and does not currently have regular access to the u.s. customs service comprehensive information systems, which contain electronic manifests frommost cargo vessels sailing within, or planning to enter, u.s.waters. furthermore, port information systems (which areoften linked to the u.s. customs service database) rarelyprovide emergency response teams with direct access to thisapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations35data. a number of port closings and other shipping delayshave been caused by difficulties encountered by public safetypersonnel trying to identify unknown cargo after spills, fires,and other incidents. time is of the essence in an emergency,and realtime access to electronic data on hazardous cargoeswould be much quicker than the current practice of relyingon paper records and hoping that marine terminal and vesselpersonnel who can identify cargoes are available.conclusion 2. the safety of u.s. ports and waterwayswould be enhanced if the uscg and local emergency response personnel had access to electronic manifest data forcommercial cargo vessels.recommendation 2. the u.s. coast guard and the u.s.customs service should develop a system to disseminateautomatically electronic information on hazardous cargofrom the existing cargotracking database to emergency response organizations and personnel.improving vessel traffic managementthe uscg is implementing a program to meet the needsof key u.s. ports and waterways that do not have adequatevts systems while also satisfying the concerns of local portstakeholders. the committeeõs interim report recommendedthat the coast guard involve local stakeholders and promotepublic/private partnerships in its efforts to implement vtssystems in ports with identified safety needs, and the coastguard has incorporated these recommendations into its current program. however, the committee still has some concerns about maintaining national standards of operation andaccommodating local needs and circumstances. marinersneed consistent rules of operation and compatible equipmentworldwide. the committee is concerned about the inconsistencies among vts systems and the vtis systems operatedby a variety of organizations (e.g., federal, state, and privateentities and combinations thereof). mariners needñandwantña consistent operating environment, which can onlybe provided if uniform guidelines are devised for vts andvtis systems. furthermore, the effectiveness of these systems will be maximized if they all use compatible equipmentdesigned to the highest standards and if they provide themost essential capabilities for navigation safety.conclusion 3. minimum system design and operationalstandards compatible with established international standards would enable vts and vtis systems to maintain abaseline level of safety nationwide.recommendation 3. the u.s. coast guard should continue to move forward, in consultation with local port stakeholders, with a comprehensive national effort to implementvessel traffic services systems in key u.s. ports and waterways where such systems are needed. periodic assessmentsof safety needs should be made to keep up to date. the u.s.coast guard should also provide a uniform national systemof traffic management implemented through coordinatedfederal vessel traffic services systems and local vessel trafficinformation services systems. the u.s. coast guard shouldtake the following steps while moving forward with the overall program:¥develop, standardize, and implement objective criteriafor selecting ports to be served by federally funded vessel traffic services systems; upgrade existing systems;implement new systems that are urgently needed¥develop training, certification, watchstanding, and operating standards applicable to all vessel traffic servicesregardless of who operates them¥as the competent authority, ensure that all shorebasedvessel traffic management activities, regardless of whooperates them, comply with established internationalstandards¥facilitate communication among ports on lessonslearned about the implementation of these systemsuniversal carriage requirementsconsistent traffic management depends on all vessels, orat least all vessels of certain sizes using specific waterways,carrying the same basic information systems and operatingthem according to uniform standards. a vts system thatincorporates ais will not be very effective if, for example,only 50 percent of the cargo ships in local waterways carrytransponders. the requirements for ais can be generic, butthe international character of the shipping industry and theprevalence of foreignflag vessels in u.s. waters argue forthe carriage of systems that meet international standards.the presence of significant numbers of large ferries, tugs,and other vessels operating in certain waterways argues forcarriage requirements that cover that traffic as well.conclusion 4. to achieve the committeeõs vision of thefuture, all major vessels must be required to carry certainadvanced navigation information systems so they can participate in traffic management schemes and navigate safelyin and out of all u.s. ports.recommendation 4. the u.s. coast guard should worktoward the implementation of international carriage requirements for electronic navigation and identification/locationsystems on board all major vessels using u.s. ports andshould continue to take steps to provide necessary communications frequencies to ensure the international compatibility of automatic identification systems.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b37appendicesapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38appendix aapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b3939appendixabiographies of committee membersh. thomas kornegay, chair, is executive director of theport of houston authority, which he joined in 1972. hepreviously served as the portõs planning and administrativeengineer, chief engineer, director of engineering, managingdirector, and acting executive director. mr. kornegay is amember of the american society of civil engineers, thepermanent international association of navigation congresses, and chi epsilon, an honorary fraternity for civilengineers. he has a b.s. degree in architectural engineeringfrom the university of texas and an m.s. degree in architectural engineering from oklahoma state university.william a. wallace, vice chair, is professor of decision sciences and engineering systems at rensselaer polytechnicinstitute. as a researcher and a consultant in managementscience and information systems, dr. wallace has more than20 years of experience in developing decisionsupport systems for industry and government. he has held academicpositions at carnegiemellon university and the state university of new york at albany and served as chairman ofthe statistical, management, and information sciences department at rensselaer. dr. wallace also has been a researchscientist and visiting professor at a number of institutionsabroad, including the swiss federal institute of technologyand the national center for industrial science and technology management development in china. he has authoredor coauthored six books and more than 100 articles and papers. he has a b.s. in chemical engineering from the illinoisinstitute of technology and an m.s. and ph.d. in management science from rensselaer.anne d. aylward is a senior consultant to the volpe national transportation systems center, which advises the u.s.department of transportation on port and freight issues. sheis past maritime director of the massachusetts port authority and served as executive director of the national commission on intermodal transportation. she has provided localand national leadership on port and intermodal freight issueswhile serving as chair of the american association of portauthorities and a board member of the north atlantic portconference, north atlantic ports association, boston shipping association, and boston harbor association. ms.aylward has also served on the national research councilõsmarine board and is currently a member of the transportation research boardõs committee on intermodal transportation. she has an a.b. degree from radcliffe college andan m.s. degree in city planning from the massachusetts institute of technology.william o. gray is president of gray maritime company, amarine consulting firm. he works closely withintertanko, which represents 70 percent of the worldtanker fleet, to promote safe waterway transits in the unitedstates. previously with the skaarup group, mr. gray initially operated the skaarup fleet and then managed specialtanker projects, working with organizations such as the national academy of sciences and intertanko. mr. grayalso spent more than 22 years with exxon corporation working primarily in the development of very large tankers. hemanaged exxonõs arctic tanker project, a successful transitof the northwest passage by the t/v manhattan. mr. grayalso spent four years with bethlehem steel working on thepreliminary design of merchant ships, especially tankers. hepreviously served as vice chair of the marine board committee on tank vessel design. he has a b.s.e. degree innaval architecture, with honors, from the university ofmichigan, and an m.e. degree in mechanical engineeringfrom yale university.jerrol larrieu is director of management information systems for the port of new orleans, where he supervised theinstallation of the nationõs most sophisticated automated portinformation system. previously, he was a consultant to theport on its automation project, coordinating design teams formajor portions of the community cargo release system. priorto that, mr. larrieu was manager of computer services forthe ingram corporation for nearly 10 years, providing corporate consulting services. he has 28 years of experience inapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40appendix aadvanced information systems, including service with general electric company and the chrysler corporation. he iscurrently chair of the american association of port authorities information technology committee and is a member ofthe executive board of the u.s. customs automation advisory committee. he has a b.s. degree in mathematics fromxavier university of louisiana.robert g. moore is president of coastwatch, incorporated,a maritime management and consulting firm involved in thedesign of vessel traffic service (vts) systems. the firm hasdeveloped vts design requirements for 23 u.s. ports. previously, he was a career officer in the u.s. coast guard. aschief of military readiness, he was responsible for servicewide security, contingency and defense planning, and training. capt. moore also has broad international experience.he was the u.s. state department advisor to the governmentof somalia and served in london as deputy commander, u.s.coast guard activities europe. capt. mooreõs extensiveexperience with vts systems includes visits to major vtssystems in europe and service as the u.s. observer to theinternational committee that developed the traffic separationschemes for dover straits and the north sea. he also playeda leading role in the 1991 port needs study, a study for theu.s. coast guard that identified u.s. ports that require vtssystems. capt. moore has a b.s. degree in engineering fromthe u.s. coast guard academy.j.s. niederhauser is an active marine pilot and past president of puget sound pilots. he is the pilot representative tothe port of tacoma project for the computer simulation oflarge container ship navigation in the blair waterway. heholds an unrestricted pilot license for puget sound watersfrom the u.s. coast guard and the state of washington andis a member of masters, mates, and pilots and the americanpilots association. previously, capt. niederhauser spent 19years with foss maritime company, where he gained seaexperience on ocean, coastal, river, and harbor towing vessels. as a tug captain, he qualified for pilotage in britishcolumbia waters and pilotage while towing loaded petroleum barges on the columbia river and southeast alaskainland waters. a charter member and past commodore ofthe pacific northwest fleet of the classic yacht association, capt. niederhauser also has considerable experience inrecreational boating on puget sound and british columbiawaters. he was educated at western washington state university in bellingham.f.d.r. posthumus is director of fleet projects for sealandservices, incorporated. he has a wealth of experience invirtually all aspects of vessel operations and fleet management and has managed foreignflag charter vessels as well asu.s.flag vessels. capt. posthumus was also manager ofmarine operations europe, booking and equipment control europe, and vessel operations in several areas of theworld. prior to joining sealand in 1970, capt. posthumussailed extensively with the dutch merchant marine. he hasa masterõs license from the hogere zeevaartschool and alicense as chief engineer of unlimited powered diesel ships.he is a graduate of the dutch army transportation corpsofficers academy.steve valerius is executive vice president of hollywoodmarine, incorporated, one of the largest tank barge companies in the united states. he is active in numerous marineindustry organizations, serving on the boards of directors ofthe american waterways operators, texas waterway operators association, and louisiana association of waterwayoperators. he is an advisory director of laporte state bankand a member of the texas general land office oil spillcommission. mr. valerius is also chairman of the executive committee of the galveston bay foundation. he is agraduate of the university of texas at austin and has a j.d.degree from the south texas college of law in houston.cameron williams is vice president for academic affairs atthe massachusetts maritime academy. he is also a professor in the joint diploma programme in shipping and portmanagement, graduate college of marine studies, university of delaware and singapore port institute. previously,he taught marine transportation, economics, and marketingat the u.s. merchant marine academy. he holds u.s. coastguard licenses as master of steam and motor vessels up to1,600 tons (oceans), second mate of vessels of any tonnage(oceans), and radar observer. he is also a captain in the u.s.naval reserve, specializing in naval control of shipping andconvoy operations. he is a member of the academic advisory committee and intermodal association of northamerica and a past member of the chief of naval operations advisory board for naval control and protection ofshipping. dr. williams has a b.s. degree in marine transportation from the u.s. merchant marine academy, an m.a.degree in business management (marketing) from centralmichigan university, and a ph.d. degree in business administration (marketing) from the university of north carolinaat chapel hill.russell woodill is executive vice president and nationalpositions chairman for the council of american mastermariners, which represents more than 1,500 shipmasters andpilots. he is also master of the sealand performance,which trades internationally and is one of the largest container ships in the world. he has been active in the u.s.merchant marine for nearly 30 years, rising through theranks of junior officers to his current position of licensedshipmaster, unlimited tonnage, any ocean. captain woodillhas expertise in marine navigation, ship management, shipconstruction, cargo requirements, and vessel operations. hehas a b.s. degree from the massachusetts maritimeacademy.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b4141appendixbexcerpt fromthe national dialog on vessel traffic servicesapril 1997preamblein january 1997, the u.s. coast guard (uscg) conveneda national dialog with maritime and port community stakeholders1 to identify the needs of waterway users with respect to vessel traffic service (vts) systems or other meansof ensuring the safety of navigation in u.s. ports and waterways.2 the stakeholders, representing all major sectors ofthe u.s. and foreignflag maritime industry, port authorities,pilots, the environmental community, and the uscg, wereasked to provide guidance on the following issues:¥the information needs of a mariner to ensure a safe passage;¥the process that should be used to identify candidateports for the installation of vts systems; and¥the basic elements of a vts, where such a system isdetermined to be necessary.a list of all participants in the stakeholder dialogue isattached. under the auspices of the marine board of thenational research council (nrc), the group held four meetings between january and march 1997. this document isnot an official report of the nrc, which has neither endorsednor taken any other official position on its contents.the national dialog was intended to provide the foundationfor the development of an approach to vts that would meetthe shared government, industry, and public objective ofensuring the safety of vessel traffic in u.s. ports and waterways, in a technologically sound and costeffective way. it isimportant for the united states to move forward in developing and implementing such an approach so as to remain atthe forefront of maritime safety.underlying premisesthe responses of dialog participants to the specific questions posed to them were based on the following underlyingpremises:¥the primary goal of a vts system is to ensure thesafety of vessel traffic in u.s. ports and waterways andto protect the marine environment by ensuring that themariner has the information necessary to prevent oravoid collisions, allisions, and groundings. by promoting safe navigation, a vts also fosters the goal of efficient navigation. a vts should have the capability tointeract with traffic and respond to traffic situations inits area.¥existing aids to navigation; charts, radar, vhf radios,publications, and other navigation tools; pilotage systems; navigation regulations, including the international and inland navigation rules; current licensingand training requirements for mariners; existing navigation management systems; and existing uscg regulatory authority and enforcement practices make a significant contribution to the safety of navigation in u.s.ports and waterways today. these existing tools serveto ensure a high level of safety and environmental protection, and therefore, vts systems are not needed inall ports.¥in some ports, additional tools may be necessary to ensure an acceptable level of safety and environmentalprotection. these tools may include a vts system. thespecific needs of individual ports to ensure safe1 these stakeholders included: the natural resources defense council,u.s. chamber of shipping, american association of port authorities, passenger vessel association, council of american master mariners, american pilots association, american waterways operators, intertanko,and u.s. coast guard.2 this summary uses the international maritime organization (imo)definition of vts as òa service implemented by a competent authority designed to improve safety and efficiency of vessel traffic and to protect theenvironment. the service should have the capability to interact with thetraffic and to respond to traffic situations developing in the vts area.ó inits proposed guidelines for vts, the imo defines òcompetent authorityó asòthe authority made responsible, in whole or in part, by the government forthe safety, including environmental safety, and efficiency of vessel trafficand protection of the environment.óapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42appendix bnavigation may vary given port and waterway trafficcharacteristics. however, certain common elements ofa vts (where such systems are deemed necessary) maybe applied.¥the decision to establish a vts in a given port shouldbe made cooperatively by the uscg and the port user/stakeholder community. it is not the intention of dialogparticipants to invalidate existing navigation safety systems established by states, pilot associations, or otherentities but rather to provide guidelines for the implementation of future vts systems.¥every mariner has the responsibility to operate vesselsin a safe manner. in addition, the uscg has the statutory obligation to ensure the safety and environmentalprotection of u.s. ports and waterways. the uscg isthe federal agency with primary responsibility for ensuring port safety and as such should play the leadingrole by ensuring that the marinerõs navigation information needs for safe passage are being met.¥waterways users are seeking enhanced navigation capabilities that would be compatible with new vts systems but that would also have utility beyond a vtscovered area. safe navigation and environmental protection outside of port boundariesñin coastal waters,rivers and other inland waterways, as well as on thehigh seasñare equally important.¥dialog participants strongly endorse the widespread useof automatic identification systems (ais) employingdifferential global positioning system (dgps) and onboard transponder technologies. these technologiesprovide a foundation for effective navigation safety,both within and outside areas where vts systems aredetermined to be necessary. they also provide for improved vesseltovessel information exchange in portsand waterways in which no vts system is established.dialog participants believe that national use of aistechnology on the greatest number of vessels is essential both as a foundation of a vts system, where such asystem is necessary, and as the basis for improvingnavigation safety. dialog participants strongly urge theuscg to take the lead both domestically and internationally in developing equipment and procedural standards that will promote universal use of ais technology. although port conditions and user/stakeholderneeds may favor the establishment of vts systems inselected ports, dialog participants believe that widespread use of ais can serve as an effective navigationsafety system.basic information needs of a mariner to ensure asafe passagedialog participants identified the following as the basicinformation needs of a mariner to ensure a safe passage:1.uptodate knowledge and/or information regardingthe route to be transited;2.timely, relevant, and accurate information aboutother vessels within the area that might affect safetyor the decision making of the mariner (this information should include vessel identity, type, size, position, course, and speed);3.timely information about emergency and environmental conditions that might affect safety or the decision making of the mariner;4.reliable bridgetobridge communications; and5.transmission of relevant information to the marinerin a manner that does not distract from the task athand, particularly in narrow, confined channelswhere there is heavy traffic.existing navigation aids and tools, pilotage systems, navigation management systems, and regulations may be sufficientto provide this information effectively to a mariner given thecharacteristics of a particular port.factors to be considered in determining whethera vts is necessaryas noted above, dialog participants agreed that existingnavigation aids and tools, pilotage systems, navigation management systems, and regulations may be adequate to meet amarinerõs information needs for safe operations in a givenport. dialog participants agreed that the process of determining whether a vts is necessary in a particular port shouldinclude the uscg and port users/stakeholders. questions tobe considered in making this determination include, but arenot necessarily limited to, the following:1.what existing local navigation management systemsare in place and how effective are they?2.what are the existing or likely future conditions inthe port with respect to traffic density, trafficpatterns, and complexity of traffic or vesselmovements?3.what are the sizes, types, and numbers of vesselsoperating in the port area?4.what is the history (including the causes) of accidents, casualties, pollution incidents, and other vessel safety problems within the port area?5.what are the physical limitations of the port?6.what types and amounts of hazardous or environmentally sensitive cargoes are transported within theport?7.what are the prevailing conditions and extremes ofweather and oceanography in the port?8.what are the environmental, safety, and economicconsequences of having or not having a vts withinthe port?applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b43dialog participants agreed that the uscg should usethese questions to conduct an initial screening and identifyports which might be candidates for a vts. port users/stakeholders should be engaged to consider these questionsin more detail and to determine whether a vts is in factnecessary in a given port.basic elements of a vtswhere the uscg and local stakeholders determine that avts is necessary, dialog participants identified several basic elements that such systems should include. within theframework provided by these elements, local variations maybe needed to meet the particular needs of a given port community. however, vesselbased equipment required for participation in a vts should be consistent from one port toanother and should have utility outside port boundaries.where the need for a vts system has been identified, itshould include the following elements:1.a vts should be based upon ais technology as ameans to provide timely, relevant, and accurate navigation information to the mariner. widespread use ofvessel transponders that use dgps for positioning isessential to a vts system for three reasons:a)ais technologies will improve safe navigationboth inside and outside of a vts area;b)information collection and transmission by thevts will be less intrusive and distracting to themariner than will a voicebased control system;and,c)dgpsbased transponder systems are gainingworldwide acceptance as an effective and costeffective means of vesseltovessel and vesseltoshore information exchange.2.local conditions may require the use of other surveillance and communications technologies.3.with emphasis on minimizing distractions, the common goal of dialog participants, including the uscg,is to fully employ ais technology to minimize voicecommunications in a vts area. dialog participantsbelieve that use of ais technology should largelyobviate the need for uscgtovessel voice communication except in navigation emergency situations.the vts system should be as transparent to the mariner and to the uscg as possible.4.ais technology should be applied in a costeffective manner using commercially available technology in an open architecture. successful implementation of an aisbased vts system will dependon adherence to the following guidelines:a)the federal government should develop anddistribute accurate electronic navigation information, including¥uptodate navigation charts in electronicformat;¥dgps broadcasts; and,¥timely updates of information, includinguscg notices to mariners, in electronicformat where appropriate.the uscg should develop standards for reliable,electronic vesseltovessel and vesseltoshore information exchange that minimize voice communication and that can provide essential information tothe mariner both within and outside designated portsor vts areas.¥standards should be performancebased, allowing the use of technology and equipment that iscommercially available on a competitive basis.¥information system requirements should becompatible nationwide and, preferably, internationally.b)timely and appropriate emergency and environmental information should be provided in acompatible format.5.to be effective, a vts system should be implemented by a competent authority. the uscgõsinvolvement, at a minimum, means the promulgation and enforcement of minimum technical standards, promulgation and enforcement of onboardequipment requirements, and responsibility for securing, if necessary, adequate spectrum capacity foroperation of the system. uscg involvement in avts system should not preclude vts partnershipoptions and cooperative arrangements with otherentities such as state governments, port authorities,or pilot associations.6.the competent authorityõs fulfillment of statutoryobligations and enforcement of mandatory participation may require some level of shoresideoversight. the level of oversight needed will varyfrom port to port; however, this oversight componentshould take full advantage of ais technology as theprimary means for monitoring waterway activitiesand vessel movements in the port to avoid potentiallyburdensome and costly systems. in general, dialogparticipants believe that use of ais technology willgreatly reduce the number of shoreside personnel andother resources needed for effective involvement in avts. the uscgõs use of vts to accomplish relatedmissions and responsibilities should not interferewith the primary goal of promoting safe navigation.7.vts systems should be compatible with international guidelines for vts.participation (including the carriage of aiscompatibleequipment and technology) should be mandatory for vessels identified in 33 cfr part 161 (all vessels greater than 20applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44appendix bmeters, vessels greater than 8 meters while engaged in towing, and vessels certified to carry 50 or more passengers).3attachment c1additional comments of the naturalresources defense councilapril 24, 1997the natural resources defense council (nrdc) hasthe following additional comments to make regarding thenational dialogue on vessel traffic services summaryguidance document, dated april, 1997. nrdc representedby sarah chasis participated in the national dialogue, convened by the u.s. coast guard, to discuss vessel trafficservice (vts) systems to enhance safety for our nationõswaterways.on page 3 of the draft guidance document, we have problems with the wording of the last sentence of the first fullparagraph (òalthough...). we favor substituting the following sentence: òthe stakeholders believe that ais has utilityboth as the foundation of a vts system (where such a system has been determined to be necessary) and as the basis3 according to 33 cfr part 161, vessels greater than 40 meters mustparticipate but vessels greater than 20 meters must monitor the system. tomonitor an ais system, a vessel requires the related equipment. therefore,participation is in effect required of vessels greater than 20 metersfor improved vesseltovessel information exchange in portsand waterways in which no vts system is established.ó webelieve this better reflects the value of advanced information systemsñeither as a basis for a vts system or for improved navigational safety in the absence of a vts system.we do not believe that ais is a substitute for vts systems.on page 4, we have problems with the suggestion in eachof the paragraphs that the coast guard and port users determine whether a vts is necessary in a particular port. thecoast guard has the legal duty to protect safety and the environment in the nationõs waterways and, therefore, it must bethe one to determine whether a vts is necessary. this determination should be made in consultation with òlocal stakeholdersó (who, we believe, should include environmentalistsand other interested in protecting the marine environment),but ultimately it is the coast guard who must decide.finally, in the discussion on the last page regarding whatconstitutes a vts, it should be made clear that a vts systemprovides for control over vessel movements by the competent authority, that it requires shoreside oversight of vesseltraffic and that, while ais technology may be an integralpart of vts, it is not always necessarily the primary meansof monitoring vessel movements.we appreciate this opportunity to provide these additionalcomments.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c4545appendixcmaritime advanced information systemspuget sound regionregional characteristicsthe puget sound region includes two major container andgeneral cargo ports, seattle and tacoma. these two portscombined rank second in volume of container traffic amongu.s. ports on the west coast. besides containers, seattleand tacoma also handle a variety of other cargoes, such aslumber, automobiles, fruit, and grain. the smaller ports incherry point, ferndale, bellingham, anacortes, port angeles, port townsend, everett, and olympia handle petroleumand forest products.the northern seaward entrance to puget sound is throughthe strait of juan de fuca, which is the u.s.canadian border. the strait is also the entrance to the canadian port ofvancouver to the north. seattle is approximately 125 milesdown the strait from the ocean, and tacoma is approximately150 miles from the ocean.major oil terminals receiving tanker shipments fromalaska and elsewhere are located in the northern section ofpuget sound, which is also home to a large deepsea andlocal fishing fleet, several major u.s. navy installations, anda substantial coastal freighter fleet. in addition, many passenger and car ferries operate throughout the region becauseof the numerous large bodies of water separating populationcenters.because of its natural beauty, puget sound is highly regarded as a recreational boating center, and pleasure boattraffic is substantial. the local population is very concernedwith protecting the environment of the sound and numerousother adjacent waterways. dating back at least to 1935,1 thestate of washington has imposed special requirements forshipping in state waters to protect the environment and natural resources.the puget sound waterways are subject to a variety ofweather and oceanographic conditions, including storms,strong currents, and low visibility due to rain and seasonalfog. although the main channels are deep and wide, navigation in some waterways in ports is restricted by vessel sizeand draft. because of the diversity in vessel types and sizesin the area, mariners must exercise extreme care in monitoring other vessel traffic. the substantial numbers of ferryoperations, often crossing at right angles to the shippinglanes, present special traffic management problems.the ports of seattle and tacoma are mainly òlandlordports,ó owning and leasing property for terminal operations. the major container terminals are operated by largesteamship lines (e.g., sealand, american president lines,hanjin, nyk, maersk) and certain independent terminaloperators, such as stevedoring services of america. theport authorityõs role is to serve as a catalyst for economicgrowth and job creation through port development and theexpansion of private industry. the port has substantial investments in land and certain capital improvements but isnot responsible for daytoday operations of terminals orother facilities.summary of maritime informationsystemsa committee work group held a oneday meeting in theport of seattle. representatives of government and industryorganizations that provide or use certain key port or terminalinformation systems were invited. participants included theu.s. coast guard, national oceanic and atmospheric administration, washington state office of marine safety,puget sound ferry operators, terminal operators, and themarine exchange. the major systems they use are describedbelow.u.s. coast guardthe vessel traffic service (vts) system in puget sound isone of the most comprehensive systems operated by the u.s.1 in the state pilotage act of 1935, òthe legislature finds and declares thatit is the policy of the state of washington to prevent loss of human lives,loss of property and vessels, and to protect the marine environment throughthe sound application of compulsory pilotage . . .óapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46appendix ccoast guard (uscg). it covers an extensive geographicregion that includes a number of harbors and cooperates withthe canadian coast guard in monitoring vessel traffic alongthe international border. the vessel traffic center (vtc)in seattle receives signals from 12 strategically located radarsites throughout the puget sound area. these radars coverapproximately 2,900 square miles, including the strait ofjuan de fuca, rosario strait, admiralty inlet, and pugetsound south to commencement bay at tacoma. in addition, several critical waterways are covered by closedcircuittelevision.this system has been in continuous operation since 1972,and participation has been mandatory for certain vesselssince 1974. (all powered vessels more than 40 meters inlength, tugs more than 8 meters in length, and vessels carrying 50 or more passengers are required to participate.) thethree major components of the vts are the surveillance network, a traffic separation scheme (as adopted by the international maritime organization), and a vessel movementreporting system. the reporting system uses a vhffmcommunications network with 10 lowelevation, lowpowersites and 3 highelevation, highpower sites continuouslymaintained by the vtc in seattle. the vts operators process all information received from vessels and disseminateall navigational safety information to mariners who ask foror require it.the vts data management, processing, and display systems were recently upgraded and, according to most usersand the local maritime community, they now provide excellent traffic monitoring and oversight, as well as safety in theregion. the system has broad support even though the available analyses of benefits are subjective and rely on anecdotalevidence. one drawback is the lack of compatibilitybetweenthe current software and other windowsbasedsystems and databases; improvements are planned in thatregard.plans for future enhancements include the addition of anautomatic identification system (ais), which will enable thevtc to receive continuous identification and tracking information from each vessel equipped with a transponder andwill eliminate the need for voice communications for identification. the local uscg office and the state ferry systemare participating in demonstrations and tests of using transponders on ferries. experience to date indicates that aisoffers benefits both in terms of safety and improved ferryoperations, and discussions are under way to move aheadwith adopting a specific system.although the puget sound vts system is achieving itsmission of safe traffic management and aiding navigation, itoperates as a selfcontained system, with virtually no electronic connection to other maritime information systems inthe regional port complex. for example, every two hoursvtc operators fax a report on vessels in the system to thelocal marine exchange, which maintains a database on shiparrivals and departures. it is theoretically (and probablytechnically) possible to link the vts data directly with themarine exchange database, but this option has not beenexplored because the uscg is concerned about unauthorizedaccess to its data.the uscg does not even integrate its own informationsystems. there is no electronic data link between the vtcand the local uscg marine safety office (mso); instead,the data are exchanged by fax. the mso operates the marine safety information system, which was developed in the1970s and is difficult to integrate with other databases. theseinformation systems do not provide adequate support for theship inspectors, who must sort through numerous paper documents to check a vesselõs accident history. similarly, theuscg maintains paper records of hazardous materials notifications for all vessels entering the port.national oceanic and atmospheric administrationthe national oceanic and atmospheric administration(noaa) performs its traditional maritime information services, including hydrographic surveys and nautical charting,weather forecasting, and operation of tidal gauges. weatherinformation, forecasts, and tidal gauge data have recentlybeen available to all users over the internet. updated surveyinformation is made available to local pilots, and electroniccharts are already available for the region.because local mariners do not seem willing to support anextensive physical oceanographic realtime system (ports)in the region, noaa operates a modest system, which includes useraccessible tidal gauges at three locations. theports of seattle and tacoma have been encouraged to contribute to system maintenance.noaa also is engaged in a variety of local research andinvestigations to promote safe marine transportation and prevent environmental damage. noaaõs other responsibilitiesinclude tracking the movement of oil spills and evaluatingtheir effects on sensitive areas. because the relevant datasystems have to be coordinated with the rest of the maritimecommunity, noaa works closely with local stakeholdersand supports the collection of data on marine casualties.washington state department of ecologythe washington state department of ecology is responsible for enforcing certain state regulations governing vesseltransits within state waters and certain required safety features. the office has developed a system to evaluate thepotential environmental threat posed by a vessel, based onfactors such as age, flag state, and casualty history. information from the uscg, lloydõs, and other sources is enteredinto the system. the agency screens vessels entering thesound and selects certain ones to board and inspect based onthe risk factors determined by the model. in addition, a nearmiss reporting system is being developed as anotheraccidentprevention tool.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c47representatives of this office assert that a central database for the entire region, accessible to everyone, would helpreduce vessel accidents and protect the marine environment.to achieve this vision, greater cooperation would be requiredamong federal and local agencies and the industry, and existing databases would have to be linked (requiring improvements in interfaces and systems compatibility). data fromthe american waterways operators and the washingtonstate pilotage commission could also be included.washington state ferry systemthe high volume of ferry traffic on numerous waterwaysin the puget sound region poses unique challenges for vesselmanagement. the state ferry system operates 25 vessels thatengage in a total of 450 to 550 trips per day, depending onthe season. many of these transits take place in busy portregions, and routes typically cross the major shipping lanes.safety is a primary concern to the operators.all ferries participate in the vts system, which providesimportant safety information. recent tests of transpondersaboard ferries suggest that this technology enhances the vtssystemõs capabilities and may also improve operational efficiency and customer service. the ferry operators are nowconsidering whether to make transponders a permanent partof their operations and evaluating the various purposes forwhich they might be used. for example, it might be possibleto track each vesselõs position and estimated time of arrivalat a terminal continuously and accurately. this informationcould be used to manage automobile traffic at terminals andprovide customers with uptodate information about trafficdelays and other particulars. thus, it may be possible tojustify the cost of a complete transponder tracking systembased on both business and safety concerns. currently aisis only installed on selected ferries.container terminal operationsseveral major container terminals are located in the portsof seattle and tacoma. each has an information system thatprovides data on cargo entering and leaving the terminal andmanages the cargo data needed by ocean and land carriers,shippers, agents, and government agencies. most systemsare automated and are electronically connected with the u.s.customs service system. the terminal information systemsare usually internal to an organization and contain proprietary data. independent terminal operators handle cargofrom many ocean carriers and must accommodate the systems used by each one. several large terminals are operatedby ocean carriers themselves and, therefore, can readily integrate shiptoterminal information flow.the terminal operated by american president lines is experimenting with a satellitetracking and containertaggingsystem that is capable of providing location information withinfour feet for each container, in a terminal (or any other locationwith an electronic relay station nearby). the system appearsto offer substantial benefits in terms of improving the management of cargo movements within terminals. whether thissystem can be used efficiently to track containers on vesselsand land carriers depends on the value of the information compared to the cost and difficulty of obtaining it.puget sound marine exchangethe puget sound marine exchange is active in this portregion. it maintains data on commercial vessels, their movements, and their projected and actual port arrival and departure times. these data are supplied to a variety of users inthe marine industry. the marine exchange is thus an information broker of increasing importance. it is one of fourmarine exchanges on the west coast that recently formed acooperative organization known as the maritime information system of north america. the partners are currentlysharing data on vessel movements and locations through theinternet in an effort to improve both the accuracy and timeliness of information. they also plan to discuss the conceptwith marine exchanges in other areas of the united statesinterested in inproving data exchange. the marine exchangedatabase is not linked electronically to the vts system. noris it linked to the data system operated by local pilots.another project developed by the puget sound marineexchange on behalf of vessel owners and operators is theinternational tug of opportunity system (itos). this projectis an industry response to a proposal for a dedicated standbytug stationed at the entrance to the strait of juan de fuca toassist tankers and other vessels during emergencies. theitos was proposed by stakeholders as a less costly and moreeffective alternative to the dedicated, standby tug.under itos, the marine exchange maintains a database onthe location and capabilities of all tugs in the region at alltimes, manages an emergency response plan, and notifies theright persons to dispatch a capable tug to the scene in case ofan incident. the program requires both an automated datasystem and an accurate vessel tracking system. a transponderbased tracking system has been proposed for the tugs. an ais(different from the ferry system) is currently installed on tugsand other craft and is being evaluated.the marine exchange is developing information systemsthat serve the local and regional maritime community as anonprofit organization offering feebased services. it is theonly industry organization that integrates information flowfor customers who pay for the service. the marine exchangeis investigating whether the collection and dissemination ofrealtime data on water depth would be supported by industry.puget sound pilotsthe puget sound pilotage district is managed by thewashington state board of pilotage commission under stateregulations. pilots must pass a rigorous examination andapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48appendix cdemonstrate both a high level of knowledge and the appropriate and accurate use of that knowledge. they use manysources of navigational information, including coast pilots,light lists, applicable excerpts from the code of federalregulations, noaa charts, u.s. army corps of engineerssurveys, berth surveys from port and terminal operators, andmaritime reference manuals and textbooks.onduty pilots are assigned to vessels by dispatchers using a special computer system. this system is accessible todispatchers at the seattle office during working hours and attheir homes by modem after hours and on weekends. thesystem is also accessible to pilots and boatmen standing byat the port angeles pilot station, and by pilots from theirhomes when standing by for outbound assignments. thesystem provides the following primary functions:¥transmits orders to dispatchers and provides a list ofpending and assigned vessel movements¥calculates billing amounts from pilotage tariffs and prepares invoices¥maintains a vessel database that dispatchers can verifyand update based on the vessel itself, a printed lloydõslist, and other sources¥maintains a database of predicted tides and currents andcalculates tide levels at scheduled departure and arrivaltimes¥stores and maintains assignment information (e.g.,berth spotting criteria, number of tugs assigned, nameof tug company) relayed from the vessel master oragent¥provides dispatchers with information needed to assignrested pilots¥uses historical data to forecast the end of assignmenttime and total pilot requirements so that offduty pilotscan be called, if necessary, to accommodate heavy vessel traffic¥creates reports required by the state of pilot assignments,rest periods, and analysis of assignments and billingused to substantiate manning levels and tariff adjustmentsthe pilot dispatch computer system also incorporateswarnings, which are activated if a dispatcher enters data thatexceeds set limits, such as a vessel draft. the system alsoprovides a warning if a vessel is bound for a berth that isalready occupied. this design allows the dispatcher tocoordinate vessel arrival and departure times with eachvesselõs agent and thus minimize delays. certain warningsmay be reviewed by the pilot association president, whoadvises on the most appropriate transit times and otheraspects of vessel movement.in addition to using the computer system, dispatchers alsoverify scheduling of vessel movements by telephone withthe marine exchange, tug companies, and others to minimizeconflicts and delays. also, the arrival times of vessels underway are obtained from the vts system or directly from thevessel by vhf radio or a pilotõs cellular telephone.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d4949appendixdmaritime information systemsport of charleston, south carolinaport characteristicsthe port of charleston, south carolina, is the second largest (after new york/new jersey) container port on the u.s.east coast. the port serves a brisk trade in container, bulk,and chemical products at both private and public terminalsalong the banks of two of the three rivers that converge at theport. a growing volume of vessel traffic poses challengeswith regard to physical space, traffic management, and information systems that will have to be solved for the port togrow, remain competitive, and operate safely. in this way,charleston is representative of many u.s. ports.as a river port, charleston is affected by seasonal flowlevels of the ashley, cooper, and wando rivers, as well astwicedaily variations in ocean tides. the interaction offlowing, freshwater rivers with ocean tidal fluctuations generates unpredictable currents. silting from the rivers createsa constant need to maintain berth and channel depths. inaddition, differences in water temperatures contribute to seasonal fog.most of the private berths and all three public terminalsare located very close to dense population centers. the columbus street terminal is approximately one mile from thecharleston city center. the cityõs status as a major touristattraction has generated a great deal of concern about thepresence of oil, chemicals, and hazardous commodities andthe potential threats these materials represent to nearby residents, tourists, and the environment.protection of the environment is a serious matter to thecitizens of charleston. the tourist industry is based in largemeasure on the scenic beauty of the city, the harbor, andrivers. wildlife is abundant and varied. a substantial boating industry and thriving commercial fishing industry usethe port, rivers, and the surrounding coastal areas. aquaculture is being developed nearby, and seafood is a staple ofcarolina lowcountry diets.maritime information systemsin june 1996, a work group of the committee on maritime advanced information systems interviewed representatives of 16 organizations1 with interests in port activitiesto determine the capabilities and deficiencies of the information systems. based on the information collected, the workgroup made the following general observations:¥no single resource or authority is responsible forcoordinating or promoting the use of advanced information technology in the port of charleston.¥a wide range of relevant and important information isavailable, but it is not being fully exploited to optimizethe safety and efficiency of maritime transportation.¥stakeholders are generally satisfied with the quality andamount of information they receive or have access to,but they believe that current levels will not be adequatein the future as the port expands. they say additionalrelevant, realtime information would be useful now,but only if it is selective and easy to obtain. all stakeholders acknowledge that advanced navigation and information systems would enhance the safety and efficiency of what is generally considered a safe and wellrun port.¥with the exception of the portõs orion system for processing u.s. customs service data, very little information is exchanged among stakeholders by computer or1 charleston port authority; sealand service, inc.; carolina shippingco.; charleston marine exchange; charleston harbor pilots; charlestonharbormaster; u.s. coast guard; national oceanic and atmospheric administration; national weather service; u.s. army corps of engineers;u.s. customs service; u.s. naturalization and immigration service; carolina port police; mount pleasant fire department; coastal carolina council; and the south carolina department of natural resources.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50appendix dthe internet. most information exchanges take placeby fax, with telephone calls and mailed newsletters asalternatives.¥with the exception of the orion system, most stakeholders use hardware and software that meets their owninformation needs. very little, if any, considerationhas been given to developing information systems thatare accessible by other local port stakeholders or arenetwork compatible.¥no single organization is capable of developing anoverarching port information infrastructure withoutsubstantial financial and technical assistance from othersources.information systems by organizationu.s. coast guardin charleston, the u.s. coast guard (uscg) fulfills itstraditional roles and is an active participant in most port advisory committees. charleston does not have a vessel trafficservices (vts) system and is not a candidate for a vts system in the eyes of either the uscg or the local port community. except in emergencies, vessel traffic management isleft to the pilots and waterways users.the uscg does provide some realtime information services within the port. when notified that a navigational aid isextinguished, missing, or improperly located, the uscg notifies waterways users through the local navigational warningbroadcasts on radio channel 22a. if they miss the broadcast,then waterways users can obtain the information by callingthe local uscg office, accessing the navinfonet, or reading the next notice to mariners. (the uscg reports the problem to the miami office for inclusion in the notices, which areupdated weekly and mailed to subscribers.) the charlestonuscg office is creating a web site and intends to includesome of this information. most port stakeholders say thattimely reporting of this information is a low priority.the uscg appears on all the national weather service(nws) severe weather warning checklists and can rebroadcast information as a navigational warning as well as takethe appropriate actions regarding waterways safety.u.s. customs servicethe u.s. customs service, working with the port authority, has been a leader in using advanced technology to promote efficiency. this agency has long collected cargo manifests electronically and provided prearrival and departureclearances of cargo, either through its own automated systems or through the charleston port authorityõs orion system (described below). the u.s. customs service appearsto be moving steadily toward a paperless system that takesfull advantage of available technology.national weather servicethe charleston office of the nws serves the local maritime community in a number of ways. it provides the forecast information for the national oceanic and atmosphericadministration (noaa) weather radio broadcasts, including a specific charleston harbor forecast. weather forecastscan also be obtained by telephone recordings, which are updated several times a day. the charleston station is mannedaround the clock and accepts calls requesting information.the office maintains four severe weather warning calllists: (1) a special marine warning checklist, (2) a winterstorm/high winds watch/warning checklist, (3) a tornado/severe thunderstorm/flash flood watch/warning checklist,and (4) a coastal flood watch/warning checklist . the uscg,harbor pilots, and south carolina ports authority appear onevery checklist and are contacted by the nws whenever severe weather is forecasted. conditions favorable for harborand coastal fog are also relayed to the checklist participants.the nws provides their weather radar picture to severalapproved and contracted vendors, which market the imageand information to the maritime community. updated radarinformation can be viewed on a computer monitor in nearreal time. the pilots were the only stakeholders interviewedwho used this service.u.s. army corps of engineersthe u.s. army corps of engineers generates considerable waterways information. the corps is involved inseveral proposed dredging projects, and the hydrographicinformation generated is made available to the charlestonmaritime community by mail.charleston port authoritythe charleston port authority uses its orion system foru.s. customs service prearrival and departure clearances,as well as for inventory control. initially, stakeholder participation in orion was mandatory in the port. however, thesystem has since been eclipsed by the u.s. customsserviceõs systems, and larger commercial stakeholders cannow bypass orion and go directly to these more sophisticated systems for clearance. smaller commercial stakeholders who cannot afford a direct customs interface still useorion. the port authority intends to upgrade this prototypesystem and perhaps expand its functions to promote efficiency and keep the system viable.information concerning traffic congestion, berth space,navigational warnings, draft restrictions, and severe weatheris gathered and exchanged by telephone and fax on an asneeded basis. the port authority does appear on the nwssevere weather warning lists. the port authority, harbormaster, and pilots coordinate their information by telephoneapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d51and fax. the port authority is considering expanding orionto capture and distribute some of this information to its customers.an advantage of orion is the capability for local control ofthe cargo information database. information passing throughorion is captured, stored, and used for analysis of port activities. realtime cargorelated information, including a running inventory of hazardous commodities, is also available.unfortunately, hazardouscargo information is not readily accessible and is not currently transferable to those responsiblefor responding to an emergency. for example, in the event ofa terminal fire, a list of the hazardous materials currently located in the terminal would have to be printed out by personnel capable of operating the system who would then meet thearriving mount pleasant firefighters. it is not clear how wellthis approach would work in the middle of the night, for example, when no cargo operations were under way.charleston harbormasterthe charleston harbormaster, an employee of the southcarolina ports authority, coordinates the docking and undocking of vessels calling on charleston harbor. theharbormaster relies heavily on telephone and fax messages.although not specifically listed on the nws severe weatherwarning call lists, the harbormaster can call the nws orpilots to ask about weather conditions or can obtain faxedinformation from the port authority.the harbormaster is in a unique position. in the event ofan emergency, this individual is expected to provide information that may, or may not, be obtainable. for example, ifa container of hazardous material falls over the side of avessel docked at a public terminal, then the harbormaster, inconjunction with the port police and uscg, is responsiblefor the recovery of the container and cargo. yet there isalmost no realtime information available concerning tidalstage or the direction and strength of currents. if spills ofhazardous materials are within the harbor or river systemthey pose a serious threat to the port. the need for improved,realtime hydrographic information was expressed by theharbormaster and others (including pilots, the port authority,and the port police).charleston harbor pilotsthe information hub in charleston is the pilots association. most stakeholders say they obtain waterways and harbor information by telephoning the pilotsõ office. the pilotsare normally the first to report missing or damaged navigational aids. they are also the most well informed sources ofinformation on vessel arrivals, departures, and the immediate status of the harbor. in the absence of a vts system incharleston, the pilots have assumed the role of traffic manager, and they play a major part in coordinating the use oflocal waterways.to handle the growing volume of traffic, the pilots havecomputerized their operations and maintain a database ofcustomers and their vessels. they can fax vessel arrival anddeparture information to port stakeholders. they can receive weather information by fax from the nws and are onthe severe weather warning call list. in addition, the pilotssubscribe to a thirdparty weather service that provides videoimages of local weather that can be viewed on personal computers and are updated hourly.to improve the coordination of vessel arrivals with working pilots, they have extended the operational range of theirvhf station out to 250 miles. in addition, they can accessrealtime information from a noaaoperated waterlevelgauge that is linked by a telephone line to the pilotsõ office.the waterlevel information is available to anyone who calls.no information on currents is available from this station oranywhere else in the port harbor area.the pilots find themselves playing a public relations roleof dispensing waterways information to a wide range of information seekers. the demand for information has beengrowing along with the port. therefore, it is no surprise thatthe pilots support the formation of a local marine exchangethat could act as an information broker.charleston maritime association/marine exchangethe maritime association of charleston is attempting toestablish a marine exchange. the concept is still in its earlystages, and the services that would be provided have not beenfully defined. supporters of the marine exchange envision anorganization that will take the lead in collecting and distributing portrelated information and coordinate the various portadvisory committees, of which the association is one. clearly,the attempt to create a marine exchange is directly related tothe recognized need among port stakeholders for the expansion, centralization, and management of information.port advisory committees address common problems inthe area. existing panels include the port advisory committee, liquid spillage control committee, and maritimeassociation (within which the intermodal, navigation, andoperations committee and hazardous materials responsecommittee operate). various subcommittees, such as thevessel agents subcommittee, have been established as well.communication among the various committees, their members, and the larger maritime community takes place duringmeetings and by telephone, fax, newsletters, and publishedreports. computers are used very little.sealand service, inc.sealandõs wando terminal is the east coast test bed ofthe companyõs terminal automated system (tas). whenfully functional, tas will provide the company with completegate, yard, and inventory control over containers enteringapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52appendix dand leaving the terminal. at the time of the work groupõsvisit, only the shore gate portion of the system was operable.the shore gate consists of 13 unmanned gates. an arriving truck drives into a vacant gate and telephones a checkerlocated in a nearby building. the checker records thetruckerõs verbal information while using several scanningcameras to enter the container and chassis number into thetas computer. the information is then fed into thecompanyõs mainframe computer, where it can be used asneeded for business purposes.once through the main gate and checked into the tas,the truck driver proceeds to another gate, where the chassisand container are checked for damage and serviceability. anemployee with a handheld, shortrange, radioequippedcomputer/transmitter relays the inspection information to thetas, and the equipment is routed into the yard or a servicearea. (the handheld computer/transmitter was unsuccessful in trials.)the number and location of a container in the yard isrecorded on paper by individuals driving through the yard.the transfer and loading of containers through the sea gate isalso recorded by hand, on paper.the tas is an inhouse system that serves only the container information needs of sealand. used in conjunctionwith the mainframe computer, tas does allow sealand todetermine the terminal status of hazardous cargo (althoughnot the exact location of individual containers) and to participate in the port authorityõs orion system.information concerning port traffic congestion, navigational warnings, tides and currents, and severe weather isacquired as needed by telephone, fax, and sometimes localweather and warning broadcasts. pilots are informed of vessel arrival times by telephone or fax. sealand does notreceive the local nws radar image and is not listed on thesevere weather warning list.carolina shipping companycarolina shipping company uses the orion system foru.s. customs service activities and, as an agent, operates itsown inhouse data system. company officials are satisfiedwith the way they gather information, even when not electronic. for example, to determine the arrival of a vessel theysimply telephone the pilotõs office. this works well forthem.representatives of the company expressed little interestin the idea of forming a local marine exchange that wouldprovide information (at a price). they acknowledged thatrealtime information on navigational restrictions, waterdepth affecting vessel loading drafts, and severe weatherwould be of some indirect value to them and would promotea safer port. however, they are most interested in information that would contribute to their business mission and costeffectiveness.south carolina ports policelocal police and fire departments oversee the police andfire protection of private terminals. accordingly, the portspolice need port and cargospecific information. they areamong the first responders in the event of a casualty in thewater adjacent to the public terminals or an emergency inpublic terminal areas. in the event of a fire, the police are incharge until the firefighters arrive.nevertheless, the police have no access to realtime portor cargo information, such as the information provided byorion. instead, they rely on terminal tenants to supply relevant cargo information. access to this information is notalways available, and terminal personnel do not always knowwhat is in the individual containers. terminal personnel often require assistance to identify hazardous materials anddangerous products, and they have no inhouse means ofdetermining the appropriate first responder for a hazardouscommodity fire. the police also expressed a need for easieraccess to the information on crews and hazardous materialsfor vessels berthed at a terminal.mount pleasant fire departmentthe mount pleasant fire department is responsible forfighting fires at the wando terminal, which is used by severalcontainer companies. the department also responds to fireson board vessels alongside the terminal. like the police, thefire department generally has to respond to emergencies without knowing exactly what commodities are involved or whathazardous commodities are on board. the department doesnot have direct access to cargo information systems, such assealandõs tas or the port authorityõs orion.upon arriving at a vessel fire, firefighters rely entirely ona printed list of hazardous cargo and the capability of thevesselõs personnel to locate those commodities. crew lists,cargo plans, ventilation systems, and safety/fire plans alsohave to be provided by the vessel crew. firefighters couldobtain information from the terminal operator, but it wouldhave to be delivered by hand. delayed delivery of a list ofhazardous cargo clearly impedes firefighting. municipalfirefighters are not necessarily familiar with all of the hazardous commodities carried in the international shippingtrade, and it could take some time for them to determine anappropriate response. to compound the apparent safetyrisks, fire departments are not on the nws severe weatherwarning call lists, and none directly receives realtime harbor information.south carolina department of natural resourcesthe south carolina department of natural resourcesdoes not generate realtime information related to the movement of cargo in charleston, but its impact on the port isapplying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d53considerable. its mission includes balancing the demands oftrade with the maintenance of a healthy environment forother marine activities in the harbor and along the coast. thedepartment reviews plans for the expansion of existing terminals, the location of new terminals, proposed bridges, andvessel anchorage areas. the discharge of vessel ballast water into local waters is another concern of this departmentthat has a direct effect on vessel cargo operations.to make good decisions, the department needs realtimedata on tides and currents as well as improved hydrographicdata on bottom types, accurate location of the shoreline, andshallow water depths. thus, the use of advanced information systems would enhance its decision making regardingthe environmental parameters within which the port mustoperate. port efficiency depends on how well trade activities can meet the challenges of environmental concerns.applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54appendix e54appendixearrivaltodeparture information exchangeworking outline of efficient vessel waterways navigationusing advanced technology in systems for u.s. ports1.introductionthe following summary of the information exchange between ship and shore upon the arrival in or departure from a u.s.port indicates the scope of information required and the means by which data are currently obtained by ships in transoceanic transit.2.prearrival harbor transit preparationssituation: ship at sea, open ocean, 24 hours prior to arrival at a major u.s. port. systems used and information exchangedare shown below.ocean navigation information and supporting systems¥inmarsat a, b, c, or m (communications system)¥mf/hf/vhf (nbdp  radio telex)¥gmdss (global maritime distress and safety system)¥gps (global positioning system)¥loran c (long range radio navigation system)¥ecdis (electronic chart display and information system)information exchanged¥automated notice to mariners¥automated local notice to mariners¥automated chart corrections in electronic chart and ecdis support¥local port weather and visibility conditions and predictions¥available port realtime hydrographic information/history¥available port realtime water height, current, and density information/history¥transmit vessel eta for pilots, u.s. coast guard, vessel traffic services, u.s. customs service, and others¥transmit crew lists for immigration prearrival clearance¥transmit vessel entry documents and certificates for prearrival customs clearance¥transmit entry documents for agriculture prearrival clearance3.vessel arrival and harbor transit to berthsituation: ship in harbor approaches and harbor, transiting to its assigned berth. systems used and information exchangedare shown below.harbor navigation information and supporting systems¥u.s. coast guard aids to navigation(buoys, fixed aids, racons and ranges)applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e55¥inmarsat a, b, c or m(communications system)¥gmdss(communications system  vhfdsc, etc.)¥vhf radio network(communications system  vhfdsc, etc.)¥cellular telephone network(communications system  vhfdsc, etc.)¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)¥vessel traffic services(information and management system)¥gps/dgps(differential global positioning system  navigation)¥ecdis(electronic chart display and information system)¥ports(physical oceanographic realtime systems)information exchanged¥arrival at pilot station¥realtime vessel position (aids to navigation and electronic charts)¥realtime channel water depth and density information (ports)¥realtime channel current information (ports)¥realtime port weather and visibility information (ports, navtex, vts, and vhf)¥realtime navigational information/vessels in system (ecdis, vts, and transponder)¥realtime vts system waterways management (vts)¥vessel emergency information (via transponder/hazardous commodities list, etc.)¥route prediction and time of arrival at berth (ecdis, vts, and transponder)4.vessel at berthsituation: ship at berth, preparing for departure. systems used and information exchanged are shown below.operations navigation information and supporting systems¥gmdss(communications system)¥vhf radio network(communications system)¥cellular telephone network(communications system)¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)¥ports(physical oceanographic realtime system)¥vessel traffic services(navigation information and management system)information exchanged¥navigational warnings (navtex, vhf radio, and vts)¥weather warnings and predictions (navtex, vhf radio, and vts)¥realtime water height and density with 24 hour predictions (ports)¥realtime current conditions with 24hour predictions (ports)¥realtime weather conditions with 24hour predictions (ports)¥waterways traffic status (vts)¥realtime emergency response status (transponder messages/realtime cargo ops)5.vessel departure and port transit to seasituation: ship in harbor and harbor approaches, transiting from assigned berth to departure to sea. systems used andinformation exchanged are shown below.harbor navigation information and supporting systems¥u.s. coast guard aids to navigation(navigation system)¥inmarsat a, b, c or m(communications system)¥gmdss(communications system vhfdsc, etc.)¥vhf radio network(communications system)¥cellphone network(communications system)¥transponder system network(communications/navigation system)¥vessel traffic services(navigation information and management system)applying advanced information systems to ports and waterways managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56appendix e¥gps/gps(differential global positioning system, navigation)¥ecdis(electronic chart display and information system)¥ports(physical oceanographic realtime systems)information exchanged¥realtime vessel position (aids to navigation and electronic charts)¥realtime channel water depth and density information (ports)¥realtime channel current information (ports)¥realtime port weather and visibility information (ports, navtex, vts, and vhf)¥realtime navigational information/vessels in system (ecdis, vts, and transponder)¥realtime vts waterways management (vts)¥vessel emergency information (via transponder/hazardous commodities list, etc.)¥route prediction and time of departure at pilot station (ecdis, vts, and transponder)