detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/6482being fluent with information technology128 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309063999 | doi 10.17226/6482committee on information technology literacy, national research councilbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on information technology literacycomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.being fluentwithinformation technologybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their specialcompetences and with regard for appropriate balance.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate thatrequires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. brucealberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academyof engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific andengineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation under contract number cda9616681. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendationsexpressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views ofthe sponsor.library of congress catalog card number 9963379international standard book number 030906399xadditional copies of this report are available from:national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, nw, box 285, washington, dc 20055800/6246242, 202/3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area), http://www.nap.educopyright 1999 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americabeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on information technology literacylawrence snyder, university of washington, chairalfred v. aho, lucent technologies, inc.marcia linn, university of california at berkeleyarnold packer, johns hopkins universityallen tucker, bowdoin collegejeffrey ullman, stanford universityandries van dam, brown universitystaffherbert s. lin, senior scientist and study directorgail pritchard, research associatelisa shum, project assistant (through august 1998)rita gaskins, project assistant (from august 1998)iiibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjames chiddix, time warner cablejohn m. cioffi, stanford universityw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amhersta.g. (sandy) fraser, at&tsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjames gray, microsoft corporationpatrick m. hanrahan, stanford universityjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscobutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, interval researchjohn major, wireless knowledgetom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald norman, nielsen norman groupraymond ozzie, groove networksdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleylee sproull, boston universityleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistjerry r. sheehan, senior program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officerjanet d. briscoe, administrative associaterita gaskins, project assistantnicci t. dowd, project assistantdavid padgham, project assistantmargaret marsh, project assistantivbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationspeter m. banks, erim international, inc., cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairwilliam browder, princeton universitylawrence d. brown, university of pennsylvaniamarshall h. cohen, california institute of technologyronald g. douglas, texas a&m universityjohn e. estes, university of california at santa barbarajerry p. gollub, haverford collegemartha p. haynes, cornell universityjohn l. hennessy, stanford universitycarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotamargaret g. kivelson, university of california at los angelesdaniel kleppner, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin companymarsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniam. elisabeth pat…cornell, stanford universitynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratorychanglin tien, university of california at berkeleynorman metzger, executive directorvbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacein response to a request from the national science foundation, thecomputer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the nationalresearch council initiated a study in august 1997 to address the subjectof information technology literacy. the rationale for such a study wasthat the increasing importance and ubiquity of information technology indaily life make it essential to articulate what everyone needs to know andunderstand about information technology. such an articulation would bean essential first step toward empowering all citizens to participate in theinformation age.information technology as a topic for literacy has multiple constituencies. for example, the library science community has developed a conceptual underpinning for skills that are important for finding, evaluating,and using information, all of which are important aspects of any definition of information technology literacy. because they spend their professional lives as creators of information technology, computer scientistshave their own perspectives, as do practitioners in disciplines that havetraditionally relied on computational tools, such as science and engineering. disciplines in the arts and humanities are just beginning to tap thepotential of information technology and will become (indeed, some wouldargue are now) important stakeholders. more generally, the broad category òknowledge workeró encompasses many professions in the workplace, and virtually all knowledge workers make use in greater and lesserdegrees (increasingly greater) of information technology. traditionallyòbluecollaró workers such as auto mechanics and heating/airconditioning technicians must also cope with a proliferation of embedded computviibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceing devices. and as government begins to provide more services to thepublic using information technology, the citizenry itself becomes an interested constituent.the committeeõs approachin addressing its charge, the committee chose a broad definition ofinformation technology. information technology was defined to includethe more traditional components of information technology (such as generalpurpose computational devices, associated peripherals, operating environments, applications software, and information), as well as embedded computing devices, communications, and the science underlying thetechnology.as for the knowledge and understanding component of its charge,the committee decided to use the term òfluency.ó professor yasmin kafai,who briefed the committee, noted that fluency connotes the ability to reformulate knowledge, to express oneself creatively and appropriately, andto produce and generate information (rather than simply to comprehendit). this report uses the term òfluency with information technology,ó orfitness, and it characterizes as fluent with information technology (fit)those who use, understand, and know about information technology inthe ways described in chapter 2. chapter 1 contrasts fluency with themore common term òliteracy.óall of the committee believed in the social desirability of the broadestpossible dissemination of a set of fundamental concepts, skills, and capabilities. good arguments were made to and by the committee for definingòeveryoneó in terms of all junior high school graduates, all high schoolgraduates, all noncollegebound individuals, all collegebound individuals, and all adult citizens (as lifelong learners). but in the end, rather thanargue that fitness was required of everyone in some demographic category of the population, the committee instead chose to make its case forthe education of individuals who want to be able to use information technology effectively. furthermore, issues of committee expertise and budget imposed some practical constraints on the committeeõs work, and thecommittee decided that it was best qualified to focus, as a first step toward fuller implementation, on the group of learners with which it wasmost familiarñthe fouryear college or university graduate. this firststep toward implementation is discussed in chapter 4.the intent of this report is to lay an intellectual framework for fluencywith information technology that is useful for others in developing disciplinespecific and/or gradeappropriate efforts to promote fitness. however, this report is not a fitness textbook, a curriculum for fitness, oreven a description of standards for fitness.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixmethodologythe committee sought input in three ways: through briefings on thetopic from individuals who have worked in the field (appendix c), fromelectronic input in response to a set of questions about fitness that thecommittee broadcast widely over the internet, and from perspectives provided at an invitationonly workshop in irvine, california, held to explorethe subject, for which participants were sought from a broad range ofbackgrounds and interests (appendix d). the committee, itself composedof individuals representing varied backgrounds and expertise (appendixe), used this broad range of input in an integrative manner to inform itsown deliberations on the appropriate scope and nature of fitness.acknowledgmentsthe committee appreciates the sponsorship of the crossdisciplinaryactivities of the directorate for computer and information science andengineering of the national science foundation for this project, and especially the support of john cherniavsky.the committee benefited from input from a broad range of sources. alist of workshop participants is contained in appendix d; a list of briefersis provided in appendix c. douglas brown of bellevue community college and mary lindquist of columbus state university provided usefulcomments on chapter 2. comments of reviewers (listed immediatelyfollowing this preface) helped the committee to tighten its presentationand to determine the appropriate emphasis on the various topics contained in the report.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs (nrcõs) report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid andcritical comments that will assist the authors and the nrc in making thepublished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the contents of the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in thereview of this report:george bugliarello, polytechnic university,robert patterson cook, university of mississippi,ronald danielson, santa clara university,scot drysdale, dartmouth college,john hennessy, stanford university,leah jamison, purdue university,joan lippincott, coalition for networked information,arthur melmed, george mason university,susan l. perry, mount holyoke college,jane prey, university of virginia,harold salzman, university of massachusetts ð lowell, andkendall n. starkweather, international technology educationassociation.although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests solely with the study committee and the nrc.xibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11why know about information technology?62the intellectual framework of fluency15with information technology3collateral issues414implementation considerations51appendixesaillustrative projects, 67brelated work, 78cindividuals who briefed the committee, 102dworkshop participants and questions postedon the internet, 103emembers of the committee, 109xiiibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summaryinformation technology is playing an increasingly important role inthe work and personal lives of citizens. computers, communications,digital information, softwareñthe constituents of the information ageñare everywhere.between those who search aggressively for opportunities to learnmore about information technology and those who choose not to learnanything at all about information technology, there are many who recognize the potential value of information technology for their everyday livesand who realize that a better understanding of information technologywill be helpful to them. this realization is based on several factors:¥information technology has entered our lives over a relatively briefperiod of time with little warning and essentially no formal educationalpreparation for most people.¥many who currently use information technology have only a limited understanding of the tools they use and a (probably correct) beliefthat they are underutilizing them.¥many citizens do not feel confident or in control when confrontedby information technology, and they would like to be more certain ofthemselves.¥there have been impressive claims for the potential benefits of information technology, and many would like to realize those benefits.¥there is concern on the part of some citizens that changes impliedby information technology embody potential risks to social values, freedoms or economic interests, etc., obligating them to become informed.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2being fluent with information technologyand, naturally, there is simple curiosity about how this powerful and pervasive technology works.these various motivations to learn more about information technology raise the general question, what should everyone know about information technology in order to use it more effectively now and in the future? addressing that question is the subject of this report.the answer to this question is complicated by the fact that information technology is changing rapidly. the electronic computer is just over50 years old, òpc,ó as in personal computer, is less than 20 years old, andthe world wide web has been known to the public for less than 5 years.in the presence of rapid change, it is impossible to give a fixed, onceandforall course that will remain current and effective.generally, òcomputer literacyó has acquired a òskillsó connotation,implying competency with a few of todayõs computer applications, suchas word processing and email. literacy is too modest a goal in the presence of rapid change, because it lacks the necessary òstaying power.ó asthe technology changes by leaps and bounds, existing skills become antiquated and there is no migration path to new skills. a better solution isfor the individual to plan to adapt to changes in the technology. thisinvolves learning sufficient foundational material to enable one to acquirenew skills independently after oneõs formal education is complete.this requirement of a deeper understanding than is implied by therudimentary term òcomputer literacyó motivated the committee to adoptòfluencyó as a term connoting a higher level of competency. people fluent with information technology (fit persons) are able to express themselves creatively, to reformulate knowledge, and to synthesize new information. fluency with information technology (i.e., what this report callsfitness) entails a process of lifelong learning in which individuals continually apply what they know to adapt to change and acquire moreknowledge to be more effective at applying information technology totheir work and personal lives.fluency with information technology requires three kinds of knowledge: contemporary skills, foundational concepts, and intellectual capabilities. these three kinds of knowledge prepare a person in differentways for fitness.¥contemporary skills, the ability to use todayõs computer applications, enable people to apply information technology immediately. in thepresent labor market, skills are an essential component of job readiness.most importantly, skills provide a store of practical experience on whichto build new competence.¥foundational concepts, the basic principles and ideas of computbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3ers, networks, and information, underpin the technology. concepts explain the how and why of information technology, and they give insightinto its opportunities and limitations. concepts are the raw material forunderstanding new information technology as it evolves.¥intellectual capabilities, the ability to apply information technology in complex and sustained situations, encapsulate higherlevel thinking in the context of information technology. capabilities empowerpeople to manipulate the medium to their advantage and to handle unintended and unexpected problems when they arise. the intellectual capabilities foster more abstract thinking about information and its manipulation.for specificity, the report enumerates the ten highestpriority itemsfor each of the three types of knowledge. (box es.1 lists these ten itemsfor each type of knowledge.) the skills, linked closely to todayõs computer usage, will change over time, but the concepts and capabilities aretimeless.concepts, capabilities, and skillsñthe three different types of knowledge of fitnessñoccupy separate dimensions, implying that a particularactivity involving information technology will involve elements of eachtype of knowledge. learning the skills and concepts and developing theintellectual capabilities can be undertaken without reference to each other,but such an effort will not promote fitness to any significant degree. thethree elements of fitness are coequal, each reinforcing the others, and allare essential to fitness.fitness is personal in the sense that individuals fluent with information technology evaluate, distinguish, learn, and use new informationtechnology as appropriate to their own personal and professional activities. what is appropriate for an individual depends on the particular applications, activities, and opportunities for being fit that are associatedwith the individualõs area of interest or specialization.fitness is also graduated and dynamic. it is graduated in the sensethat fitness is characterized by different levels of sophistication (ratherthan a single fluent/not fluent judgment). and, it is dynamic in thatfitness entails lifelong learning as information technology evolves.in short, fitness should not be regarded as an end state that is independent of domain, but rather as something that develops over a lifetimein particular domains of interest and that has a different character andtone depending on which domains are involved. accordingly, thepedagogic goal is to provide students with a sufficiently complete foundation of the three types of knowledge that they can òlearn the rest of itóon their own as the need arises throughout life.because fitness is fundamentally integrative, calling upon an indibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4being fluent with information technologybox es.1the components of fluency with information technologynote: readers are urged to read chapter 2 for more elaboration ofthese items.intellectual capabilities1.engage in sustained reasoning.2.manage complexity.3.test a solution.4.manage problems in faulty solutions.5.organize and navigate information structures and evaluate information.6.collaborate.7.communicate to other audiences.8.expect the unexpected.9.anticipate changing technologies.10.think about information technology abstractly.information technology concepts1.computers2.information systems3.networks4.digital representation of information5.information organization6.modeling and abstraction7.algorithmic thinking and programming8.universality9.limitations of information technology10.societal impact of information and information technologyinformation technology skills1.setting up a personal computer2.using basic operating system features3.using a word processor to create a text document4.using a graphics and/or artwork package to create illustrations, slides,or other imagebased expressions of ideas5.connecting a computer to a network6.using the internet to find information and resources7.using a computer to communicate with others8.using a spreadsheet to model simple processes or financial tables9.using a database system to set up and access useful information10.using instructional materials to learn how to use new applications orfeaturesbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5vidual to coordinate information and skills with respect to multiple dimensions of a problem and to make overall judgments and decisions taking all such information into account, a projectbased approach to developing fitness is most appropriate. projects of appropriate scale and scopeinherently involve multiple iterations, each of which provides an opportunity for an instructional checkpoint or intervention. the domain of aproject can be tailored to an individualõs interest (e.g., in the departmentof a studentõs major), thereby providing motivation for a person to expend the (nontrivial) effort to master the concepts and skills of fitness.in addition, a project of appropriate scope will be sufficiently complexthat intellectual integration is necessary to complete it. note also thatmuch of the infrastructure of existing skillsbased computer or information technology literacy efforts (e.g., hardware, software, network connections, support staff) will be important elements of efforts to promotefitness.although the essentials of fitness are for the most part not dependent on sophisticated mathematics, and should therefore generally be accessible in some form to every citizen, any program or effort to make individuals more fit must be customized to the target population. becausethe committee was composed of college and university faculty, the committee chose to focus its implementational concerns on the fouryear college or university graduate as one important starting point for the development of fitness across the citizenry. further, the committee believesthat successful implementation of fitness instruction will require seriousrethinking of the college and university curriculum. it will not be sufficient for individual instructors to revisit their course content or approach.rather, entire departments must examine the question of the extent towhich their students will graduate fit. universities need to concernthemselves with the fitness of students who cross discipline boundariesand with the extent to which each discipline is meeting the goals of universal fitness.in summary, fit individuals, those who know a starter set of information technology skills, who understand the basic concepts on whichinformation technology is founded, and who have engaged in the higherlevel thinking embodied in the intellectual capabilities, should use information technology confidently, should come to work ready to learn newbusiness systems quickly and use them effectively, should be able to applyinformation technology to personally relevant problems, and should beable to adapt to the inevitable change as information technology evolvesover their lifetime. to be fit is to possess knowledge essential to usinginformation technology now and in the future.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6being fluent with information technology61why know aboutinformation technology?this report focuses on what an individual must know and understandabout information technology in order to use it effectively and productively for his or her own purposes. there are at least four broad categories of rationale motivating an understanding of information technology:personal, workforce, educational, and societal.1.1personal rationalesamerica is increasingly an information society. computers and communications not only perform routine tasks like controlling microwaveovens and connecting cellular phones, but with the internet they give thecomputercapable among us access to much of the worldõs digital information and the means to process it. from finding a subway map of praguefor vacation planning to locating the best buys for books, mortgages, andcowboy boots, many americans find that the use of information technology is a valuable enhancement to their way of life. information technology helps people to keep in contact with family and friends via email,manage their finances with spreadsheets and online banking, track investments through an online broker, pursue hobbies like genealogy orgardening with specialized software packages, help their children withhomework and school projects using word processing and graphing tools,find medical information, become informed about political candidates andcommunicate with their political representatives, and track environmental issues or monitor public policy issues over the world wide web.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why know about information technology?71.2a workforce rationalein todayõs workplace, information technology is increasingly common. if the nation is to obtain the maximum benefit from its investmentsin information technology, a labor pool capable of using it appropriatelyis necessary. it is obvious that individuals who work with informationand knowledge (socalled òknowledge workersó) need to understand theubiquitous office information technologies, but it is also true that few jobclassifications require no knowledge of information technology at all. forexample, the clerk in a retail establishment at one time had only to knowhow to use a cash register. today, the same clerk can come into contactwith inventory systems, order tracking, and credit card and other business systems, which are becoming more sophisticated and integrated. inthe manufacturing industry, many traditionally òbluecollaró workersmust cope with a variety of manufacturing systems for tracking materials,parts inventory and production, process control, and online manuals andprocedures.though a company must train its employees in the use of its businesssystems, it is nałve to consider such training as a onetime activity. thesystems are upgraded frequently and become more complex. opportunities to apply information technology to business problems and opportunities to integrate existing information technology solutions continue,implying a continual training mission. obviously, this training task isgreatly simplified if the labor pool is already well educated in information technology, since employees come up to speed faster and require lesstraining overall. further, they will probably utilize existing systems morefully and adapt to upgrades better. employee productivity is directlyaffected by the employeesõ knowledge of information technology.from the employeeõs point of view expertise in information technology is valuable. it not only leads to the simple satisfaction of performingoneõs job well and nimbly responding to problems; it can also improve jobmobility. more facility with a companyõs information technology infrastructure can be a valuable job asset that may be considered in promotions. finding a job at another company will entail learning new information systems, but understanding them more abstractlyñknowing whichfeatures should be common and how they might differñis also an asset ina labor market where employees no longer enjoy a òjob for life.ó1.3an educational rationaleinformation technology is an enabler for many new types of educational opportunities. one type is based on the access of students to anarray of educational resources that were not previously accessible to them.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8being fluent with information technologyconsider, for example, the kids as global scientists program, operated bythe university of colorado in conjunction with the university ofmichiganõs weather underground and the weather channel. the goal ofthis program is to help students use the internet to learn about weatherand environmental science issues as they also get to know other studentsfrom different regions of the united states and the world. the programand associated curriculum offer studentdirected discussions and predictions about the paths and history of this yearõs tropical storms that can becompared with those of the experts and with the actual event as it occurs;handson activities, realtime data collection, and instructions on how toview and interpret a variety of satellite images; guided access to interactive displays of current hurricane data and trajectories; links to newspaper stories and other current reports; studentcollected data that is postedto the internet to share with other classrooms around the world; contentexpertise from hurricane specialists via online questioning and conferencing; online discussion groups for teachers, students, and experts, providing support on technical, content, and pedagogical issues; and a vehicle for posting information and graphics about a studentõs school in anonline newspaper.1a second type of educational opportunity is described by mit computer scientist seymour papert. in òmindstorms,ó papert asserts that adeep understanding of programming, in particular the notions of successive decomposition as a mode of analysis and debugging of trial solutions, results in significant educational benefits in many domains ofdiscourse, including those unrelated to computers and information technology per se.2 he further argues that computers can be the means foreducators òto support the development of new ways of thinking andlearningó (p. xiv). he believes that computers can be a conduit of powerful ideas and òthe seeds of cultural change, . . . help[ing] people form newrelationships with knowledge that cuts across the traditional lines separating humanities from sciences and knowledge of the self . . .ó (p. 4). bytransforming abstractions into concrete representations via programming,students òbuild their own intellectual structures with materials drawnfrom surrounding cultureó (pp. 3132).finally, a third type of opportunity is the medium that informationtechnology provides for students to develop and exercise their criticalthinking abilities. information conveyed through advanced information1for more information, see <http://www.onesky.umich.edu/kgs/htdocs/home1.html>.2seymour a. papert. 1999. mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas, secondedition, basic books, new york.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why know about information technology?9technology such as computers and the world wide web can appear moreconvincing than the same information conveyed through a conversationwith a stranger or the newspaper, despite the fact that it may have equivalent accuracy and validity. students must evaluate all information critically. their ability to present information using information technologycan aid in developing an ability to separate form from content in all information, and in assessing its accuracy and validity. the result is a morecritical evaluation of all information. such critical ability helps individuals to evaluate information technologymediated claims for alternativemedicines, advertisements for energyefficient homes, and homeworkadvice from peers.1.4a societal rationalethe practice of democracy is based on an informed citizenry. intodayõs increasingly technological society, many public policy debates areconnected to information technology. for example:¥a person with a basic understanding of database technology canbetter appreciate the risks to privacy entailed in datamining based on hisor her creditcard transactions.¥a jury that understands the basics of computer animation and image manipulation may have a better understanding of what counts asòphotographic truthó in the reconstruction of a crime or an accident.¥understanding choices about representation of information can bekey to understanding how copyright laws may apply to information inelectronic media.¥a person who understands the structure and operation of theworld wide web is in a better position to evaluate and appreciate policyissues related to the first amendment, free expression, and the availability of pornography on the internet.while some of these issues were argued and debated before the advent of modern information technology, the pervasiveness of informationtechnology has brought many of them into the public consciousness in amore poignant and vivid manner. some basic understanding of information technology thus is needed to make informed judgments about thesepublic policy issues, many of which have a direct impact on citizenswhether or not they use information technology in their daily lives.as information technology becomes more and more ubiquitous, citizens need to know how to evaluate the social impact of information technology and when to complain about information technology solutionsembedded in their lives. the òyear 2000ó problem reminds citizens, techbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10being fluent with information technologynology experts, government policy makers, and industry leaders thatseemingly transparent technological solutions can have substantial weaknesses. citizens who live in a world where information technology grows,changes, advances, and fails require some level of understanding of information technology if they are to make informed choices.finally, entirely apart from public policy concerns per se, the growinguse of information technology throughout the world may have profoundsocial effects (box 1.1).1.5understanding, knowing, andusing information technologythis report asserts that individuals must understand informationtechnology in order to use it effectively. this assertion may seem to becurious advice considering that the foregoing rationales argue substantialbenefits already exist from the use of information technology even forindividuals who lack an enhanced understanding of the topic. further,industry is eager to make information technologies as easy to use as possible. why should there be anything more to learn?though both observations have some truth, they overlook severalcritical points about current and future uses of information technology.¥almost by definition, new technologies have not yet been deeplyexplored, and applications or products or services based on new technologies are often fragile, quirky, unintuitive, and flawed. (the samequalities may also beset applications or products or services based on relatively old technologies!) an understanding of the underlying technologies helps the user to cope with the difficulties inevitably encountered inuse.¥the information technology needs of an individual may not be metby an offtheshelf application, implying that it may not be possible tofulfill needs simply by punching a single button (as individuals might inusing a specialized information òapplianceó). thus, having some understanding of information technology will help individuals make more effective use of whatever technology is available to them.¥the ability to use a tool in a rudimentary manner for a limited setof purposes is not the same as the ability to use the tool safely, effectively,and flexibly. the former may be sufficient for many individuals, but themore an individual possesses the latter ability, the more useful the tool isto that individual.¥new information technologies and applications of that technologyemerge rapidly. in some cases, the power and capabilities of new developments will be well matched to the needs of a particular individual. anbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why know about information technology?11individual who has a robust understanding of information technologywill be able to exploit these developments and to comprehend the capabilities and implications of new technologies more quickly.¥many people approach computers tentatively and with little confidence, even if they have been using computers for years. this seemingparadox probably derives from the fact that they have little true understanding of the technology. the training for the applications they knowhas concentrated on using the tools, and has ignored more general description of principles and concepts. when something goes wrong, or anew application is available, people with such backgrounds are at a lossto know what to do and often experience frustration. they must get help,further adding to their feeling of not being in control, and the help theyreceive usually treats the immediate problem without imparting morebasic knowledge, thus perpetuating the problem.granting that some knowledge of information technology is necessary for its use, many efforts have focused on what has come to be knownas òcomputer literacy.ó this term has a long history, and in commonparlance it means the ability to use a few computer applications. for example, computer literacy often refers to the ability to use a spreadsheetand a word processor and to search the world wide web for information.in an era in which the most useful applications change rapidly, the òskillsóapproach lacks òstaying power.ó new tools or new versions of toolsemerge frequently, requiring new skills. for example, searching theworld wide web would not have been a skill included in a literacy coursefive years ago. skills with specific applications are thus necessary but notsufficient for individuals to prosper in the information age.the following analogy illustrates one difference between òcomputerliteracyó and the robust understanding of information technology described in chapter 2. consider a person who has visited a certain cityseveral times and who has learned a single route from the airport to somefinal destination. this visitorõs understanding of the local geography islimited and fragile, whereas residents have a fuller understanding of arterial streets and landmarks. when a traffic jam occurs, the visitor doubtless chooses to wait it out, while the resident is more able to find an alternate route. though the resident may not necessarily be familiar with thelocal streets of the exit, knowing the landmarks and general organizationof the arterials will allow a rapid recovery. in the same way, a computerliterate individual knowing only basic information technology skillsñword processing, email, simple web browsingñmay appear not to needa deep or robust understanding of information technology, but whenfaced with an unexpected event or a problem, may well be less able toadapt or to find a workaround.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12being fluent with information technologybox 1.1possible social effects of information technologyinformation technology has brought or is bringing more abstract or intangible changes than those enumerated in the text.¥freedom. information technology is an enabler for the opportunityfor individuals to express themselves freely, unfettered by intermediaries.for a modest investment in a computer and the nominal cost of a connection to an internet service provider, anyone can post anything on a personal home page or say anything in a chat room, and the potential audience for such postings is quite large. such convenient, inexpensive, andsustained opportunities for free speech are unprecedented, as are the darksides of easy expression (e.g., the ease of disseminating misinformation ordisinformation, hate speech, child pornography, and so on).¥world connectivity. information technology is cheap, fast, òpoint topoint,ó and asynchronous, giving email a convenience and immediacythat postal and telephonic communications have never had, and a personalization that broadcast media cannot provide. with the world wide web,access to local information is possible at unprecedented speedsñone canread the sydney morning herald in sydney, nova scotia, at the same moment that australians are reading it. the ease with which informationtechnology allows citizens of the world to keep in touch with people andevents elsewhere unifies the world profoundly. and this effect will increase as information technology becomes adopted more completelyaround the world.¥loss of remoteness. a corollary to the worldconnecting property ofinformation technology is that information resources are now much moreaccessible to individuals worldwide. although the entire holdings of thenew york public library will not soon be completely online, the informa1.6fluency with information technologythis report addresses the question, what must an individual knowand understand about information technology in order to use it effectivelyand productively for his or her own purposes? because the technology ischanging continually (and rapidly), the answer to this question cannot bestatic. the rapid pace of change in information technologyñelectroniccomputers are barely 50 years old, the term òpcó is less than 20 years old,and the world wide web has been known to the public for less than 5ñimplies that neither a fixed repertoire of skills nor a static curriculumtaught òonce and for alló can possibly suffice.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.why know about information technology?13tion access advantages of those living in geographically remote areas withaccess to the world wide web compare favorably to those living in the bigapple. the information needed by many people, though perhaps not scholars, is largely available electronically. telecommuting is another manifestation of information technologyõs location independence.¥alienation. there is recent, preliminary evidence that even a modestamount of time (one or a few hours per day) spent on the internet can leadsome users to feelings of depression and alienation.1 an apparent source ofsome alienation is that òfriendshipsó formed via chat rooms can be moresuperficial than those formed through facetoface interaction. in addition,the time spent in front of a screen reduces normal interpersonal contact.this topic requires further study, and if the findings of the carnegie mellonuniversity study are confirmed, would suggest the need for attention to themental health consequences of changes associated with the use of information technology.¥predominance of english. information technology is largely an englishoriented medium, because its development has followed the englishcentric tradition of postworld war ii science, and, perhaps more importantly, because the united states has played a dominant role in thedeployment of information technology. while information in almost every written language can be found on the world wide web, a surfer musthave at least a passable understanding of english to reap the greatest advantage of information technology globally. the implications for othernatural languages are unclear, but it is likely that many world residents willwant to be bilingual in the near future.1robert kraut et al. 1998. òinternet paradox: a social technology that reducessocial involvement and psychological wellbeing?ó, american psychologist,53(9):10171031.and, because the technology is powerful, the answer to the questioncannot be superficial. if effectively using information technology were assimple as driving a car or using an automatic teller machine, it would beeasy to teach what one would need to know about information technology in order to use it. but computers and communication are more versatile and in a deep sense more powerful technologies, making the educational task more challenging. (chapter 2 grounds this assertion in moreprecise terms, and explicitly addresses the oftmentioned analogy betweendriving and computing.)while some applications of information technology require relativelybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14being fluent with information technologylittle knowledge to use, other quite useful applications are accessible onlyto those who have some understanding of the underlying technology.those who have this understanding, perhaps because they are technicallytrained, acquired it in connection with their work, or are simply curious,motivated, and persistent enough to have figured it out on their own,have greater facility operating in the digital world and thus greater accessto the benefits it offers.while no term is perfect, the notion of fluency captures best for thecommittee connotations of the ability to reformulate knowledge, to express oneself creatively and appropriately, and to produce and generateinformation (rather than simply to comprehend it). for this reason, thecommittee chose òfluency with information technology,ó or fitness, as alabel for the robust understanding of what is needed to use informationtechnology effectively across a broad range of applications.fitness involves three distinct but interrelated dimensionsñintellectual capabilities, conceptual knowledge, and an appropriate skill set. anindividual who develops these capabilities, knowledge, and skills becomes more fluent with information technology (fit). functionally, amore fit individual is better able to use todayõs information technologyeffectively in personal and professional life, to adapt information technology to be personally relevant, and to acquire future knowledge as information technology changes than a person who is less fit. an adequatelevel of fitness provides an individual with the foundational knowledgeand understanding that enable him or her to advance along a continuum,becoming more and more adept at applying information technology for arange of purposes and having a deeper understanding of the technological opportunities for doing so.in chapter 2, each of these dimensions of fitness is defined and explained more carefully. chapter 2 outlines the intellectual core of fitness.chapter 3 discusses several collateral issues associated with the fitnessframework. chapter 4 addresses òimplementational efforts,ó which arenecessarily tied to specific grade levels. in the case of this report, they aretied to college undergraduates.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness15152the intellectual framework offluency with information technology2.1what is fluency withinformation technology?fluency with information technology (abbreviated as fitness) goesbeyond traditional notions of computer literacy. as noted in chapter 1,literacy about information technology might call for a minimal level offamiliarity with technological tools like word processors, email, and webbrowsers. by contrast, fitness requires that persons understand information technology broadly enough to be able to apply it productively atwork and in their everyday lives, to recognize when information technology would assist or impede the achievement of a goal, and to continuallyadapt to the changes in and advancement of information technology.fitness therefore requires a deeper, more essential understanding andmastery of information technology for information processing, communication, and problem solving than does computer literacy as traditionallydefined. (box 2.1 addresses the difference between literacy and fitness inmore specific terms.) note also that fitness as described in this chapterbuilds on many other fundamental competencies, such as textual literacy,logical reasoning, and knowledge of civics and society.information technology is a medium that permits the expression of avast array of information, ideas, concepts, and messages, and fitness isabout effectively exploiting that expressive power. fitness enables a person to accomplish a variety of different tasks using information technology and to develop different ways of accomplishing a given task.fitness comes in degrees and gradations and is tied to different purbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16being fluent with information technologyposes. fitness is thus not an òend stateó that is independent of domain,but rather develops over a lifetime in particular domains of interest involving particular applications. aspects of fitness can be developed byusing spreadsheets for personal or professional budgeting, desktop publishing tools to create or edit documents or web pages, search enginesand database management tools for locating information on the web or inlarge databases, and design tools to create visualizations in various scientific and engineering disciplines.the wide variety of contexts in which fitness is relevant is matchedby the rapid pace at which information technology evolves. most professionals today require constant upgrading of technological skills as newtools become useful in their work; they learn new word processing programs, new computerassisted design environments, or new techniquesfor searching the world wide web. different applications of informationbox 2.1i use computers all dayñam i fit?many americans use information technology daily in their work, butsuch contact does not automatically bestow fluency with information technology. although many jobsñmedical records data entry, submitting creditcard transactions, building spreadsheets in an accounting department,designing homes using architectural computeraided design tools, and numerous othersñrequire facility with the tools provided by specific information technology systems, this kind of expertise is often restricted largelyto the skills dimension of fitness. developing fitness as described in thisreport requires more than sustained contact with information technology,though such experience can nevertheless provide a good point of departure. common fears about òbreaking somethingó will have been overcome, certain common protocols will have been learned, and unusual situations will have been encountered.there are highly fit individuals across america and the world, ofcourse. through a combination of classes, experience, reading, curiosity,and probably persistence, these individuals not only have acquired skillsthat make information technology useful in their work and personal lives,but they also have learned a base of concepts and intellectual capabilitiessufficient to acquire new knowledge about information technology independently, allowing them to expand their use and to adapt to change. someare òtechies,ó but many are simply individuals who by various means havegained enough basic knowledge to become independent, lifelong learners.as they learn more, they become more fit, more adept at applying information technology to personally relevant tasks.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness17technology emerge rather frequently, both in areas with long traditions ofusing information and information technology and in areas that are notusually seen as being technologyintensive. perhaps the major challengefor individuals embarking on the goal of lifelong fitness involves deciding when to learn a new tool, when to change to a new technology, whento devote energy to increasing technological competency, and when toallocate time to other professional activities.the above comments suggest that fitness is personal, graduated, anddynamic. fitness is personal in the sense that individuals evaluate, distinguish, learn, and use new information technology as appropriate totheir own sustained personal and professional activities. what is appropriate for an individual depends on the particular applications, activities,and opportunities for fitness that are associated with the individualõsarea of interest or specialization, and what is reasonable for a fit lawyeror a historian to know and be able to do may well differ from what isrequired for a fit scientist or engineer. fitness is graduated in the sensethat it is characterized by different levels of sophistication (rather than asingle fit/notfit judgment), and it is dynamic in that it requires lifelonglearning as information technology evolves.put differently, fitness should not be assessed according to whethera person òhas/does not haveó all ten capabilities, and is not a singleòpass/fail judgment.ó people with different needs and interests and goalswill have lesser or greater stakes in the various components of fitnessñthey will obviously have greater stakes in those components that are mostdirectly linked to their own individual needs. nevertheless, the committee believes that all of the elements discussed below are necessary for individuals to exploit effectively the power of information technology acrosseven a relatively small range of interests and needs.2.2the elements of fitnessfitness involves three types of knowledge. these types, describedbriefly below, interact to reinforce each other, leading to deeper understanding of information technology and its uses.¥intellectual capabilities. the intellectual capabilities of fitness referto oneõs ability to apply information technology in complex and sustainedsituations and to understand the consequences of doing so. these capabilities transcend particular hardware or software applications. indeed,the items listed as capabilities in section 2.4 have general applicability tomany domains other than information technology. but a great deal ofresearch (and everyday experience as well) indicates that these capabilibeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18being fluent with information technologyties do not easily transfer between problem domains,1 and in general, fewindividuals are equally adept with these capabilities in all domains. forthis reason, these capabilities can be regarded as òlife skillsó that are formulated in the context of information technology.¥fundamental concepts. concepts refer to the foundations on whichinformation technology is built. this is the òbook learningó part of fluency, although it is highly doubtful that a decent understanding of theconcepts described in section 2.5 can be achieved strictly through the useof textbooks. the concepts are fundamental to information and computing and are enduring in the sense that new concepts may become important in the future as qualitatively new information technologies emerge,but the presented list of fundamental concepts will be augmented withrather than replaced by new concepts.¥contemporary skills. skills refer to the ability to use particular (andcontemporary) hardware or software resources to accomplish information processing tasks. skills embody the intent of the phrase òknowinghow to use a computeró as that phrase is colloquially understood. skillsinclude (but are not limited to) the use of several common software applications. the òskillsó component of fitness necessarily changes over timebecause the information technology products and services available tocitizens continually change. the enumeration given in section 2.6 isappropriate for today, but the list would have been different five yearsago and will surely be different five years from now.section 2.3 discusses the relationship of capabilities, concepts, andskills, as well as the role of knowledge in particular domains.intellectual capabilities and fundamental concepts of informationtechnology are instantiated in or relevant to a wide variety of contexts.intellectual capabilities and skills relate to very practical matters, gettingat the heart of what it means to function in a complex technologyorientedworld. and all have the characteristic that the acquisition of informationtechnology skills, the understanding of information technology concepts,and the development of intellectual capabilities are lifelong activities.over a lifetime, an individual will acquire more skills and develop additional proficiency with those skills, understand information technology1see for example, national research council. 1999. how people learn: brain, mind, experience, and school, chapter 3, òlearning and transfer,ó national academy press, washington,d.c.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness19concepts in a richer and more textured manner, and enhance his or herintellectual capabilities through engagement in multiple domains.the discussion below proposes a òtop tenó in each classification. (theten are not listed in any order of priority.) experts will doubtless recognize omissions and the list could easily be extended. but it is easy togenerate longer lists, and at some point, the length of a list exceeds need,practicality, and even feasibility. the committee believes that it is important to identify the items of highest significance among possible alternatives, and the ten items in each category represent the committeeõs collective judgment of the most important. it is the committeeõs hope that allwho draw from, build on, critique, or modify these lists will also impose alimit of ten on themselves.2.3a tripartite approach to fitnesscapabilities, concepts, and skillsñthe three different types of knowledge basic to fitnessñoccupy separate dimensions, implying that a particular activity involving information technology will involve elements ofeach type of knowledge. learning information technology skills and concepts and developing the intellectual capabilities can be undertaken without reference to each other, but such an effort will not promote fitness toany significant degree. the three elements of fitness are coequal, eachreinforcing the others, and all are essential to fitness.2¥study that emphasizes skills without fundamental concepts andintellectual capabilities meets some needs for utility in the short term. butalthough these skills enable one to perform basic tasks with a word processor (for example), they may not help much in countering the frustration felt when the computer freezes, the printer cannot be accessed, or theparagraphs mysteriously develop new fonts. similar frustration is oftenexperienced by an individual learning a new wordprocessor. the fundamental concepts underlying information technology are the basis for amental model of how a specific application is (or is not) working, a modelthat enables reflective thought about what might be done to fix a problemor how a new application might work. the capabilities of fitness enablea person to deal with unexpected consequences and make appropriatedecisions about learning new features or new software, and they are nec2the statement that òconcepts, capabilities, and skills are coequaló applies only to theirepistemological importance to fitness. it does not argue that the appropriate pedagogiesfor each type of knowledge are, or should be, identical. this point is addressed at somewhatgreater length in section 4.3.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20being fluent with information technologyessary for one to engage in any kind of sustained effort using informationtechnology.¥study of information technology concepts in isolation from skillsor capabilities is reminiscent of computer science education in the daysbefore computers became abundant. the concepts represent abstract information about deep and interesting phenomena. they are worthy ofstudy for their inherent interest, like studying subatomic particles andthe structure of matter. but taught in the context of skills and capabilities,concepts also become the foundation on which one codifies oneõs experience, abstracts to new situations, and reasons about information technology. as information technology changes, concepts provide the basis foradapting to the change, inasmuch as the new systems adhere to the sameprinciples the old systems did. further, concepts provide the raw material needed to engage in capabilitybased action such as engaging in sustained reasoning and managing complexity.¥study that emphasizes capabilities at the expense of concepts andskills will lack the essential connection to information technology. although the intellectual capabilities are quite general, their developmentin the context of fitness requires a substantive connection to informationtechnology that is provided by exposure to the concepts and skills. forexample, to learn to òdebugó a program or test an application, studentsneed to understand the concepts implemented in the artifact. to implement their designs and work with others they need communication andsearch skills.fitness integrates skills, concepts, and capabilities into an effectiveunderstanding of information technology, enabling citizens to use information technology to solve personally relevant problems and apply theirknowledge of information technology to new situations. this integrationis an essential element for individuals to learn over a lifetime. thus, apedagogical approach that balances the treatment of these three elementsis essentialñthis is the subject of chapter 4.2.4intellectual capabilities for fitnesswithin the framework of fitness as described above, the intellectualcapabilities integrate knowledge specific to information technology withproblem domains of personal interest to individuals. many of the capabilities on this òtop tenõõ list might be familiar in other disciplinesñengineering design, library science, or general educationñor even from anunderstanding of what is needed to live a productive life. indeed, noassertion is made that these capabilities are unique or òbelongó to information technology. however, the prominence and importance of inforbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness21mation technology in society today take them out of the world of the designer or engineering specialist and put them squarely in the lives andworkspaces of us all.the essential elements of fitness include the ability to:1.engage in sustained reasoning.sustained reasoning starts with defining and clarifying a problem.understanding exactly what problem is to be solved and knowing whenit has been solved are often the most difficult aspects of problem solving.and, because information technology will in general operate in the wayin which one directs it to operate, rather than the way in which one intends it to operate, precise specification of the problem to be solved withinformation technology is even more critical for solving other types ofproblems.once the problem has been defined, multiple attempts at formulatinga solution are often required. an initial solution is often revised or improved by iteration, which often causes a refinement in the definition ofthe problem. reasoning is used for planning, designing, executing, andevaluating a solution.the òsustainedó aspect of this capability is intended to convey an integrated effort that covers days or weeks rather than a onetime event.thus, individuals might use desktop publishing programs, computerassisted design tools, visualization and modeling environments, websearchengines, or a variety of other technological resources to help implement asolution.2.manage complexity.problems often have a variety of solutions, each with its advantagesand disadvantages, and tradeoffs are often necessary in determining themost appropriate solution. one solution may require extensive designbut result in a relatively straightforward implementation; another mayrequire the oppositeña simple design but a costly implementation. furthermore, any given approach to a solution will often result in components of a system interacting in complex, unexpected ways.a sustained activity involving information technology will typicallybe complex, involving a number of tasks, such as problem clarification,solution formulation, solution design and implementation, and testingand evaluation of the outcome. the solution developed for the problemwill often contain several components, including both hardware and software. a person needs to be able to plan a project, design a solution, integrate the components, respond to unexpected interactions, and diagnosewhat is needed from each task. some of the steps of the project may inbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22being fluent with information technologyvolve some type of computer programming. such programming couldentail configuring system control panels, using and adapting existing software packages for oneõs needs, or writing code in some programminglanguage.another source of complexity is the need to manage the resourcesthat technology provides, especially when the resources available are inadequate. thus, a user of information technology needs to be able to manage resources: do processes require too much time? too much diskspace? is the bandwidth available to download what is offered? and ofcourse, are there ways to perform necessary tasks that will not exceed thelimits imposed by resource availability and/or adequacy?a third source of complexity is the fact that large information technologybased systems often have interdependencies. that is, small changesin one part of the system can have large effects on another part of thesystem that is òapparentlyó separate from that part. such interdependencies can be reduced by enforcing a rigid separation between different system parts, but this practice is much easier to describe than to implement.3.test a solution.determining the scope, nature, and conditions under which a technological solution is intended to operate can be difficult. a solution to aproblem must be tested in two waysñto determine that the design is correct or appropriate to the problem at hand (i.e., that the solution, whenimplemented correctly, will meet user needs) and to determine that theimplementation of a given design is correct.testing entails determining whether a proposed solution meets design goals and works under diverse conditions, taking into account thatmost systems will be used in ways that were not intended, as well as inexpected ways. testing involves identifying the uses most likely to causea failure, developing ways of testing for all normal modes of operation,determining typical misuses of the system, and designing the system sothat it responds gracefully when misused. furthermore, because somefixes to problems may introduce more problems, special care is necessaryto fix (or manage) the initial flaws. testing is also best seen as an activityconcurrent with design, because the alternative is to implement a complete system before knowing whether the implementation is correct.4.manage problems in faulty solutions.when systems crash and technological tools fail, users need the ability to òdebug,ó that is, to detect, diagnose, and correct problems and faults(i.e., bugs). debugging is a complex process that often goes beyond thetechnology and includes the personal and social aspects of the undertakbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness23ing (e.g., when a system has multiple interacting components, each ofwhich is the responsibility of a different individual). debugging also involves other capabilites, such as sustained reasoning, managing complexity, and testing.debugging is necessary because the bestdesigned and bestintegratedsystems will still exhibit unanticipated behavior. bugs are inevitably encountered in any ongoing effort using information technology, and thususers must anticipate the need to identify them, diagnose their sources(e.g., by recognizing patterns in observations or in fault reports, distinguishing root causes from derivative but proximate causes, and designing systematic diagnostic experiments), understand the implications ofeliminating those sources, and take steps to modify the system appropriately. alternatively, the appropriate response to a faulty system that isvital to some application may well be to structure the environment inwhich the system operates to limit the risk associated with its use.testing reveals bugs, but once discovered, bugs need to be repairedcleanly and correctly. good design also involves designing systems thatare more easily fixed when something goes wrong (a process often knownas òantibuggingó). for example, a welldesigned system has clear documentation. welldesigned systems avoid hidden dependencies, so fixesat one point do not create new flaws at another. the system design itselffacilitates examination of what the system is doing and enables the reporting of unexpected events.debugging also involves making the everyday elements of technology work. when something goes wrong, it is desirable to be able to tracethe chain of events upon which correct operation depends. a typical example today starts with a person who tries to print a document preparedwith a word processor, and the printer doesnõt produce any output. therecould be a flaw anywhere along a chain of potential causes: the printerisnõt plugged in or is turned off; the printer isnõt connected to the computer; the wrong driver is selected; the printer queue is blocked; improperparameters were set in the print command; and many other possibleevents. a user needs to recognize that this is a solvable problem, find thebroken link in the chain, and either solve the problem or call the appropriate expert.5.organize and navigate information structures and evaluate information.most sustained activities involve the location, evaluation, use, andorganization of information. often searching for and locating information involve other aspects of fitness, including evaluating the validity ofinformation and resolving conflicting accounts of situations. (note alsothe connection to information literacy, discussed in section 3.2.)being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24being fluent with information technologythis capability also involves the ability to find and evaluate information at different levels of sophistication. tasks range from reading amanual to finding and using online help. web searches may be necessaryto find more complex information. of course, as the level of complexityrises, it becomes increasingly important (and more difficult) to ascertainaccuracy. an individual must be prepared to evaluate the reliability of asource, understand the nature of a shared information space such as theweb, and regard with appropriate caution the quality of the informationretrieved.this capability also suggests that one must be able to structure information appropriately to make it useful. the information created must beretrievable and useful for the intended purpose. thus, the design processfor information structures involves elements of communication (and mayinvolve programming of some sort).6.collaborate.when project responsibilities must be divided among a number ofpeople, collaboration abilities are involved. among other things, collaboration involves a strategy for dividing a task into pieces that can beworked on individually. in practice, how a problem is divided is basedon both the structure of the problem and the organizational structure ofthe team that will solve it (e.g., different individuals may have differenttalents). in collaborating, individuals need to avoid duplication of effortas well as inconsistencies in the parts that they deliver for integration intothe final product. furthermore, each must have a clear sense for how thevarious parts of a solution are made to operate together as well as theexpectations for his or her own part, the importance of clearly specifiedinterfaces as a technique for increasing the likelihood that parts of a solution can operate together, and a strategy for ensuring that team memberswork on an appropriately recent version of the solution.information technologies used for collaboration do not change whatis required of a collaboration, but they do change how a collaborationtakes place. information technologies such as telephones, email, videoconferencing, shared web pages, chat rooms, and so on enable collaborators to work together remotely and asynchronously, with relatively lessreliance on facetoface interactions. but learning how to cope with thelimitations of technologically mediated interactions thus becomes essential. for example, if team members communicate by email, they maywell lose some ability to communicate clearly and unambiguously; at thevery least, they may be forced to articulate things explicitly that a facetoface interaction would not require.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness257.communicate to other audiences.in conveying information to others, it is often necessary to use technology. this may involve the use of images or processes as well as words.effective communication requires familiarity with and understanding ofthe pros and cons of various means of communication, because the intervening technology may change the nature of the communication. forexample, it is much more difficult to provide driving directions to a givenlocation by using the telephone than by gesturing and pointing to a map.but a deeper aspect of communication with other audiences is thenature of that communication, independent of media. for example, communicating problem statements or project outcomes to customers, interested individuals, and others requires an understanding of audience needsand background knowledge. an effective communication to expertsmight involve translating informal needs into formal requirements, forexample, moving from a òwish listó expressed during a lunchtime conversation to a more formal tasking to a work team. these formal requirements form the basis for discussing whether or not a project performscorrectly, and therefore underlie the ability to test and debug. withoutcommunication that carries nuance and detail, it is impossible to knowwhether a project component is being built correctly.a related dimension of communication with other audiences is documentation. documentation is almost always a component of informingan òoutsideró audience about the nature of a system, such as an officesystem, a manufacturing system, or an information technology system.documentation makes content more explicit and provides many opportunities for someone to think through the structure of a project. the development of documentation can be regarded as a process of devising theminimum set of information and instructions needed for an unknown taskto be performed with a specific tool by a nonexpert.8.expect the unexpected.even when a technological system works as intended to solve a problem as it was originally stated, its use may still have unexpected consequences, because the system is embedded in a larger social and technological context that may not have been properly anticipated. in someinstances, these unexpected consequences may even overshadow the intended outcome (i.e., the solving of the original problem). users shouldunderstand that such consequences are not uncommon and work to mitigate or exploit them as appropriate.unforeseen benefits or drawbacks may result when a technology deployed for one purpose is used for other purposes. for example:being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26being fluent with information technology¥one of the original òprimaryó purposes of the arpanet (the predecessor to the internet) was to facilitate the use of computers many milesaway from oneõs local desktop; as users learned how to use the arpanet,they found that it was most useful for its email capabilities.¥making web browsers in school libraries available to all studentsis intended to give students easy access to the rich information content ofthe internet. but open access may unintentionally expose students to childmolesters, hate speech, and pornography.in other cases, unexpected side effects may occur because a technological system is deployed on a much larger scale than originally expected.for example:¥introducing computers into schools on a large scale means thatmany teachers must be trained to use them effectively.3¥introducing information technology into businesses on a large scaleoften results in unexpected recurring expenditures to keep hardware andsoftware investments current with evolving applications.4 small applications of information technology can be funded on a shoestring (e.g., because problems can be solved in a òquick and dirtyó manner). but on alarge scale, maintenance, support, documentation, and training becomebig sources of expense.finally, technological systems may be designed for a particular intensity of usage, but may display unexpected behavior or may result in unexpected consequences when the actual intensity of usage is higher. forexample:¥acquisition of a cellular telephone òfor emergency use onlyó for alow monthly payment often results in firsttime bills that are much largerthan expected, because the user finds the convenience of the cellular telephone irresistible.3see, for example, panel on educational technology. 1997. report to the president on theuse of technology to strengthen k12 education in the united states, presidentõs committee ofadvisors on science and technology (pcast), washington, d.c., march, chapter 5.4such experiences in the private sector are often reported in the trade press. see, forexample, m. lynne markus and robert i. benjamin. 1997. òare you gambling on a magicbullet?ó, computerworld, october 20; clayton m christensen. 1997. òfatal attraction: thedangers of too much technology,ó computerworld, june 16; vaughan merlyn and sheilasmith. 1997. òbe careful what you wish for: managing technologyõs unintended consequences,ó computerworld, january 20.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness27¥a server designed for a particular load may crash when subject totoo many requests for service arriving at the same time, as often happenswhen access is sought to a popular web site.59.anticipate changing technologies.while no one can predict accurately the future course of technology,technology inevitably changes. fitness entails the capability to adapt tonew technology efficiently and how to learn a new language or system,building on what is already known about older, perhaps similar technologies and facilities. for example, new versions of technology and tools willalmost certainly appear, and they may offer benefits over older versions(e.g., the new version may be faster or offer more features). at the sametime, additional functionality often comes at a cost (e.g., the need to upgrade system resources such as memory, or the need to learn the new setof features). users thus must be prepared to weigh whether the benefitsof the inevitable new version outweigh its costs. decisions as to when orwhether to upgrade, which tool to use, and how many features to learnare examples of such adaptation.10.think about information technology abstractly.a person who effectively determines how to apply information technology to his or her needs will think about information technologyabstractly. for example, she will reflect on her use of information technology, identifying characteristics and commonalities that cut across technological experiences. she will transfer the principles of technologicalsolutions from one setting to another. she will recognize technologicalanalogies, and use them to become adept with new technology quickly.she will have high expectations for technological solutions, and she willfind workarounds when technology falls short.a second dimension of thinking abstractly about information technology is to consider what aspects of information technology affect apolicy issue. for example, a person engaged in such thought will try todetermine if and how the technology makes previous policy solutions inadequate. he or she will think deeply about proposed metaphors, such asassertions that putting up a web page is equivalent to publishing.5william stallings. 1996. data and computer communications, 5th edition, prenticehall,new york. see also keynote systems, inc. 1998. òtop 10 discoveries about the internet,óand òhow fast is the internet?ó available online at, respectively, <http://www.keynote.com/measures/top10.html> and <http://www.keynote.com/measures/howfast.html>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28being fluent with information technology2.5information technology concepts6if information technology were unchanging, then most people wouldfind it unnecessary to learn information technology concepts. the information technology skills could be taught once and for all, and the conceptual foundation underlying information technology would be of interestonly to specialists. but information technology changes daily and oftendramatically, rendering presentday skills obsolete but also offering newopportunities to solve personally relevant problems. how can one prepare for this inevitable change? how can one quickly upgrade oneõs skillsto exploit new opportunities?the answer lies in understanding a few of the basic ideas and concepts underpinning information technology. these concepts are approximately independent of particular technology or applications, though theyare instantiated in different ways in different technologies and applications. in particular, the new and improved information technology of thefuture will also depend on these concepts, and an understanding of theprinciples on which information technology rests will continue to enablea person to acquire information technology skills more easily. and, because these concepts are fundamental, they are far more enduring thaninformation technology skills that are tied to specific technologies.the topics given in the following list touch on ideas of computation,communication, and information that are deep and intellectually challenging. although any of the topics could be the basis of years of graduatestudy for a specialist, the basic ideas are straightforward and accessible,having been regularly taught to nonspecialists for years. note also thatthe time and effort required to teach and learn each concept may varywidely.the concepts presented below reflect the committeeõs judgmentsabout the most important conceptual foundations of information technology contributing to fitness. there is no intended order.6the discussion in this section identifies various information technology concepts in aform that approximates that of a catalog description of a course. a full explanation of theconcepts would be appropriate for a textbook, but not for a report attempting to outline abasic framework for understanding information technology. some of these concepts maynot be familiar to nonspecialists, a point that previews a pedagogical approach discussed inchapter 4 involving the joint teaching efforts of information technology specialists and domain experts.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness291.computerskey aspects of a storedprogram computer, including:¥the program as a sequence of steps,¥the process of program interpretation,¥the memory as a repository for program and data (including notions of memory hierarchy and associated ideas of permanence/volatility), and¥overall organization, including relationship to peripheral devices(e.g., i/o devices).the appropriate emphasis is not necessarily a specific electronic realization such as a particular computer, but rather the idea of a computational task as a discrete sequence of steps, the deterministic interpretationof instructions, instruction sequencing and control flow, and the distinction between name and value. computers do what the program tells themto do given particular input, and if a computer exhibits a particular capability, it is because someone figured out how to break the task into a sequence of basic steps, i.e., how to program it.2.information systemsthe general structural features of an information system, including,among others, the hardware and software components, people and processes, interfaces (both technology interfaces and humancomputer interfaces), databases, transactions, consistency, availability, persistent storage, archiving, audit trails, security and privacy and their technologicalunderpinnings.most knowledge workers in the labor force interact with one or moreinformation systems, becoming knowledgeable about their characteristicsand idiosyncrasies. understanding the abstract structure of such systemsprepares students for employment, enhances job mobility, enables workers to adapt to new systems more quickly, and helps them to exploit morefully the facilities of a given system.3.networkskey attributes and aspects of information networks, including theirphysical structure (messages, packets, switching, routing, addressing, congestion, local area networks (lans), wide area networks (wans), bandwidth, latency, pointtopoint communication, multicast, broadcast,ethernet, mobility), and logical structure (client/server, interfaces, layered protocols, standards, network services).being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30being fluent with information technologycomputers are generally much more useful when connected to eachother and to the internet. the goal is to understand how computers canbe connected to each other and to networks, and how information isrouted between computers. the appropriate emphasis is how the parameters of communication, such as latency and bandwidth, affect the responsiveness of a network from a userõs point of view and how they mightlimit oneõs ability to work.4.digital representation of informationthe general concept of information encoding in binary form. different information encodings: ascii, digital sound, images, and video/movies. topics such as precision, conversion and interoperability (e.g., of fileformats), resolution, fidelity, transformation, compression, and encryption are related, as is standardization of representations to support communication.the appropriate emphasis is the notion that information that is processed by computers and communication systems is represented by bits(i.e., binary digits). such a representation is a uniform way for computersand communication systems to store and transmit all information; information can be synthesized without a master analog source simply by creating the bits and so can be used to produce everything from toy storyanimations to forged email; symbolic information in machinereadableform is more easily searchable than physical information.5.information organizationthe general concepts of information organization, including forms,structure, classification and indexing, searching and retrieving, assessinginformation quality, authoring and presentation, and citation. search engines for text, images, video, audio.information in computers, databases, libraries, and elsewhere mustbe structured to be accessible and useful. how the data should be organized and indexed depends critically on how users will describe the information sought (and vice versa), and how completely that description canbe specified. in addition to locating and structuring information, it is important to be able to judge the quality (accuracy, authoritativeness, and soforth) of information both stored and retrieved. section 3.2 provides someadditional discussion.6.modeling and abstractionthe general methods and techniques for representing realworld phenomena as computer models, first in appropriate forms such as systemsbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness31of equations, graphs, and relationships, and then in appropriate programming objects such as arrays or lists or procedures. topics include continuous and discrete models, discrete time, events, randomization, andconvergence, as well as the use of abstraction to hide irrelevant detail.computers can be made to play chess, predict the weather, and simulate the crash of a sports car by abstracting realworld phenomena andmanipulating those abstractions using transformations that duplicate orapproximate the realworld processes. one goal is understanding the relationship between reality and its representation, including notions ofapproximation, validity, and limitations; i.e., not all aspects of the realworld are modeled in any one program, and a model is not reality.7.algorithmic thinking and programmingthe general concepts of algorithmic thinking, including functionaldecomposition, repetition (iteration and/or recursion), basic data organizations (record, array, list), generalization and parameterization, algorithm vs. program, topdown design, and refinement. note also that sometypes of algorithmic thinking do not necessarily require the use or understanding of sophisticated mathematics. the role of programming,which is a specific instantiation of algorithmic thinking, is discussed inchapter 3.algorithmic thinking is key to understanding many aspects of information technology. specifically, it is essential to comprehending how andwhy information technology systems work as they do. to troubleshoot ordebug a problem in an information technology system, application, oroperation, it is essential to have some expectation of what the proper behavior should be, and how it might fail to be realized. further, algorithmic thinking is key to applying information technology to other personally relevant situations.8.universalitythe òuniversality of computersó is one of the fundamental facts ofinformation technology discovered by computing pioneers a.m. turingand alonzo church in the 1930s, before practical computers were created.7 shorn of its theoretical formalism and expressed informally, universality says that any computational task can be performed by any computer. the statement has several implications:7alonzo church. 1936. òan unsolvable problem of elementary number theory,ó american journal of mathematics, 58:345363; alan m. turing. 1936. òon computable numbers,with an application to the entscheidungsproblem,ó proceedings of the london mathematicalsociety, ser. 2, 42:230265, 43:544546.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32being fluent with information technology¥no computational task is so complex that it cannot be decomposedinto instructions suitable for the most basic computer.¥the instruction repertoire of a computer is largely unimportant interms of giving it power since any missing instruction types can be programmed using the instructions the machine does have.¥computers differ by how quickly they solve a problem, notwhether they can solve the problem.¥programs, which direct the instructionfollowing components of acomputer to realize a computation, are the key.universality distinguishes computers from other types of machines(box 2.2).9.limitations of information technologythe general notions of complexity, growth rates, scale, tractability,decidability, and state explosion combine to express some of the limitations of information technology. tangible connections should be made toapplications, such as text search, sorting, scheduling, and debugging.computers possess no intuition, creativity, imagination, or magic.though extraordinary in their scope and application, information technology systems cannot do everything. some tasks, such as calculating theclosing price for a given stock on the nasdaq exchange, are not solvableby computer. other tasks, such as that of placing objects into a containerso as to maximize the number that can be stored within it (e.g., optimallyfilling boxcars, shipping containers, moving vans, or space shuttles), canbe solved only for small problems but not for large ones or those of practical importance.8 some tasks are so easily solved that it hardly matterswhich solution is used. and, because the programs that run on computers are designed by human beings, they reflect the assumptions that theirdesigners build into them, assumptions that may be inappropriate orwrong. thus, for example, a computer simulation of some òrealó phenomenon may or may not accurately reflect the underlying reality (and anałve user may be unable to tell the difference between a generally truesimulation and one that is fundamentally misleading). assessing what8in the case of the maximization problem above (often known as the òknapsackó problem), the proper arrangement can be determined by exhaustively trying all arrangementsand orientations of the objects. but this calculation cannot be performed in any reasonablelength of time when many objects can be placed into the container. yet the penalty of notbeing able to find the maximizing arrangement can be high, as when shipping two containers rather than one or launching the space shuttle twice rather than once. when the problemis large enough that the maximizing arrangement cannot be practically computed, it is necessary to use ònearly maximaló arrangements that can be more easily determined.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness33box 2.2 on universalityñin principle and in practicethe universality property of computers is a theoretical result. is it true inpractice? the answer is yes, definitely, but there are complicating practical issues that can obscure the truth of this fact.how can a computer without connection to a printer perform the computation, òprint the reportó? of course, it cannot. but, the computer canwithout change perform the task, given a printer and the necessary software to format the report and drive the printer. similarly, a computerembedded in an automobileõs carburetor cannot print a report either, because, first, it does not have the proper input/output devices and, second,its software is permanently set to the task of mixing fuel. but the computer,i.e., the central processing unit, is not a limitation in these or other cases.indeed, it is the universality of computers that explains why they are soubiquitous in modern america: a computer chip with a program stored inreadonly memory (rom) is more convenient to design, cheaper to build,more reliable, and easier to maintain than specialized circuitry for controlling appliances, automobile subsystems, and other mechanical devices, aswell as electronics like cell phones and global positioning system (gps)devices.further, the observation that applications like word processing requiredifferent software to run on a macintosh versus a pc seems to contradictthe above claims and imply that the instruction set does matter. in a narrow sense it does, since the mac cannot directly execute the binary encoding of a program specialized to the pc and vice versa. this is because themac and the pc use different microprocessor chips and the binary files forsoftware applications are customized for each type of microprocessor. butthose two different binary encodings can be created from a single sourceprogram by a translator (compiler) that specializes the computation to eachinstruction set. the two machines are literally running the same sourceprogram, i.e., performing the same word processing computation. andthere is an indirect sense in which any pc software can run on a mac andvice versa. a program can be written for one machine to emulate theinstruction set of the other machine, allowing it to execute the actual binary encoding used by the other machine. being indirect, this would beslower than a customized version, but it truly illustrates universality.information technology can be appliedñand when it should be appliedñis essential in todayõs information age.10.societal impact of information and information technologythe technical basis for social concerns about privacy, intellectual property, ownership, security, weak/strong encryption, inferences about perbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34being fluent with information technologysonal characteristics based on electronic behavior such as monitoring websites visited, ònetiquette,ó òspamming,ó and free speech in the internetenvironment.understanding social issues strongly connected to information technology goes beyond fitness to general principles of good citizenship.policy issues that relate to information technology, including privacy, encryption, copyright, and related concerns, are increasingly common today, and informed citizens must have a basis for understanding the significance of those issues and for making reasoned judgments about them.information technology connects to the world at large in many ways,and characteristics of the technology have implications for everyday issues. consider, for example, intellectual property. copyright is accompanied by a wellestablished body of law, but now that the web makesimages and documents available to a huge audience, it has become muchmore important for web users to understand that the ability to see animage on the web does not automatically imply that the image can becopied or reused.numerous other issues are apparent today on which many nontechnologists are asked to make judgments. is the internet just another formof publication, and therefore subject to the same first amendment andcopyright protections that newspapers enjoy? is encryption a potentialweapon that needs to be kept out of foreign hands? why are standardsimportant, and how do we promote the use of standards without permitting unregulated monopolies to stifle innovation? does inviting technologically skilled workers from other countries create or destroy jobs? howdo we encourage children to achieve the highest levels of technologicalcompetence? does information technology cause job displacement and/or upskilling? how is it possible to promote social equity regarding access to information technology?discussionthese fundamental concepts represent major ideas underpinning information technology. the claim that fitness demands an understanding of these concepts is most frequently challenged by an analogy: if mostpeople can drive without understanding how an automobile works, whyshould anyone need to know how a computer works?the weakness in this analogy is embodied in the difference betweenthe two kinds of machines. automobiles perform essentially one task,transporting people and things from one location to another, and are incapable of other physical tasks, say, mixing concrete. any computer canperform any information processing taskñthis is the concept of universality. it is not only a principle; it is a fact used every day. when onebeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness35wants to manage a household budget, one doesnõt buy a new computerfor budgeting. rather, one buys and installs software to add budgeting tothe computerõs other capabilities. not being specialized like other machines that directly affect the physical world, computers may well affectour lives more than these other machines have, including automobiles.knowing the conceptual foundations, then, is essential to understandingthis impactñwhat information technology can do, what it cannot do, whatrisks computers and access to information bring, and so on. armed withsuch knowledge, individuals can make informed choices ranging frompersonal decisions (like taking precautions against computer viruses) tomatters of public policy such as protecting privacy interests.an equally important motivation for learning information technology concepts is that they provide foundational knowledge to be usedwhen acquiring and applying the intellectual capabilities. to perform thereasoning and thinking activities embodied in the capabilities, it is necessary to have some understanding of the range of possibilities. furthermore, understanding these concepts enables an individual to be more versatile and more creative in his or her use of information technology tools.finally, box 2.3 points out that even in a world in which the publicõsexposure to information technology is through specialized informationappliances rather than desktop computers or through technologies thatadapt to user needs and knowledge, the fundamental concepts of information technology will still be useful in understanding how to use suchdevices effectively.2.6information technology skillsskills such as managing a personal computer, using word processing,network browsers, mail, and spreadsheet software, or understanding anoperating system are what are most usually subsumed under the label ofòcomputer literacy.óbecause information technology skills are closely tied to todayõs applications, the set of necessary skills can be expected to change at aboutthe same rate that commercial information technology changes, i.e., quiterapidly. (note, for example, that a list of skills developed five years agowould not have mentioned the web or the internet.) changes in the specific interests and needs of the individual involved also have a significanteffect on what skills are (or become) necessary. over the course of a lifetime, individuals who use information technology must regularly evaluate their skills and determine which new skills they need for their workplace or personal success. fitness entails a continuing acquisition of newskills and adaptation of a set of skills to a changing environment.the list of skills below is appropriate for todayõs technologies (circabeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36being fluent with information technologybox 2.3fitness, personal computers, informationappliances, and adaptive technologytoday, desktop computers are a primary platform through which individuals interact with information technology. but whether this propositionwill remain true in the future is an open question. some reports suggestthat information appliancesñsinglepurpose devices that manipulate informationñmay become more common and ubiquitous in the future. indeed, those making this prediction argue that information appliances canbe made so easy to use that no knowledge of information technology willbe necessary to operate them.predictions of the future technology environment are notoriously uncertain. it is likely that todayõs desktop computers (or their equivalents) willcontinue to be used by information workers. but the intellectual framework outlined in this chapter for fitness will continue to have applicabilityeven to individuals dealing with information appliances. of course, thespecific skills needed will be different. but the basic concepts and intellectual capabilities of fitness will continue to be relevant. for example:¥an algorithm of some sort will be driving the operation of an information appliance. understanding the general characteristics of algorithmswill help the user to understand the limitations of a given device. forexample, a navigation system for a car may provide the òbestó route frompoint a to b; the user may find it useful to know whether òbestó refers to themost scenic route or the shortest route or the fastest route.¥input to an information appliance is likely to remain òbrittle,ó in thesense that the device will respond to the input that the user actually provides, not the input that the user intended to provide. this is a consequence of several concepts, including the digital representation of information and the nature of computational devices and information systems.1999) and focuses on what one would need to know to buy a personalcomputer, set it up, use the principal software that comes with it, subscribe to an internet service provider, and use its services. these itemsand other similar ones emerged from a question posed to attendees at thecommitteeõs january 1998 workshop about what an information technologyliterate person should know.this list of skills extends in one important way the content of òcomputer literacyó courses that teach individuals how to use specific softwarepackages. it is true that students need to use specific software and hardware to acquire skills with information technology. but the skills involvedin the committeeõs list are generic skills, rather than the specific skillsbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness37needed to operate a particular vendorõs product. for example, òwordprocessingó refers to the use of functionality common to most or all wordprocessors, rather than the specific commands, keybindings, or dialogboxes of one vendorõs software. acquiring these skills includes understanding what similarities and differences to expect between differentproducts for the same task.todayõs set of ten essential skills includes:1.setting up a personal computera person who uses computers should be able to connect the parts of a¥a wireless information appliance that facilitates interaction with largeamounts of data will require a local database for a fast response. thenavigation system described above, for example, will in general not receive maps through the air, but rather will require maps òprestoredó insome way that is local to the device.¥identifying and correcting faults will always be necessary for the userto understand how he or she used the device improperly.furthermore, a knowledge of the basic concepts of fitness will enablea person to move more freely among information appliances. for example, a user will need to know to look for a way to correct mistakeninput.none of this is to argue the impossibility of operating an informationappliance by the memorized application of a particular set of keystrokesñwhich today enables some individuals to obtain something useful from acomputer. but gaining the full value from either a computer or an information appliance will require the full intellectual range of fitness.in a similar vein, it can be argued that information technology shouldbeñand someday will beñdesigned to minimize what the individual mustknow in order to use it. for example, some information technology applications attempt to adapt to a particular userõs style and needs. other applications attempt to conceal their internal operation to reduce the burden onthe user.such technological adaptations to the relatively nałve user are unquestionably helpful. but they do notñindeed, cannotñeliminate the need forfitness. for example, it is hard to imagine that a complex application hasno operating faults in it, and thus users will always have to cope with thingsthat donõt work. all of the rationales articulated above for fitness in thecontext of information appliances equally apply to wellengineered anduseradaptive information technology applications.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38being fluent with information technologypersonal computer and its major peripherals (e.g., a printer). this entailsknowing about the physical appearance of cables and ports, as well ashaving some understanding of how to configure the computer (e.g., knowing that most computers provide a way to set the system clock, or how toselect a screen saver and why one may need to use a screen saver).2.using basic operating system featurestypical of todayõs operating system use is the ability to install newsoftware, delete unwanted software, and invoke applications. there aremany other skills that could reasonably be included in this category, suchas the ability to find out from the operating system whether there is sufficient disk space.3.using a word processor to create a text documenttoday, minimal skills in this area include the ability to select fonts,paginate, organize, and edit documents. integration of image and otherdata is becoming essential. in the near future, requirements in this areawill likely include the creation of web pages using specialized authoringtools.4.using a graphics and/or artwork package to create illustrations, slides, orother imagebased expressions of ideastoday, this skill involves the ability to use the current generation ofpresentation software and graphics packages.5.connecting a computer to a networktoday, this process can be as simple as wiring the computer to a telephone jack and subscribing to an internet service provider, although asmore powerful communications options become available, this processmay become more complex.6.using the internet to find information and resourcestoday, locating information on the internet involves the use of browsers and search engines. the use of search engines and browsers requiresan understanding of oneõs needs and how they relate to what is availableand what can be found readily, as well as the ability to specify queries andevaluate the results.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the intellectual framework of fitness397.using a computer to communicate with otherstoday, electronic mail is a primary mode of computerbased communication. variants and improvements, as well as entirely new modes ofcommunication, are expected in the future.8.using a spreadsheet to model simple processes or financial tablesthis skill includes the ability to use standard spreadsheet systemsand/or specialized packages (e.g., tax preparation software).9.using a database system to set up and access useful informationtoday, sqlbased systems9 are becoming ubiquitous in the workplace, and personal information managers are becoming increasingly common. in the future, different approaches, perhaps weboriented, may become the prevalent mode.10.using instructional materials to learn how to use new applications orfeaturesthis skill involves using online help files and reading and understanding printed manuals. one aspect of this process is obtaining details orfeatures of systems one already comprehends; a second aspect is usingthe tutorial to grasp the essential models and ideas underlying a new system.2.7fitness in perspectivethe intellectual content of fitness is rich and deep. but the depthand richness of this content are determined by the nature of informationtechnology. although different individuals need different degrees of familiarity with the different elements of fitness, a good understanding ofand facility with all of the skills, concepts, and capabilities of fitness arenecessary for individuals to exploit the full power of information technology across a range of different applications.nevertheless, such depth and richness raise the question of the extentto which it is reasonable to expect that the content of fitness is accessibleto a wide range of the citizenry. for perspective on this question, it isuseful to consider the national council of teachers of mathematicsõ9 sql is an acronym for structured query language, a common language used in interactions with databases.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40being fluent with information technology(nctm) standards for mathematics education and the national researchcouncilõs standards for science education. as described in appendix b,such organizations focus on the mathematical and scientific education ofall students, rather than a special few with previously demonstrated aptitude for mathematics or science. the organizations that produced thesestandards for mathematics and science education make the case that theintellectual content articulated in the standards is rich, deep, and mostimportantly not òdumbed down.ó these organizations believe that learning about science and mathematics is valuable not just for future scientistsand mathematicians, but also for a very wide range of the citizenry.the essentials of fitness are not for the most part dependent onknowledge of sophisticated mathematics. indeed, the capabilities andconcepts, though not the skills, are intellectually accessible even withoutcomputers per se. for example, the concept of an algorithm can be expressed and conveyed in an entirely qualitative and nonmathematicalmanner even to a 4th grader by discussing the rules of a game or following a recipe in the kitchen. thus, the committee believes that the intellectual content of fitness is no less accessible to citizens than the mathematics and science contained within the nctm and nrc standards.a second issue is the following: by design, fitness is a body of knowledge and understanding that enables individuals to use information technology effectively in a variety of different contexts. but does being fitmean that one will never need to rely on an information technology expert? put differently, does an individualõs consultation of an informationtechnology expert imply a lack of fitness for that individual?there is certainly some level of fitness at which an individual willnot need to rely on an expert to fix an information technology problem orto exploit a new opportunity offered by information technology. buteven someone who is fit enough to not have to rely on an expert mayfind it advantageous to do so anyway. for example, a highly fit individual may simply decide that it is not worth his or her time to fix a problem, even if he or she could do so. furthermore, even if an individualwith more basic levels of fitness may still need to consult with an information techology expert to solve a technology problem or to describe atechnology solution, that basic understanding and knowledge will helphim or her to interact constructively with the expert (e.g., to recognizethat a problem is indeed solvable; to explain the problem or solution requirements more precisely; or to understand, implement, or dispute anapproach that the expert proposes).being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collateral issues41413collateral issueschapter 2 outlines an intellectual framework for fitness. but the specifics of the committeeõs articulation inevitably lead to concerns about tworelated issues. first, the role of programming as an essential element ofunderstanding information technology is an issue that has been long debated in the computer science community. and, because the issue mayseem like an esoteric diversion for the nonspecialist, some words of explanation are appropriate. second, for many years the library science community has promulgated the notion of information literacy. because information literacy and fluency with information technology share certainelements, an explicit comparison between the two is warranted.3.1the role of programmingalgorithmic thinking is a valuable ability for many educated people,yet programmingñthe act of expressing an algorithm in a specific form tosolve a problemñis widely seen as the purview of the specialist. algorithmic thinking and programming were listed together as a concept inchapter 2, because they are very closely related forms of the same phenomenon. they are an implied constituent of many of the skills, concepts,and capabilities that embody the intellectual framework of fitness. thiscentral role of programming coupled with the perception that it is thedomain of experts mandates a careful explanation of what programmingis and why it is so critical to fitness.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42being fluent with information technology3.1.1what is programming?many activities have been called programming, but not all of themmeet the definition appropriate for fitness. for example, setting a videocassette recorder to tape an upcoming tv show is not programming, despite the fact that it has become a cultural icon for a technological task.nor is scheduling the fall tv series programming as used here.programming, for the purposes of this report, is defined as the construction of a specification (sequence of instructions or program) for solving a problem by an agent other than the programmer. the action entailsdecomposing the problem into a sequence of steps and specifying themsufficiently precisely, unambiguously, and primitively that the interpreting agent, usually a computer, can effectively realize the intended solution.computer programming in a standard programming language meetsthis definition, of course, but programming arises in many other cases inwhich the agent is a human and the language is english. giving directions to soccer players to find a particular field in a city, especially one notidentifiable by numeric street/avenue coordinates, constitutes programming by this definition. a player is the agent interpreting or executingthe instructions. recipes with precise quantities of ingredients and precisely described preparation and cooking steps are programs executed bycooks. toy manufactures write programs, called assembly instructions,for parents to follow, and the internal revenue service (irs) writes theprogram for òdeductible ira contributionsó that taxpayers follow. (nocomment is offered about the comprehensibility of such programs to anindividual human being.)setting the vcr does not constitute programming by the foregoingdefinition, because only start/stop times, i.e., data, are being given. thedata is input to a hardwired program in the vcr. (this is parameterspecification in technical terminology.) the situation does not call for theuser to identify any sequence of steps. using a phone menu is anotherinstance of data presentation, though setting up the phone menu mayconstitute programming. oneõs ability to set a vcr, however, does benefit from using and understanding some of the fitness concepts and capabilities, e.g., dealing with unintended consequences, illustrating thepoint that components of fitness can translate to other technical settings.critical to the programming enterprise is specification that meets theconditions òpreciselyó and òprimitively.ó¥òpreciseó specifications are essential to provide assurance that theagent can determine which actions are to be performed and in what order,so that the intended result is achieved. avoiding ambiguity is obviouslybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collateral issues43crucial, but even seemingly unambiguous commands can fail. for example, òturn rightó fails if the soccer players can approach the intersection from either the east or the west, so òturn northó is preferred. similarly, òbeató and òfold inó are not synonyms for òstiró when combiningingredients, so successful recipes use precise terminology selected withgreat care. an important nontechnology advantage of programmingknowledge is that the need for precision can promote precision in everyday communication.¥òprimitiveó specifications are essential to provide assurance thatthe steps to be performed are within the operational repertoire of the executing agent. the programmer may understand the task as òpi times rsquared,ó but if the executing agent doesnõt know what òsquaredó meansor how to accomplish it, then the programmer must express the task inmore primitive terms, perhaps revising it to òpi times r times r.ó formany taxpayers, the word òqualifyingó in the irsõs instruction phraseòsubtract qualifying contributionsó would likely fail the test for primitiveness, because they would not readily understand what the termmeans.although programming can be as simple as giving a few commandsñpreheat oven to 350 degrees, combine dry ingredients, stir in eggs, pressinto greased loaf pan, bake for 20 minutesñmost solutions require theuse of conditional instructions and repetition of groups of instructions.conditional instructions are those that may or may not be performed,depending on the input to the program. this means that for differentinputs, different subsequences of instructions will be performed. forexample, in box 3.1, the conditional instructions are presented fordetermining what happens in a baseball game when a batter walks. programming with conditional instructions allows for solutions that canrespond to different situations, leading to potentially more complex computations. thus, one sequence of instructions is executed if there is arunner on first base, and a different sequence is executed if there is not.repeated instruction execution is a second essential programmingconstruct, since it allows a program, for example, to process any numberof data items rather than just a fixed number. repetition is usually accomplished by enclosing processing instructions in a loop that repeats theprocessing until the data items are exhausted. determining when the loopis completed requires a conditional test. box 3.2 illustrates the use of iteration to calculate a batting average.fitnesslevel programming experience implies facility with conditional instructions and repetition constructs. though there are manytypes of instructions used by trained programmers, most are built on thebeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44being fluent with information technologybox 3.1conditional instructions for a walkthe sentence shown in (a) is a specification in english of how the batterand runners advance when a batter walks in baseball. the indentationsgroup the true and false alternatives of each conditional phrase. thoughthe solution in (a) is entirely satisfactory, a programmer would notice theredundancy of this direct solution and might reorganize it as shown in (b).the (b) solution tests for the presence of a runner on base and resolves thatcase, rather than treating the absence and presence of runners as separatecases. notice that in program (b) a semicolon is used to separate consecutive statements, and parentheses have been added to assist in understanding the programmerõs intent.solution (a)if no runner is on 1st base then the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise there is a runner on 1st base, soif no runner is on 2nd base then the runner on 1st basegoes to 2nd base and the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise there are runners on 1st and 2nd, soif no runner is on 3rd base then the runner on 2nd basegoes to 3rd, the runner on 1st goes to 2nd baseand the batter goes to 1st baseotherwise the bases are loaded, sothe runner on 3rd goes home, the runner on2nd goes to 3rd, the runner on 1st goes to2nd, and the batter goes to 1st.solution (b)if there is a runner on 1st base then,(if there is a runner on 2nd base then, (if there is a runner on 3rd base then the runner on 3rd goes home); the runner on 2nd goes to 3rd);the runner on 1st goes to 2nd);the batter goes to 1st.principles of conditional and/or repeated execution. in addition to experience with conditional and repetition constructs, fitness requires experience with at least two other fundamental programming ideas: functionaldecomposition and functional abstraction. these are the powerful mechanisms used by programmers to solve large problems (functional decombeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collateral issues45position) and to reuse their earlier programming efforts (functional abstraction).finally, it is necessary to address the question of what programminglanguage should be used to teach programming. this question has absorbed much energy of computer scientists, but the committee believesthat while fitness does imply a basic programming ability, that abilityneed not be acquired in using a conventional programming language. forexample, certain spreadsheet operations and advanced html programming for web pages, among others, demand an understanding of enoughprogramming concepts that they can provide this basic programming experience. such applications will often yield more personally relevant opportunities to learn programming than programming in a conventionalprogramming language.1box 3.2 using repeated instruction execution to computedimaggioõs 1950 batting averagefiguring a batting average requires that the hits and times at bat for eachgame be accumulated, so a loop is used to consider the outcome of eachgame. the processing instructions are conditional on whether dimaggioplayed in the game. the ògameó is the data value that is changing witheach iteration of the loop. notice that this program assumes dimaggiobatted in at least one game in 1950.let the countofthenumberofhits begin at 0.let the totaltimesatbat begin at 0.for each game of the 1950 season beginning with the first, if dimaggio played in the game then add dimaggioõs hits in this game to countofthenumberofhits; add dimaggioõs times at bat in this game to totaltimesatbat;dimaggioõs batting average is numberofhits / totaltimesatbat.1and, programming has advanced significantly in recent years. readers who may havebeen familiar with programming in the past, but have not stayed current, might be surprised to see how great has been the progress. achievements such as objectoriented programming and program development environments have combined with graphical userinterfaces and browsers to change a personõs contact with programming in two significantways. furthermore, programming has been greatly simplified because of convenient accessto a large reservoir of software. new scripting languages such as perl, java, and vbscriptallow nonprofessionals to write modest programs that solve their problems.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46being fluent with information technologythis is not to say that the study of a conventional programming language cannot be sufficiently interesting, exciting, and rewarding for somestudents. but it is important to emphasize that being an accomplishedprogrammer in a conventional programming language, e.g., c or fortranor java, is not sufficient by itself for fitness. recognizing the centrality ofprogramming, some traditional òinformation technology literacyó curricula have focused almost exclusively on programming in a conventionalprogramming language. but programming cuts across the fitness spectrum, being essential to some aspects and nearly irrelevant to others.3.1.2the importance of programming knowledgethe foregoing section outlines basic programming principles that areas fundamental to algorithmic thinking as multiplication and division areto mathematical thinking. indeed, the parallel with mathematics is worthpursuing somewhat further.at one time, arithmetic was considered the realm of specialistsñreckonersñwho were considered to have spiritual or magical powers.2now, everyone learns arithmetic, calculators free us from the tedium ofthe actual symbol manipulation, and computers perform trillions of arithmetic operations per second. educated people in industrialized societiesgive arithmetic little thoughtñit is an essential of modern life, a tool intheir world of quantities.analogously, programming, the medium of algorithmic thinking, hastraditionally been the realm of specialists. but, as is evident from thediscussion above, programming principles are comprehensible and accessible. universal knowledge of these principles is fundamental to aninformation society. to apply and exploit information processing technology that creates, manipulates, searches, and displays information, thepopulation must be able to think algorithmically. as with arithmetic, thepoint is evident to those who think algorithmically, though it may be lessobvious to those who do not yet do so.how programming knowledge and experience can benefit one in aninformation society is made more explicit in the following three reasonsfor learning these concepts:1.exploiting information technology systems. many prepackaged applications can be customized, extended, or enhanced using basic program2see, for example, carl c. boyer and uta c. merzbach, 1991, a history of mathematics, johnwiley and sons, new york, or eric temple bell, 1991, the magic of numbers, dover publications, new york.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collateral issues47ming concepts. serious use of spreadsheets requires programming, asdoes creating a sophisticated web page. furthermore, while not everypersonally relevant application will be available as prepackaged software,a person with a basic knowledge of programming may be able to òscriptóa solution using some of the large number of software building blocksnow available commercially. construction of complex systems from commercial software using macros, scripting facilities, shell commands, orother compositional tools is one way for nonspecialists to use information technology in a personally relevant way.such activities constitute programmingñdeveloping a series of stepsfor an agent to solve a problemñwhere the òprimitive operationsó can behuge, e.g., whole database searches. in essence, this type of programminggives the nonspecialist user the power to exploit tools fully and to transform computing resources so that they more completely meet their needs.2.gaining knowledge assumed for capabilities. some of the capabilitiesthat are at the heart of fitness rely explicitly or implicitly on programming knowledge. thus, even if one does not expect to write programs,fully applying the capabilities requires some degree of familiarity withprogramming. for example, problems arise routinely in computing, evenfor the most casual computer user, so troubleshooting or òdebuggingó (acapability listed in chapter 2) is needed. yet, figuring out what device,system, or application is failing, and how, presumes at least rudimentaryknowledge of how it is constructed and supposed to work. rebooting thecomputer, restarting the application, or òjigglingó a connection may ultimately be necessary to solve a problem, but the need for such actions (andthe likelihood that they may not solve the problem) can be reduced byunderstanding the algorithmic nature of the device or system and henceits possible failure modes. other capabilities that assume programmingprinciples are those related to sustained reasoning and managing complexity.3.application to noninformation technology problems. since programming concepts arise in situations not related to information technology,formal instruction in information technologyrelated programming canbe directly related to such problems. for example, returning to the situation of giving directions to a soccer field, a person who understandsprogramming would likely provide directions that are independent of orientation, include òsentinelsó of the form, òif you pass a church, youõvegone too far,ó and are unambiguous, preferring òat the third lightó ratherthan òafter three lights.ó it hardly justifies studying programming, but itis a benefit. an example from an unexpected quarter: english professorsbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48being fluent with information technologyare authenticating chaucerõs tales using programs designed for testingdna similarity that the professors modified to compare literary texts.3in addition, the continual use of abstract thinking in programmingcan guide and discipline oneõs approach to problems in a way that hasvalue well beyond the information technologyprogramming setting. inessence, programming becomes a laboratory for discussing and developing valuable life skills, as well as one element of the foundation for learning about other subjects.for example, one difference between an algorithm and a program isthat the algorithm embodies the basic structural features of the computation independently of the details of implementation, whereas a programcommits to a specific set of details to solve a particular problem. understanding this interrelationship is basic programming, but the principleapplies throughout life, as the givingdirections example above suggests.one observes that a solution technique (corresponding to the algorithm)can be used in different problem situations (corresponding to the programs). inversely, one expects that a successful problem solution embodies a more general process that is independent of the situational specifics.these observations are wellknown life experience that most people actually acquire in daily life. but, these observations could be taught in theclassroom, since programming provides both a concrete context for discussing the more general point, and a multitude of instances. this is anexciting possibility. of course, there is no substitute for experience, butthe ability to think abstractly, and to understand oneõs experience usingabstractions, can be benefits that arise from an understanding of abstraction in programming.3.2the relationship betweeninformation literacy and fitness4òinformation literacyó is a term long used by the library science community to denote a competence to find, evaluate, and make use of infor3see adrian c. barbrook, christopher j. howe, norman blake, and peter robinson. 1998.òthe phylogeny of the canterbury tales,ó nature, august 27. based on their adaptation andapplication of computerized techniques used by biologists to reconstruct evolutionary treesof different species from their dna, the authors conclude that a number of neglected manuscripts of the canterbury tales are close descendants of chaucerõs original version, whilemany manuscripts often used by scholars are actually more distant relatives.4this section is largely adapted (by permission) from clifford lynch, director, coalitionfor networked information (cni), òinformation literacy and information technology literacy: new components in the curriculum for a digital culture,ó position paper submittedto the committee on information technology literacy, february 1998.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collateral issues49mation appropriately. information literacy and fitness are interrelatedbut quite distinct. information literacy focuses on content and communication: it encompasses authoring, information finding and organization,research, and information analysis, assessment, and evaluation. contentcan take many forms: text, images, video, computer simulations, andmultimedia interactive works. content can also serve many purposes:news, art, entertainment, education, research and scholarship, advertising, politics, commerce, and documents and records that structure activities of everyday business and personal life. information literacy subsumesbut goes far beyond the traditional textual literacy that has been considered part of a basic education (the ability to read, write, and criticallyanalyze various forms of primarily textual literary works or personal andbusiness documents). by contrast, fitness focuses on a set of intellectualcapabilities, conceptual knowledge, and contemporary skills associatedwith information technology.both information literacy and fitness are essential for individuals touse information technology effectively. today, the acquisition and shaping of information are increasingly mediated by information technology.information technology shapes the channels of publication, access, anddissemination of information. the nature of increasingly common digitaldocuments raises new issues in the activities and practices of analysis,assessment, evaluation, and criticism. much of todayõs information technology and supporting infrastructure is intended to enable communication, information finding, information access, and information delivery.as it relates to fitness, information literacy implies that the skills andintellectual capabilities usually associated with traditional textual literacyñauthoring and critical and analytic reading (including the assessment of purpose, bias, accuracy, and quality)ñmust be extended to thefull range of visual (image and video) and multimedia communicationgenres. this includes an appreciation of interactive media, and also a recognition of the fluid nature of many digital forms, plus an understandingof the growing ability to use computers to edit or even fabricate whathave traditionally been viewed as factual records of events (such as images).furthermore, as computerbased searching becomes increasingly central to information finding and research, fitness will require an understanding of how searching systems work, and of the interplay betweenindexing techniques, descriptive practices and organizational systems(cataloging, abstracting, indexing, rating), searching, and information accessibility, visibility, and impact. one important point is the limitationsof both digital information resources (much material will not be availablein digital form for the foreseeable future) and also of various searchingtechniques.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50being fluent with information technologyfitness also involves an understanding of information resources andhow they are mapped into technological and economic structures, andhow these resources interrelate. in essence, individuals need to form aconceptual map of information space. for example, they need to beguided in developing mental models of the relationships among documents on the internet and in proprietary databases, library collections,and the like as a basis for learning to evaluate what information sourcesare likely to be most appropriate for their various information needs.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations51514implementation considerations4.1implementation in perspectivechapters 2 and 3 describe an intellectual framework for fitness. butwhile the committee believes that the framework of fitness is generallyrelevant to a very broad range of the citizenry, implementational issuesare very different for every segment of the population that might benefitfrom fitness. as noted in the preface, issues of committee expertise andbudget imposed some practical constraints, and the committee ultimatelydecided to restrict the implementational focus of the report to the highereducation community with which it was most familiarñthe fouryear college or university graduate. box 4.1 offers a few comments on fitnessand k12 education.a focus on college graduates is pragmatic as a first place to beginefforts to promote fitness:¥efforts to promote fitness may be easier to implement in collegesand universities at first, compared to k12 schools or settings outside educational institutions. a multitude of collegelevel models exist for promoting fitness, as described below. furthermore, colleges and universities generally enjoy greater autonomy in changing curricula, as comparedto k12 schools (or school districts). and, they tend to have more computing infrastructure than k12 schools and a greater ability to invest in moreinfrastructure.¥k12 teachers are themselves schooled in colleges and universities.in the long run, fitness efforts that reach university graduates are animportant enabler for efforts to promote such fluency among k12 students.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52being fluent with information technologybox 4.1k12 and fitnessalthough the implementational focus of this report is primarily collegeand university education, a few comments about k12 and fitness areappropriate.first, the committee has described fitness as a continuum. the notionof a continuum is quite consistent with a powerful pedagogical approachin which an individual learns or covers the òsameó material repeatedly, butfrom increasingly sophisticated perspectives that build on what has previously been learned. thus, what a fourth grader learns in developing fitnessis consistent with what he or she will learn in eighth grade, but in eighthgrade the individual can bring to bear on his or her fitness efforts a broaderrange of experience and interests, as well as greater maturity, intellectualsophistication, and ability to abstract.second, what students can or should learn in college naturally dependson what they have learned prior to college. as efforts to promote fitnessbegin to take hold in the k12 domain, colleges and universities will beable to make increasingly stronger assumptions about the level of preparation that entering students bring to such courses, in the form of informationtechnology concepts and skills learned in secondary school or at home.indeed, it may be that over time, some degree of fitness will becomeprerequisite knowledge required on entrance to college, like knowledge ofalgebra or a foreign language.third, the committee hopes that although it has produced a report thatcommunicates most successfully to college and university faculty in disciplines other than those that traditionally make great use of informationtechnology, the report will prove useful as a point of departure for the otheraudiences it would eventually wish to influence. it may well be that gradeappropriate efforts promoting fitness will be necessary (though not sufficient) for the success of efforts of k12 educators to integrate informationtechnology into k12 education. many of the issues faced in colleges anduniversities are similar to those faced in k12 education as well. theseinclude decisions about allocation of scarce technological resources, replacement cycles for machines, disposition of outmoded technology, rapidredesign of courses to incorporate new technological tools, and reassessment of instructional priorities based on technological innovation. in tackling the relatively simpler problems of content and pedagogy, the committee hopes that its work will provide an intellectually sound foundation uponwhich these other audiences can build their efforts.fourth, educational standards that focus on the acquisition of specificskills or recitation of specific concepts promote learning in isolation without any realizable connection to anything of interest to most individuals.standards related to information technology revised to better reflect theintegration of intellectual capabilities, fundamental concepts, and contemporary skills described in this report suggest a more holistic considerationbased on the use of portfolios and other similar techniques.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations53¥future job growth is expected to be largest in those occupationsrequiring education beyond high school. many of these jobs can be characterized as jobs for òknowledge workers,ó a very broad category of employment that is more likely to require the use of information technology.1a final reason for emphasizing college and university efforts is to promote equity. in an ideal world, all students would have access to thetechnological resources necessary to support their personal and professional interests. but in reality, technological advances frequently leavebehind individuals with few opportunities, resources, wealth, or access topublic facilities.2 colleges and universities provide important opportunities for such individuals, and such opportunities can be used to breakdown barriers to education, knowledge, and power. conscious efforts toattack disparities in preparation among incoming students may well benecessary to promote a goal of all students graduating more fit.enhancing undergraduate education for fitness will not be easy. u.s.undergraduate education is challenged as never before. access to knowledge has become a requirement for many decent jobs, while at the sametime, students, parents, administrators, and public officials look with dismay at the prospect of longer and more expensive courses of study required for a fouryear baccalaureate degree. solving the problem withevermore narrow disciplines whose graduates know more and moreabout less and less is unsatisfactory. such segmentation poorly serves aworld where career changes are frequent and crossdisciplinary communication is needed to solve systemic problems.the committee has considered the challenge of undergraduate education in two ways. first, its definition of fitness is parsimonious, broad,and flexible, with only ten requirements each in the three types of knowledge: capabilities, concepts, and skills. how the importance and context1see, for example, george t. silvestri. 1997. òoccupational employment projections to2006,ó monthly labor review, 120(11).2for example, a report by the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) found, based on census data, that while as a whole the united states hasachieved a significant increase in the last several years (i.e., between 1994 and 1997) in itsownership of computers and modems and its use of email, the growth favors certain groupsover others, and furthermore the gap between these groups is increasing over time. forexample, those living in central cities and rural areas lag behind the national average forcomputer ownership and online access. income levels, race, and educational levels greatlyaffect penetration levels. nationally, the òleast connectedó groups are the rural poor, ruraland central city minorities, young households, and femaleheaded households. see ntia.1998. falling through the net ii: new data on the digital divide, washington, d.c. availableonline from <http://ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/net2/falling.htm>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54being fluent with information technologyfor each of these 30 requirements are tailored to the career and intellectualinterests of individual students is the focus of this chapter. second, itrecognizes the practical issues of introducing new content into undergraduate curricula that are already packed.4.2a projectbased approach to developing fitnessalthough the content of fitness is presented in chapter 2 as a list ofitems, such a characterization does not imply that lecturing about them isthe optimal form of instruction. fitness is fundamentally integrative,requiring the coordination of information and skills with respect to multiple dimensions of a problem and the need for making overall judgmentsand decisions taking all such information into account. for this reason,the committee believes the best way to develop fitness is through projectbased education. projects weave together the skills, concepts, and capabilities of fitness to achieve a tangible result. in a project, specific information technologies will be used, motivating students to become skillfulwith such things as databases, email, and presentation software. understanding the range of alternatives and implementing the solution will relyon or motivate learning the underlying concepts.projects of appropriate scale and scope inherently involve multipleiterations that provide opportunities for instructional checkpoints or interventions. and, an appropriately scoped project will be sufficientlycomplex that intellectual integration is necessary to complete it. (appendix a provides some illustrative projects.)an appropriately scoped project demands collaborative efforts.projectbased collaborative efforts are pedagogically valuable for severalreasons. first, developing true expertise in any area requires the individual involved to assume a variety of different rolesñcreator, critic, partner, supporter, and so onñand a collaborative group effort is a naturalsetting in which to exercise these roles. furthermore, learning to specialize and to deliver oneõs special information to a group is an importantdimension of developing expertise, and so projectbased learning helpsteach students the character and nature of varied roles as well as how toplay the role of a specialist. second, a project requiring multiple collaborators can be large and complex enough to raise important intellectualand strategic issues that simply do not arise when problems are artificially delimited to be completely doable by a single individual. third,students benefit from hearing explanations formulated by peers as well asexperts.33the literature on collaborative learning is extensive. see, for example, gavriel salomon(editor). 1993. distributed cognitions: psychological and educational considerations: learning inbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations55a projectbased approach is consistent with many different instructional models:¥instruction as transmission of information. in this model, lectures,books, and other materials transmit the information that students need tolearn.¥instruction as active learning. this model suggests that studentslearn best by actively engaging the material through asking questions,answering questions, pushing buttons, doing experiments, or using tutoring programs.¥instruction through discovery learning. in discovery learning, students learn with little direct guidance on the theory that students whoòdiscoveró solutions on their own will be more likely to remember andmaster the competency and be able to apply that competency in like situations. students who are spoonfed will frequently not develop the cognitive maps associated with real mastery.each of these models can support projectbased learning, though inpractice no one approach suffices for a successful project. effectivecourses need support and scaffolding so individuals can test their understanding against expectations regularly and obtain feedback on theirweaknesses.no single project bestows fitness, but a series of wellchosen projectscan provide a foundation for the lifelong journey toward fitness. byworking on a number of projects, students will have opportunities to usesimilar principles of technological solutions in different settings, to recognize technological analogies, to develop reasonable expectations for technological solutions, and to find workarounds when technology falls short.a series of projects can provide sufficient breadth and diversity of experience that students can realistically òlearn the restó on their own, thus providing the intellectual foundation for selfdirected, lifelong learning thatcan occur in many nonclassroom settings.4doingñsocial, cognitive, and computational perspectives, cambridge university press, newyork. a piece by roy pea, òpractices of distributed intelligence and designs for education,óin this volume is particularly compelling.4while lifelong efforts to develop and maintain fitness depend most importantly on anadequate intellectual foundation, other elements are important as well. for example, students often lose access upon graduation to the information technology infrastructure theyused to develop fitness. they may regain some level of access when they take new jobs,but the new information technology infrastructure may well not be as sophisticated as thatleft behind, disadvantaging them in subsequent efforts to maintain fitness. some universities now offer graduates access to some basic facilities, such as òemail for lifeó; these stepsmove in the right direction. of course, individuals must do their part as well, such as obtaining access to a computer that provides them with access to the infrastructure.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56being fluent with information technologyundertaking projects in complex problem domains provides a natural context in which fitness can be developed. for effective pedagogy,problem domains must be personally relevant so that the learner has reason to revisit and redefine his or her understanding of information technology. individuals must use information technology in a domain theyunderstand in order to develop fitness, but as long as that domain isrelevant to the individual, it does not matter which domain is involved.finally, the description of capabilities, concepts, and skills describedin chapter 2 naturally raises for many educators the question of howmuch time is needed for each capability, concept, and skill in a timelimited curriculum for students to promote fitness. however, becausefitness is a continuum, a specific educational context is needed to answerthis question concretely. a course promoting fitness for history majorsmay well have a different weighting of topics than a course promotingfitness for engineers. a minicourse taught in an òindependent activitiesperiodó designed for firstyear students without designated majors is certain to be structured differently than a twosemester course for graduating seniors. such matters are best handled by those who know the resource constraints of time and the availability of computing resources, aswell as the competing needs, how the knowledge and skills are likely tobe applied, and the value of deeper understanding to other student objectives.the treatment of the three components of fitnessñskills, concepts,and capabilitiesñmay be approached differently. students can learnword processing through the need to prepare and submit essays, spreadsheets or databases through the need to manipulate data in sciencecourses, and so on. many students will develop some of these skills priorto college, but even those who do not will have considerable motivationto learn them. college students have many noncurricular opportunitiesto develop current information technology skills, such as reading selfinstruction books, learning from friends, or taking college or universityworkshops and noncredit courses taught by nonfaculty professionals,e.g., computing center professionals and librarians.the fundamental concepts are somewhat harder to integrate into standard curricula. however, as instructors develop and structure theircourses to use information technology for enhanced pedagogical effectiveness, it will be increasingly possible to take advantage of the opportunities thereby provided for discussing the fundamental concepts and theapplication of these concepts in terms that are relevant to the disciplinarycontent of those courses. for example, art students study images, andoften these images are images on a computer screen. but understandingthe fidelity of these images to the originals requires an understanding ofhow images can be digitally represented. a business course might usebeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations57computer simulations to demonstrate business processes. but understanding the limitations of a simulation requires understanding how processes can be modeled and the nature and scope of their limitations.the capabilities also warrant being taught as part of disciplinary ordepartmental instructional programs. indeed, these capabilities contribute both to fitness and to developing analytical skills that are necessaryfor success in multiple disciplines. the mode of instruction is primarilythrough projects that serve the purposes of the domain yet offer studentsthe opportunity to learn and/or exercise the ten capabilities.4.3infusing fitness into the universitymany, if not most, colleges and universities understand that information technology will play an increasingly large role on their campuses.5indeed, some are requiring that all matriculating students have a personalcomputer for use throughout their college careers. some courses are being restructured and some new curricula are being developed to take advantage of new pedagogical opportunities offered by information technology.students who are successful in these courses must have skills adequate to support their use of the technology, and most institutions andcourses provide some opportunitiesñwhether in forcredit courses ornotñfor students to learn these skills. but the fundamental concepts andintellectual capabilities do not seem to be essential in these courses in anymeaningful way. the challenge for colleges and universities is then howto build on the existing infrastructure of hardware, support services, andtechnologyadapted curricula and courses to support fitness.one common reaction to calls for proficiency in x is to promulgaterequired courses on x. for example, in response to concerns about thewriting ability of students, many universities require all students to enrollin (or place out of) a writing course. only rarely have calls for new,universal courses of this type had a significant impact on curricula. nevertheless, one first step toward fitness is a single college course, open toall students. no one course can fully realize the power and breadth offitness, but it can provide a solid foundation upon which an individualcan build further knowledge independently. with such a foundation inplace, pedagogical efforts involving information technology should beeasier and more efficient to undertake in subsequent courses.this collegewide course would require students to complete a series5see, for example, òcomputers across campus,ó communications of the acm, january1998, pp. 2225.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58being fluent with information technologyof projects as a medium for acquiring the fitness capabilities and simultaneously to develop their understanding of the concepts and skills offitness. it would be laboratoryintensive and ideally would drawprojects from subject disciplines in which the student had some expertiseor interest, whether or not those disciplines were technical. thus, disciplines from engineering to economics or art history would be fair game.if such a course were added to the undergraduate curriculum, whatmight it replace? the answer to this question will vary from one institution to the next, and there are a number of alternative strategies. forinstance, many colleges and universities now offer a conventional computer literacy course for nonmajors, taught by the computer science faculty. it usually covers many of the topics listed as skills and conceptsunder fitness. in some cases, it also covers some of the capabilities byway of a programming laboratory component. this course could be converted, or updated, so that students who complete it are more fit.a better approach to fitness draws on the idea that information technology is pervasive. that is, when properly integrated, fitness will benefit the study of any subject, much as the ability to write well benefitsstudents of any subject. by analogy to efforts that promote òwriting in themajor field of study,ó universities might consider offering fitness courseswithin a home discipline that are teamtaught with a faculty member fromthe home discipline (who would provide the disciplinary context) and afaculty member from computer science (who would provide the conceptual foundations for information technology).6 for instance, a fitnesscourse teamtaught by a computer scientist and an economist might involve projects in which students would apply algorithmic problemsolving skills to the development and exercising of economic models usingappropriate modeling software. science and engineering majors mightbenefit from a more thorough study of computer modeling, while humanities majors might benefit from a more thorough study of locatingand evaluating information. box 4.2 provides some examples of disciplinary courses that help to promote some aspects of fitness.over time, a series of these initiatives can help an institution educategraduates with a considerable measure of fitness, regardless of theirmajor field of study. in the long run, faculty in various subject areaswould offer courses that allow students to develop further their masteryof the concepts, skills, and capabilities of fitness in the context of problems drawn from their own fields; such courses would build on the foun6because the concepts of information technology may be harder to teach in the context ofother subject material (especially nontechnical subject material), pairing a computer scientist with a faculty member in a home discipline may be particularly advantageous for explicating the fundamental concepts of information technology in a context that is relevant tothe home discipline.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations59dations of fitness established in earlier years. experience in establishingdepartmentally based efforts to fulfill global universitywide requirements (e.g., in areas such as expository writing) provides some confidencethat departments can be successful in supporting universitywide goals topromote fitness.even apart from disciplineoriented courses, other instructional venues offer opportunities to develop fitness. most institutions acknowledge that information technology will play an increasingly important roleon their campuses. thus, with information technology an increasing presence on campuses, most course designers make decisions (even if onlyimplicitly) about what role information technology will play in theircourses, e.g., whether students can communicate with the instructor electronically, are allowed to submit handwritten rather than typed papers,or are able to access the syllabus or homework assignments online. inaddition, the institution itself provides many opportunities for using technologyñcourse registration, class participation (e.g., through chat rooms),tutoring, application for financial aid, homework submission, databasesof campus event information, and library research are among the possibilities.lest the integration of fitness across the curriculum appear toosimple, the committee reminds the reader that a successful implementation of fitness instruction requires serious rethinking of the curriculum,just as campuswide efforts to improve the writing abilities of undergraduates have involved such rethinking. the greatest successes in theselatter efforts have been achieved not through a mandated requirementthat all students complete the same writing course, but rather through theintegration of writing into the fabric of courses taken by disciplinarymajors.although box 4.2 provides examples of individual courses that incorporate elements of fitness, projects that involve information technologyin some essential way are still rare in nontechnical courses. universitiesneed to concern themselves with the fitness of students who cross discipline boundaries and with the extent to which each discipline is meetingthe goals of universal fitness.7 the broad universitywide challenge isless about those disciplines where technology is stereotypically included(e.g., engineering) than those where technology is stereotypically rel7the difficulties of promulgating largescale change across an entire curriculum are welldocumented. for example, many analysts believe that a faculty reward system that activelydiscourages junior faculty from developing innovative courses (because such work takestime away from research and publishing efforts) is a major impediment to change (see, forexample, national research council, 1999, information technology and the transformation ofundergraduate education, national academy press, washington, d.c.). but these issues arebeyond the scope of this report.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60being fluent with information technologybox 4.2multiple routes for developing aspects of fitnessfitness can be developed in a wide variety of venues. consider thefollowing courses:¥students in the social sciences and humanities and in the professional schools other than engineering at berkeley can take an introductoryinterdepartmental course on information technology that deals with theconceptual foundations of computing and information technology, thestructure and function of computing systems, elements of programming,and applications programs. course examples are drawn mainly from wordprocessing, database management, electronic spreadsheets, graphics andsimulation, and telecommunication.¥sociology students at bowdoin college can take a social researchcourse that provides firsthand experience with the specific proceduresthrough which social science knowledge is developed. the course emphasizes the interaction between theory and research, and includes fieldand laboratory exercises that involve observation, interviewing, use ofavailable data (e.g., historical documents, statistical archives, computerized data banks, cultural artifacts), sampling, coding, use of computers,and elementary data analysis and interpretation.¥students at stanford university can take a variety of short, forcreditcourses on the basics of computing. subjects include word processing,spreadsheets, using unix, using the world wide web, and using university resources. additional subjects include web authoring tools, programming in specific languages such as java or c++, problem solving withmathematica, and security and privacy issues.¥public policy students at johns hopkins university can take a courseon the tools and techniques of policy implementation, including selectingstrategies, weighing alternatives, and planning for contingencies; preparingbudgets, which are the heart of public programs, and developing schedulesegated to a minor role or no role at all (e.g., the humanities8). thus, it isnot sufficient for individual instructors to revisit their course content orapproach. as with the efforts to promote writing, campuswide collaboration is needed to develop appropriate goals for fitness and to determine how departments will contribute to those goals, and in any event,8see, for example, american council of learned societies. 1998. occasional paper no. 41,òcomputing and the humanities: summary of a roundtable meeting.ó available onlinefrom <http://www.acls.org/op41toc.htm>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations61that ensure that plans are realized; recruiting and keeping a winning staff;and making a cogent and persuasive presentation. students are expectedto use technology to carry out the assignments, including the use ofpowerpoint for their presentations and spreadsheets for their budgets. aportion of the course is specifically devoted to developing and managingdata systems.¥students at carnegie mellon university design and implement a history database to answer complex questions in history. they frequentlydraw on the great american history machine (a historical geographicaldatabase) to carry out their more limited database designs.1¥students in introductory economics courses at a number of differentinstitutes use excel or stella to create a model of an economic problemor historical event and demonstrate the factors contributing to the outcome.students typically predict what they think an appropriate model will beand then refine it when they find out that it is not adequate or complete.¥students design artistic animations using complex threedimensionalmodeling tools in some courses at the university of illinois. students inthese courses typically have majors in art, art history, and computer graphics. often joint projects involve individuals interested in becoming artistsand individuals with expertise in computer science.¥in physiology courses, for example at the university of california,students use stella and related tools to design models of human systems,such as the renal system. undergraduate students each devise models forparts of the renal system and then connect them to represent the entirehuman renal system.1see, for example, john modell and david miller. 1998. òteaching united stateshistory with the great american history machine,ó historical methods, 21(3):121134.the process through which fitness can become a part of the regular curriculum must be evolutionary.faculty development is an essential dimension of campuswidepreparation to promote fitness. that is, to offer courses that seriouslyintegrate appropriate information technology concepts, skills, and capabilities, instructors themselves will need to learn and utilize effectivelythe appropriate technologies as they become available for teaching andresearch in their respective disciplines. for instance, many fields withinthe social sciences are beginning to use computationalmodeling softwarebeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62being fluent with information technologyto help exercise and explain the principles of various social science phenomena, such as population growth or the interactions between variouselements of the economy. nevertheless, universal faculty fitness is not aprerequisite for universal student fitness, and not every course in a discipline needs to have a fitness component.currently, the level of fitness among college and university facultyis uneven, both among the disciplines and within any single discipline.for faculty who accept the idea that fitness is both fundamental to theirstudentsõ mastery of their discipline and to their academic careers, support for faculty and curriculum development is necessary to help thembecome more fit. initially, such support might be external (e.g., provided by foundations), but over time, the institutions themselves must bewilling to make the necessary investment on an ongoing basis. evolutionbox 4.3imperatives for universities in adopting information technologyfor instructional purposesimproving teaching and learning¥develop a coordinated, crossdepartmental organization to advancethe institutionõs goals in instructional technology.¥equip more classrooms with basic and advanced information infrastructure.¥provide better and more extensive training and support services inpedagogy and multimedia technology.¥expand the availability of software site licenses, including better toolsfor building instructional materials.¥create new, flexible multimedia learning environments.supporting students¥develop programs to ensure universal individual student access to(ownership of) networkenabled computers.¥provide basic universal competency training in the use of online information resources for all students who do not yet have it.¥provide more extensive and readily available helpdesk facilities forstudents and faculty.¥expand and modernize dropin facilities with a mix of multimediadevelopment capabilities, docking stations, printers, advanced software,and so on, with consulting support.¥enhance the capabilities of universal email and provide voice mail.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implementation considerations63¥provide facilities for universal web publishing for students and student organizations, and consistent home pages for all courses.¥develop capabilities to demonstrate, and to lend where appropriate,advanced tools and unique resources to students.¥improve online student access to enrollment, financial, and advisinginformation.improving access to library resources¥expand the availability of digital resources such as subscriptions tojournals, digitized museum collections, and others.¥provide electronic course reserves and enhanced digital referencematerials.¥expand and modernize workstations for access to information resources throughout the library.improving network infrastructure¥expand the bandwidth of the campus digital network, the backboneand nervous system of the electronic dimension of the university.¥complete network connectivity to all residential living facilities.¥provide affordable offcampus access to the institutionõs network andthe internet.¥expand video delivery capabilities throughout the campus.source: adapted from òimproving instructional technology at the university ofcalifornia, berkeley,ó campus computing and communications policy board, subcommittee on instructional technology, october 18, 1996. available online at<http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~cccpbit/itreport101896.html>.will also play a role in faculty development, in the sense that as new faculty are hired they will bring to the institution new expectations for information technology support, both in their research and in their teaching.curricular change will unfold in a context of broad integration of information technology into most aspects of a university operation and function in which instructors and administrators deploy the technology to support such possibilities (and associated infrastructure, such as adequatebandwidth for student usage) and learn how best to use that technology.for most students, the effectiveness with which they can use theuniversityõs information infrastructure will to a great extent determinethe value of their educational experience. box 4.3 describes some institutional imperatives for enhancing instructional use of information technology that will also support fitness.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66being fluent with information technologybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a6767appendixaillustrative projectsthe example projects in this appendix are described with differentlevels of detail and different emphases, as one would expect from projectsconceptualized by individuals from different disciplines. these diverseprojects are intended to demonstrate that projects dealing with differentdomain areas can all support efforts to develop fluency with informationtechnology (fitness).a.1developing a business planfor a computer storemodule placement: a course in business administration, computer science, applied mathematicstask: develop a business plan for a computer software and hardwarestore in a mall. to carry out this project, students should do the following:¥decide on products to sell,¥develop a pricing strategy,¥consider staffing issues,¥devise a marketing approach,¥create an inventory policy,¥design the store, and¥make a presentation to the bank and mall representatives.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68being fluent with information technologyall of this should be discussed in the business plan.delivery: a cdrom or web site providing a project scenario electronicallybackground: a shopping mall would like to fill a commercial openingwith a computer store. teams of four should apply for the space by creating a business plan that could be used to apply for a bank loan. the bank,which has financed most of the mall, will select the applicants who presentthe best business plan. the storeõs emphasis will be on selling to firsttime buyers looking for a computer for their home or for a very smallbusiness.project addons: students could also consider possible changes to theirproduct line as new technologies become available.pedagogy: students will work in teams of four. the project will extendover a period of approximately eight to ten weeks, with the final weekdevoted to student reflection on lessons learned and possible applicationsto other business ventures. students will use technology in the designprocess: e.g., wordprocessing and presentation software, email, theworld wide web, spreadsheets, and even computeraided design andmanufacturing tools to design the store. milestones should be establishedfor each task of the project.a.2designing an hivtracking systemfor a hospitalmodule placement: a course in computer science, health administration,or biology (immunology, epidemiology)task: design an information system to track hiv infections for a community hospital and its outreach clinics. the project should identify necessary:¥hardwareððequipment to run the system;¥softwareððtracking expenditures, patient information;¥peopleððstaffing requirements; and¥processesððimplementation schedule, staff training sessions, written report, and oral presentation.delivery: a cdrom or web site providing a project scenario electronicallybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a69background: the community hospital is running education, prevention,and treatment programs for hiv (and maybe other sexually transmitteddiseases). the community health director wants to evaluate the three programs continuously so that he/she can make them more costeffectivewhile reducing the incidence of hiv in the community. decisions includeallocation of financial and staff resources among and within the three programs. a variety of individuals express concern about various aspects ofthe different programs, including issues of equity, confidentiality, andòfamily valuesó (education and sexual activity). students should be givendata on community size, current case loads, and so on. studentsõ writtenreport should include a budget, staffing requirements, and implementation schedule, including specifications for staff training. students shouldalso make a presentation to the hospital board; ideally the latter wouldinclude representatives from a local hospital, a school of public health,and a private computer science firm.project addons: students should research and recommend security andprivacy measures for the program.pedagogy: students will use technology in the design process: e.g., wordprocessing and presentation software, email, the world wide web,spreadsheets, system design (flow chart) software, and databases. milestones should be established for each task of the project.a.3designing and implementinga client manager databasemodule placement: a course in business, management, nonprofit administrationtask: complete a simple yet useful database that has been started byteaching assistants. the work will focus on the user interface aspect of thesystem. design the final product to be a visually attractive database that abank could use to keep track of clients and their accounts.the user of the system should be able to:¥view a clientõs entire record,¥view all clients in list form,¥find and view the bankõs top clients,¥sort based on multiple criteria, and¥print mailing labels for all of the clients or for a userdefined subset.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70being fluent with information technologydelivery: a client manager databasebackground: databases are a useful way of storing related information.they simplify organization and retrieval of the data and become morepowerful and useful as data sets grow larger. with the rapid growth ofinformation and the proliferation of the internet, databases will becomean even more important part of daytoday life. one of the main parts ofthis assignment will be to create an attractive, consistent, and intuitiveuser interface. an example of a successful user interface should be provided to students. besides designing the user interface, students will alsobe doing other database tasks, such as designing layouts, creating fields,writing simple scripts, and working with queries and sorts.teaching assistants should begin the project and provide a databaseshell, which includes the following information:¥some of the fields, preconfigured, that the database relies on;¥both fully completed layouts and partially completed ones to getstudents started;¥script stubs, so that students need only complete the meaningfulpart of the scripts;¥buttons that have already been linked to their associated scripts;and¥a rich user interface that includes buttons, icons, and backgroundcolors, and that serves to integrate the layouts in the database.the shell should be designed to allow students to focus on the meaningful and important aspects of the assignment.each record will store the:¥clientõs name,¥clientõs address,¥several means of contact with the client,¥assets in several different accounts, and¥freeform notes.data entry will be facilitated by popup menus.students are responsible for:¥creating some additional fields,¥updating two existing layouts and creating an entirely new one,being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a71¥filling in several scripts that facilitate movement between differentparts of the database,¥providing a simple sorting facility for the user, and¥entering some sample data (to help test the assignment).project addons: there is significant opportunity for extra credit in thisassignment. for example, try implementing one or more of the followingfeatures:¥set up a mail merge that uses information from records in the database.¥write other useful and more complicated scripts.¥incorporate multimedia (such as pictures, video).pedagogy: this project seeks to familiarize students with databasesthrough design and implementation that emphasize designing a qualityuser interface and learning to program in a simple scripting language.a.4designing and implementing aspreadsheetbased home budgetmodule placement: a course in computer science, library science, liberalartstask: create a home budget that a typical family could use to track theirincome and expenditures over the course of a year. to accomplish thistask, create a system of linked spreadsheets in microsoft excel that willhelp organize and process this information.delivery: a spreadsheetbased home budget software programbackground: the system should consist of a single workbook and musthave the following properties and features:¥tracking for six classes of expenses; examples include food, housing, automobile expenses, movie rentals, and so on.¥income tracking, including monthly, weekly, or biweekly salary,taxes, and miscellaneous income. a summary of this data should be provided as well.¥tracking for multiple bank accounts, with the ability to note account transactions (withdrawals and deposits). the balance for each account should compute automatically depending on the transactions, inbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72being fluent with information technologycluding a simple interest calculation, so that the user only needs to enter astarting balance to begin using the account tracking system.¥summary of total expenses and income, by month. this shouldalso include a graphical representation of the summary, and a threedimensional graph that displays all expenses, by month (note that thereshould be three separate axes).students are free to determine a design for the spreadsheets. there isno òone right wayó to do it. the workbook should be logically organizedand well formatted to give it a consistent and attractive appearance. students should become familiar with spreadsheet conceptsñthrough lectures, manuals, or online tutorials and help. (teaching assistants coulddevelop an excel tutorial.)students should consider sketching the system design on paper before beginning to develop it electronically. such a design should includehow to divide the information into separate spreadsheets, how to linkdata from separate sheets, and what graphs to provide to help the useranalyze the underlying data. students should also concentrate on thework of calculating and linking the data before tackling the formattingand visual appeal of the spreadsheet. this approach encourages focusingon getting the basic structure of the system correct.project addons: extra credit should be offered for integrating advancedexcel features, such as pivot tables or visual basic for applications, intothe home budget.pedagogy: this project prepares students to apply spreadsheet conceptsto a practical situation, to design an attractive and easytouse system ofspreadsheets, to organize and present related information, both graphically and textually, and to gain familiarity with a spreadsheet application(microsoft excel).a.5networkbased informationretrieval and presentationmodule placement: a course in information technology, library science,liberal artstask: use network facilities on the world wide web to present and findinformation. use a word processor to document the results.delivery: home page and essaybeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a73background: home pageððthe home page must consist of one page. partof the assignment is learning to design attractive web pages using html,so students should pay attention to the aesthetics of their page. the assignment also includes learning how to use a document scanner, how toconvert graphics to different file formats, and how to use a text editor toproduce html. students can feel free to organize the information creatively; however, the page must contain the elements below:¥some type of list, with several items;¥several links to other sites on the web;¥a scannedin photo of the student;¥a graphic retrieved off the web;¥a òmail toó form that lets visitors send a message, question, or anyother information to the home page creator; and¥table(s) to format the above content; specifically, a table should beused to format the fields and submit and reset buttons of the form.treasure huntððstudents should answer the questions below using theinternet and a variety of search engines. they will also use ònewsgroupsóto find particular newsgroups and individual postings. answers to thetreasure hunt should be handed in as part of the networks essay. studentsshould provide both the answers and the sites on which the informationwas found.¥to whom did jerry garcia leave his guitars?¥what is donald duckõs middle name?¥what environmental bill did president clinton sign during a radioaddress in the fall of 1996?¥on what newsgroups should individuals . . .ñdiscuss the merits of html tables and frames?ñtalk about yesterdayõs funny comic strip?ñask a question about algebra homework?¥on a designated class newsgroup, find the special treasure huntposting made by a particular student (e.g., mike) and consider his/herposting.¥find information from another web site that could contribute tothe thread of the studentõs posting.networks essayððstudents should provide concise yet complete answersto a number of questions that focus on intercomputer communication,the internet, and the hardware and protocols involved in networks today.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74being fluent with information technologythe essay should be written in microsoft word and should use styles toseparate the answers to the background questions into logical sections.¥describe the architecture of the internet. as part of the answer,explain how a remote web page is sent to your computer over the internet,starting with you entering a uniform resource locator (url) in abrowser and ending with your browser receiving the page.¥identify and explain two obstacles to the further growth of theinternet and/or technologies relating to the internet.¥discuss how local area networks (lans) are used in business andoffice settings. how does a lan communicate with outside networks?pedagogy: this project requires students to write and design structureddocuments using html, to learn how to effectively use search engines tofind information on the internet, to become familiar with several internetrelated applications, including browsers, newsgroup readers, and graphics applications, and to learn about the internet, protocols, and generalnetworking concepts.a.6creating and using a multimediahyperlinked presentation1module placement: a course in graphic arts, business, or nonprofit administrationtask: plan a multimedia presentation by writing a text description of thetopics and points to communicate, using pictures, sound, interactive content, animation, quicktime movies, and related materials. (it is essentialthat the presentation feature interactive or active content.) select specificpoints from the text description where media would improve the communication potential of the presentation. discuss with peers and select criteria to decide which medium and how many related representations areappropriate for each talking point. design the links between the mediatypes in order to implement the communication plan. make links between different forms of media, and make sure that the interactive content is accessible to the intended audience. seek criticism and guidancefrom experts. try the presentation out with a pilot audience, and analyzethe strengths and limitations of the presentation. refine the presentationbased on feedback from users and from experts.1 project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals: michael clancy,eyi chen, tamar posner, lani horn, andrew begel, ricky tang, and phillip bell.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a75delivery: a multimedia hyperlinked presentationbackground: the creation of effective presentations involves many stepsoutlined above in the task. for this group project, it will be necessary to:¥design a shared file system or email attachment system to agreeon tools or conversion mechanisms for the various media types and toworry about incompatibilities.¥select tools and an environment for the multimedia presentation toensure ease of use among the target audience. be sure to consider platform incompatibilities, the capabilities of users, projection opportunitiesand venues in which the presentation might be used, and options if thefirst plan is unsuccessful.¥determine the forms of help necessary in order to implement theplan on the platform selected and seek help from experts to make sure theplan is successful. seek help as the plan gets developed to ensure it workseffectively.¥locate and select appropriate multimedia content, test it with users, and incorporate it into the presentation.pedagogy: students will become familiar with considering and usingmultimedia to enhance a verbal presentation to an audience, to balancethe multimedia and other mechanisms for presentations, to analyze whatthe audience learned from the presentation, and to consider modificationsto meet the audienceõs needs more effectively.a.7sociology of disease2module placement: a project for a biology or public health classtask: students are asked to imagine that they or a family member havebeen diagnosed with a lifethreatening disease. students should plan acourse of action to find out information to answer a set of questions, andin teams of two or three, research the disease and write a paper addressing each issue. use the search engines on the web to gather information.critically examine the sources of this information, and consider challengesto its validity. coordinate the search with teammates via email to avoidcollecting redundant information, and review or critique each otherõs con2project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals: michael clancy,eyi chen, tamar posner, lani horn, andrew begel, ricky tang, and phillip bell.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76being fluent with information technologyjectures. post papers on the class web site, and solicit expert and peercommentary.delivery: organized desription/listing of electronic resources on a variety of diseases in laymenõs languagebackground: the project essays should consider the following points:¥what are the alternative treatments that are effective for this disease? how do the treatments address the specific symptoms of the disease? what are the shortterm and longterm consequences of the treatments?¥what social support systems are necessary to wage a successfulbattle against this disease? when have social support systems succeeded,and which ones? what social supports are right for this situation?¥what changes in lifestyle and diet are necessary for accommodating the symptoms and the condition of this lifethreatening disease? howcan these changes best be implemented and made effective?¥what other issues related to the disease are important, such as environmental factors, transmission, and discrimination? how can these bedealt with?pedagogy: students will work in teams. the project will be carried outover an extended period, perhaps eight to ten weeks, with the final weekdevoted to student reflection on lessons learned. this project enhancesresearching skills and synthesis of complex information, as well as effective electronic presentation of complex data.a.8home page design project3module placement: a project for a high school computer science, english,physical science, or social science class, or an afterschool activitytask: this project requires students to design a home page for theirschool. the purpose of the home page is to provide information for parents researching information on the school, as well as children interestedin finding out more about the school.delivery: a home page for a precollege school3project jointly conceived and developed with the following individuals: michael clancy,eyi chen, tamar posner, lani horn, andrew begel, ricky tang, and phillip bell.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a77background: initially, all students should work together to conceptualizethe design of the site, including the main page, as well as what categories,topics, and links it should have (such as òacademicsó and òathleticsó). indesigning the site, students should search for webbased tips, suggestions, and resources and also review other pages with appealing designs.students should then separate into groups of two to four to design aparticular page on each link/topic. (each page could include several otherlinks.) consulting home page exemplars should be encouraged.the student groups should write the pages in html. periodically,the entire class should meet to discuss the overall site design, share tipsand examples, and discuss questions such as how to achieve consistencyand the need for coherence among the different pages. these generaldiscussions would also be a good forum in which to consider new or different technologies (e.g., different browser versions, multimedia options,user needs). students could also test each otherõs pages and make suggestions. when test versions of all pages exist, students could demonstratethe site publicly and ask other students and community members to testthe pages and offer comments.pedagogy: the web pages would be made available to the general webcommunity, and groups such as parents and students would be told aboutthe appropriate address. comments should be solicited so that new ideascould be incorporated into the existing page.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78being fluent with information technology78appendixbrelated workjudging by the scale of effort involved, many interested parties embrace the idea that knowledge of and familiarity with information technology are important to citizens. a considerable amount of work hasfocused on the development of educational standards to which variouspopulations (e.g., high school students, teachers, all citizens) should beheld accountable; these include standards for mathematics, science, andtechnology education and have been designed by various organizations.in some cases, model curricula have been developed, as well as a host ofcollegelevel courses that focus on literacy about information technology.vocational schools and community colleges have developed programsthat impart jobrelated technology skills, and a variety of continuingeducation enterprises (both inhouse and òoutsourcedó) have been sponsoredby companies for their employees.this appendix addresses the evolving philosophy, standards, curricula, and other venues in which such educational effortsñfor nonspecialistsñhave developed an identity and/or a significant implementationin the modern world.b.1standardsperhaps the earliest type of educational standard was a behavioralone, based on the notion that a student will behave in accord with a specified standard, and that the purpose of education is to induce students tobehave in such a manner. many workplacebased skill standards reflect asimilar behaviorist philosophy of psychology and education.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b79standards for content reflect a òknowledgetellingó philosophy ofeducation and are the most prevalent. in this view, a student is a òblankslateó onto which the appropriate knowledge can be written. instructionis intended to convey knowledge from teacher (or textbook) to student,and the ability to answer specific questions is the sine qua non of theeducated student.cognitive standards reflect a more constructivist philosophy of education: the student constructs knowledge for himself or herself, perhapsguided or coached by a teacher. in doing so, the student is able to providean appropriate context for new knowledge and is thus able to take òownershipó of that knowledge in a much more secure manner. (much of whatthis report describes as intellectual capabilities is also rooted in aconstructivist view of education.)standards are often tied to assessments rather than to instructionalprograms. because the most common assessments emphasize a skill development or a òknowledgetellingó approach to instruction, instructionthat putatively implements cognitive standards may in practice be quitefar from constructivist instruction. although a given set of educationalstandards does not necessarily imply a form of instruction, the form ofinstruction really does have an impact on their implementation.the start of the modern era of educational standards can be said todate from the publication of a nation at risk in 1983,1 which stated, òtheeducational foundations of our society are presently eroded by a risingtide of mediocrity that threatens our very future as a nation and apeople. . . .ó this report is often credited with identifying the inadequatemathematics and science preparation of u.s. students. since its publication, efforts have followed to establish both academic and vocational(industry) standards.in the vocational and industrial arena, workforce 2000 predicted in1987 that a shortage of skilled workers would, unless checked, constrainamericaõs economic growth.2 in 1990, americaõs choice: high skills or lowwages, explicitly called for setting academic and occupational skill standards.3 otherwise, the report warned, a majority of workers would continue to see their real wages decline. in 1991, the u.s. department of1national commission on excellence in education. 1983. a nation at risk: the imperativefor educational reform, department of education, washington, d.c., p. 65.2william b. johnston and arnold packer, with contributions by matthew p. jaffe. 1987.workforce 2000: work and workers for the twentyfirst century, hudson institute, indianapolis, ind., and department of labor, washington, d.c., p. 117.3commission on the skills of the american workforce. 1990. americaõs choice: high skillor low wages, national center on education and the economy, rochester, n.y.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80being fluent with information technologylaborõs secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skills (scans)issued what work requires of schools, which established a language fordiscussing standards to ensure appropriate preparation in schools for theworkplace, whether school ended with high school graduation or withcompletion of a ph.d program.4the national skills standards board (nssb) was created in 1994 bythe national skills standards act of 1994 to help voluntary industry organizations set standards for 12 industries and 4 crosscutting occupationsthat will cover the entire economy. even before nssb was created, theu.s. department of labor and the department of education had awardedcontracts to a number of groups to develop standards for such diverseareas as the retail industry, metal working, computeraided design andcomputeraided manufacture, hospitality and tourism, and even industrial launderers.the final judgment on the nssb effort is years away, because thereare as yet no assessments for most of the jobs in most of the 16 areas thatthe nssb has identified. however, some industries have begun to publish standards for selected jobsñusually at the entry levelñin theirspheres. the nssb strategy involves individuals having òcore + oneó certificates. the core would be common to the entire private sector andwould likely resemble the workplace knowhow defined by the scanscommission.in the academic arena, the national council of teachers of mathematics (nctm) produced the first set of national mathematics content standards for k12 education, curriculum and evaluation standards for schoolmathematics, released in 1989.5 (nctm also produced professional standards for teaching mathematics (1991)6and assessment standards for schoolmathematics (1995).7) also in 1989, the american association for the advancement of science, through its project 2061 program, published sciencefor all americans,8 which defined scientific literacy for all high schoolgraduates. in 1993, project 2061 issued a contentoriented document,4commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989. what work requires of schools:a scans report for america 2000, department of labor, washington, d.c.5commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989. curriculum and evaluation standards for school mathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.6commission on standards for school mathematics. 1991. professional standards for teaching mathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.7commission on standards for school mathematics. 1991. assessment standards for schoolmathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.8american association for the advancement of science. 1989. science for all americans: aproject 2061 report on literacy goals in science, mathematics, and technology, american association for the advancement of science, washington, d.c.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b81benchmarks for science literacy.9 the national research council deliberated on appropriate science content for precollege education and issuednational science education standards in 1996.10 continuing the new era ofreform, the international technology education association will publishtechnology standards for k12 education in 1999.furthermore, states have been establishing their own academic standards for high school graduation, although there is still great confusionover what makes for an adequate standard. the american federation ofteachers, the council for basic education, and the fordham foundationhave attempted to rate state efforts, although an education week analysisfound large disparities in the letter grades assigned by these organizations.11 for example, more than half the states received marks in mathematics that varied by at least two letter grades across the three organizationsõ reports. in english/language arts, such variability was found in 19states. finally, a quite recent analysis found that there is a long way to gobefore òstandardsbased reformó becomes a reality in the nationõsschools.12in general, the academic standards described above differ from theresults of past efforts at education reform in two important ways. first,they emphasize the goals of literacy and broad inclusion, rather than concentrating on an intellectually elite subpopulation. second, they identifyan important role for whole communities (rather than just teachers); everyone plays some part in assisting educators to meet the standards. forexample, in national science education standards, business and industryare asked to collaborate with school personnel to initiate interesting, highquality programs that support the standards.13 legislators and publicofficials are asked to strive for policies and funding priorities that supportthe goals of the standards.as envisioned by their authoring bodies, the standards present contentñnot curriculumñto facilitate coordination, consistency, and coherence of mathematics, science, and technology education in the unitedstates. they are designed to encourage a consistent set of educationaloutcomes that develop studentsõ critical thinking skills, scientific reason9american association for the advancement of science. 1993. benchmarks for science literacy, oxford university press, new york.10national research council. 1996. national science education standards, national academy press, washington, d.c.11lynn olson. 1998. education week, april 15.12mark tucker and judy codding. 1998.  standards for our schools, josseybass publishers, san francisco, calif.13national research council. 1996. national science education standards, national academy press, washington d.c., p. 245.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82being fluent with information technologying, creative problem solving, and judicious analysisñqualities identifiedby various constituencies as critical to the nationõs ability to meet the scientific and technological demands of the 21st century and remain competitive in an increasingly global economy.although the distinction does provide a good point of departure forunderstanding standards, the line between academic and vocational/industrial standards is somewhat blurred. for example, the scansapproach was supported by the department of labor, but leaned in thedirection of academic standards.other government agencies have not been silent, and other standardshave been developed. the national institute for literacy has an ongoingproject, equip for the future (eff), which has recently published draftliteracy content standards for three realms: work, citizenship, andparenting. this work follows on earlier efforts such as the educationaltesting servicesõ international adult literacy survey, which was basedon a threepart structure of prose, document, and quantitative literacy.the eff framework describes for each of three roles (work, citizenship,and parenting) four purposes: access to information, a voice in individualsõ own lives, ability to take action, and a bridge to the future (learning tolearn). for all of these the eff defined 12 common activities (such asmanagement of resources). it then defined 17 generative skills (such asinterpersonal skills) and knowledge domains (such as systems) that support the common activities. in many ways, the eff framework can beseen as an elaboration on the scans approach.a wide range of standards at the industry, federal, and the state levelhave begun to evolve and help define the scope and meaning of information technology literacy and related concepts. the subsections below identify some of the most salient standards as they relate to the committeeõsidea of fluency with information technology (fitness).b.1.1national council of teachers of mathematics standardsin its 1989 report, curriculum and evaluation standards for school mathematics, the national council of teachers of mathematics (nctm) definedmathematical literacy as the combination of five interrelated goals for students:141.learn to value mathematics,2.become confident in their ability to do mathematics,14commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989. curriculum and evaluationstandards for school mathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.,p. 5.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b833.become mathematical problem solvers,4.learn to communicate mathematically, and5.learn to reason mathematically.the nctm standards are intended to provide a coherent frameworkfor ensuring òthat all students have an opportunity to become mathematically literate, are capable of extending their learning, [and] have an equalopportunity to learn.ó15 importantly, the rationale for these standards iscouched in terms of the mathematical literacy needed to function in aninformation and technological society. for example, the report states thatòtechnology has dramatically changed the nature of the physical, life, andsocial sciences; business; industry; and government . . . . information isthe new capital and the new material, and communication is the newmeans of production. . . . the impact of this technological shift has become an economic reality. today, the pace of economic change is beingaccelerated by continued innovation in communications and computertechnology.ó16finally, the nctm standards are envisioned as a living document; aworking group is now revising the initial set of standards (box b.1 givesan example from the current nctm curriculum), and an updated versionis expected in the year 2000.b.1.2standards for science educationthe standards set forth in the national research councilõs nationalscience education standards were developed òto provide criteria to judgeprogress toward a national vision of learning and teaching science in asystem that promotes excellence. . . .ó17 approximately four years ofdeliberations and the combined work of thousands of educators, scientists, science educators, and other experts nationwide produced a comprehensive vision of effective science education. the associated standards15commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989. curriculum and evaluationstandards for school mathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.,p. 5.16commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989. curriculum and evaluationstandards for school mathematics, national council of teachers of mathematics, reston, va.,p. 3.17national research council. 1996. national science education standards, national academy press, washington d.c., p. 12.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84being fluent with information technologybox b.1sample nctm curriculum standardñfunctionsin grades 912, the mathematics curriculum should include the continued study of functions so that all students canñ¥model realworld phenomena with a variety of functions;¥represent and analyze relationships using tables, verbal rules, equations, and graphs;¥translate among tabular, symbolic, and graphical representations offunctions;¥recognize that a variety of problem situations can be modeled by thesame type of function;¥analyze the effects of parameter changes on the graphs of functions;and so that, in addition, collegeintending students canñ¥understand operations on, and the general properties and behaviorof, classes of functions. . . .. . . the function concept also is important because it is a mathematicalrepresentation of many inputoutput situations found in the real world,including those that recently have arisen as a result of technologicaladvances. . . .since functional relationships are encountered so frequently, the studyof functions should begin with a sampling of those that exist in the studentsõ world. students should have the opportunity to appreciate the pervasiveness of functions through activities such as describing realworld relationships that can be depicted by graphs, reading and interpreting graphs,and sketching graphs of data in which the value of one variable dependson the value of another.source: excerpted from commission on standards for school mathematics. 1989.curriculum and evaluation standards for school mathematics, national council ofteachers of mathematics, reston, va., pp. 154155.outline the content of what students need to know, understand, and beable to do to be scientifically literate at all grade levels. in addition, theyaddress pedagogy, professional development, assessment, individualschool programs, and public policy at various levels. the standards areintended to guide local educational administrators and educators in forbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b85mulating curricula, staff development activities, and assessment programs.national science education standards reflects the conviction that scienceunderstanding and ability will òenhance the capability of all students tohold meaningful and productive jobs in the future,ó in a business community that needs workers who can òlearn, reason, think creatively, makedecisions, and solve problems.ó18an example of the nrcõs science education content standards is provided in box b.2.b.1.3technology for all americans projecthistorically, the united states has neglected technology education inits academic repertoire, relegating the understanding of technologyñthestudy of the humanmade worldñto vocational education.19 in european countries such as germany, trade schools have long prepared children of workers for entry into the workforce.20 now, standards for technology education are being created by the international technologyeducation association (itea), and they will serve as the basis for promoting technological literacy in grades k12. a document produced in thefirst phase of the project, technology for all americans: a rationale and structure for the study of technology, defines the need for standards for technology education and shows how technology can be studied.21 this phasehas also sought to build consensus on issues concerning technology education.phase ii of the project will develop standards for technology education at all grade levels, k12. the standards will focus on what studentsneed to know and be able to do in order to be technologically literate. thestandards document will identify appropriate content for technology education in a comprehensive but flexible format that local administratorsand educators can adapt to fit their particular academic curriculum.the goal of technology standards is to foster technologyliterate students. itea defines technology literacy as ò. . . knowing how to use,manage, and understand technology.ó22 one purpose of these standards18national research council. 1996. national science education standards, national academy press, washington d.c., p. 12.19international technology education association. 1996. technology for all americans: arationale and structure for the study of technology, international technology education association, reston, va.20thomas alexander. 1918. the prussian elementary schools, macmillan, new york.21technology for all americans: a rationale and structure for the study of technology, 1996.22technology for all americans: a rationale and structure for the study of technology, 1996,chapter 2, p. 9.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86being fluent with information technologybox b.2sample science education standardcontent standard b [physical science]: as a result of their activitiesin grades 912, all students should develop an understanding of¥structure of atoms¥structure and properties of matter¥chemical reactions¥motions and forces¥conservation of energy and increase in disorder¥interactions of energy and matterdeveloping student understandinghighschool students develop the ability to relate the macroscopic properties of substances that they study in grades k8 to the microscopic structure of substances. this development in understanding requires students tomove among three domains of thoughtñthe macroscopic world of observable phenomena, the microscopic world of molecules, atoms, and subatomic particles, and the symbolic and mathematical world of chemicalformulas, equations, and symbols. . . .on the basis of their experiences with energy transfers in the middlegrades, highschool students can investigate energy transfers quantitativelyby measuring variables such as temperature change and kinetic energy.laboratory investigations and descriptions of other experiments can helpstudents understand the evidence that leads to the conclusion that energyis conserved. although the operational distinction between temperatureand heat can be fairly well understood after careful instruction, researchwith highschool students indicates that the idea that heat is the energy ofis to strengthen educatorsõ recognition of technology as a dynamic, transforming force that schools must prepare students and citizens to manageeffectively, given its increasingly central role in u.s. economic, social, andpolitical systems. in equipping students with technology literacy, a standardsbased curriculum prepares graduates to become òvested membersof our technologically based society, contributing members of ourworkforce, and cognizant members of our democracy.ó23the iteaõs technology for all americans standards are expected to bereleased in 2000.23technology for all americans: a rationale and structure for the study of technology, 1996,chapter 1, p. 3.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b87b.1.4national educational technology standards projectthe international society for technology in education (iste) has produced a set of guidelines for technology skills in prek through 12th gradeeducation, the national educational technology standards for students(nets).24 the primary goal of the nets project has been òto developnational standards for the educational uses of technology. . . to guide educational leaders in recognizing and addressing the essential conditionsrandom motion and vibrating molecules is difficult for students to understand.guide to the content standardfundamental concepts and principles that underlie this standard include. . . conservation of energy and the increase in disorder.¥the total energy of the universe is constant. energy can be transferred by collisions in chemical and nuclear reactions, by light waves andother radiation, and in many other ways. however, it can never be destroyed. as these transfers occur, the matter involved becomes steadily lessordered.¥all energy can be considered to be either kinetic energy, which isthe energy of motion; potential energy, which depends on relative position; or energy contained by a field, such as electromagnetic waves.¥heat consists of random motion and the vibrations of atoms, molecules, and ions. the higher the temperature, the greater the atomic ormolecular motion.¥everything tends to become less organized and less orderly over time.thus, in all energy transfers, the overall effect is that the energy is spreadout uniformly. examples are the transfer of energy from hotter to coolerobjects by conduction, radiation, or convection and the warming of oursurroundings when we burn fuels.source: excerpted from national research council. 1996. òcontent standards: 912,ó in national science education standards, national academy press, washington, d.c., pp. 176178.24international society for technology in education. 1988. national educational technology standards for students, international society for technology in education, eugene, ore.available online at <http:// cnets.iste.org/>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88being fluent with information technologyfor effective use of technology to support prek12 education.ó thepremise for these guidelines is the belief that the u.s. educational systemmust begin the complex task of integrating technology within a soundeducational system to prepare students for the opportunities and rigors ofthe technologically rich 21st century.the technology foundation standards for students are divided intosix broad categories:1.basic operations and concepts (students demonstrate a sound understanding of the nature and operation of technology systems and areproficient in the use of technology).2.social, ethical, and human issues (students understand the ethical,cultural, and societal issues related to technology; practice responsible useof technology systems, information, and software; and develop positiveattitudes toward technology uses that support lifelong learning, collaboration, personal pursuits, and productivity).3.technology productivity tools (students use technology tools toenhance learning, increase productivity, promote creativity, and use productivity tools to collaborate in constructing technologyenhanced models, preparing publications, and producing other creative works).4.technology communications tools (students use telecommunications to collaborate, publish, interact with peers, experts, and other audiences, and use a variety of media and formats to communicate information and ideas effectively to multiple audiences).5.technology research tools (students use technology to locate,evaluate, and collect information from a variety of sources; use technology tools to process data and report results; and evaluate and select newinformation resources and technological innovations based on theirappropriateness to specific tasks).6.technology problemsolving and decisionmaking tools (studentsuse technology resources for solving problems and making informed decisions, and employ technology in the development of strategies for solving problems in the real world).to assist teachers, iste has also created a general set of profiles thatdescribe technology literate students at key developmental points in theirprecollege education. these profiles provide performance indicators describing the technology competence students should exhibit upon completion of the various grade ranges (see box b.3, for example).being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b89box b.3sample profile for technology literate students (grades 912)students will:1.identify capabilities and limitations of contemporary and emergingtechnology resources and assess the potential of these systems and servicesto address personal, lifelong learning, and workplace needs. (2)12.make informed choices among technology systems, resources, andservices. (1,2)3.analyze advantages and disadvantages of widespread use of and reliance on technology in the workplace and in society as a whole. (2)4.demonstrate and advocate for legal and ethical behaviors amongpeers, family, and community regarding the use of technology and information. (2)5.use technology tools and resources for managing and communicating personal/professional information (e.g., finances, schedules, addresses,purchases, correspondence). (3, 4)6.evaluate technologybased options, including distance and distributed education, for lifelong learning. (5)7.routinely and efficiently use online information resources to meetneeds for collaboration, research, publications, communications, and productivity. (4, 5, 6)8.select and apply technology tools for research, information analysis,problemsolving, and decisionmaking in content learning. (4, 5)9.investigate and apply expert systems, intelligent agents, and simulations in realworld situations. (3, 5, 6)10.collaborate with peers, experts, and others to contribute to a contentrelated knowledge base by using technology to compile, synthesize,produce, and disseminate information, models, and other creative works.(4, 5, 6)source: this material is taken from the òprofiles for studentsó section of a webpage provided by the international society for technology in education. availableonline at <http://cnets.iste.org/>.1numbers in parentheses following each performance indicator refer to the standards category to which the performance is linked.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90being fluent with information technologyb.1.5the secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skillsin 1992, the department of laborõs secretaryõs commission onachieving necessary skills (scans) released learning a living: a blueprint for high performance,25 which identified the skills needed by americans to join the growing highskill workforce. as described in the report,the commissionõs fundamental purpose was òto encourage a highperformance economy characterized by highskill, highwage employmentó(p. xiii).the commission addressed its messages to three stakeholders.schools were asked to expand their mission to include the diverse rolesstudents will eventually play in their communities and workplaces.teachers were encouraged to adopt an interdisciplinary and global teaching approach, including making connections to instill a broader perspective. employers were urged to improve the organization of work and thedevelopment of human resources, with greater consideration for the community and the country as well as the company.the conclusions and recommendationsñaimed at òreinventingschool,ó òfostering workbased learning,ó òreorganizing the workplace,óand òrestructuring assessmentóñare grounded in five workplace competencies and three foundational skills that the commission proposed as anational blueprint by which to judge competence in necessary hightechnology skills. the competencies, skills, and personal qualities were identified as fundamental requirements for building a workforce prepared tolead advancements and participate effectively in the information age.these goals were advocated for all students. box b.4 describes how the scans competencies and fitness capabilities relate to each other.b.1.6state standards for technology literacysome states, such as new york and maine, have begun to developstandards for k12 technology education. the maine standards tend totreat technology literacy as a supporting skill within the sciences, as suggested by the subject area heading òscience and technology,ó rather thanas a separate subject area.2625secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skills. 1992. learning a living: a blueprint for high performance, department of labor, washington, d.c.26maine department of education. 1996. òstate of maine learning results,ó draft, mainedepartment of education, augusta, maine, december. available online at <htmlresanchorhttp://www.state.me.us/education/lres.htm>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b91the new york state standards (revised in march 1996) reflect a moreconstructivist view, focusing on technology competency so that studentswill be able to apply technological knowledge and skills to design, construct, use, and evaluate products and systems to satisfy human and environmental needs.27 although they are more elaborate than the mainestandards, the new york standards also fit within a collection of standards that address scientific and technological literacy. each standardidentifies content for appropriate learning and requirements at the elementary, intermediate, and high school levels.new york stateõs technology standards encompass seven differentareas of investigation and education as described below:¥engineering design: modeling and optimization are used in an iterative process to develop technological solutions to problems within givenconstraints.¥tools, resources, and technological processes: technological tools, materials, and other resources should be selected on the basis of safety, cost,availability, appropriateness, and environmental impact; technologicalprocesses change energy, information, and material resources into moreuseful forms.¥computers: as tools for design, modeling, information processing,communication, and system control, computers have greatly increasedhuman productivity and knowledge.¥technological systems: systems are designed to achieve specific results and produce outputs, such as products, structures, services, energy,or other systems.¥history and evolution of technology: technology has been the drivingforce in the evolution of society from an agricultural to an industrial to aninformation base.¥impact of technology: technology can have positive and negativeimpacts on individuals, society, and the environment, and humans havethe capability and responsibility to constrain or promote technologicaldevelopment.¥management of technology: project management is essential to ensuring that technological endeavors are profitable and that products andsystems are of high quality and built safely, on schedule, and within budget.the standards for students range from using materials in the elemen27new york state department of education. 1996. learning standards for mathematics,science, and technology, revised edition, albany, new york.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92being fluent with information technologytary grades to understanding and considering the societal impacts of theadopted technologies as a commencement requirement. box b.5 providessome examples of standards that must be met upon graduation from highschool.b.1.7information technology skill standards28the national science foundation (nsf) is funding a number of efforts to develop standards for information technology skills. bellevuebox b.4the scans framework and fitnessa particularly important viewpoint is presented in the scans reportproduced in 1992 by the secretary of laborõs commission on achievingnecessary skills to promote the development of a skilled workforce.1 inaddition to being the driver for a number of efforts (ranging from programsfor literacy to standards for the retail industry and the information technology industry), the scans report described competencies that provided animportant point of departure for the approach to fitness described in chapter 2 of this report. the scans workplace competencies include thefollowing:1.planning and resource allocation (budgets, schedules, space, andstaff);2.information (acquire, evaluate, interpret, organize, communicate);3.interpersonal skills (work in teams, negotiate, teach, lead, serve customers, work with diversity);4.technology (select, use, and troubleshoot);5.systems (understand, monitor, and design).the intellectual framework laid out in this report and the scans reporthave much in common. in particular, the scans competencies are expressed in the context of sustained collaborative project activity, using technology. the correspondence between the fitness capabilities and thescans competencies is shown in table b.1 below.1secretaryõs commission on achieving necessary skills. 1992. learning a living: ablueprint for high performance, department of labor, washington, d.c.28this description is adapted from a web page on information technology skill standardsprovided by the northwest center for emerging technologies at bellevue community college in bellevue, washington. the page can be found at <htmlresanchor http://nwcet.bcc.ctc.edu/skills/intro/intro.htm>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b93community college in bellevue, washington, is the host for the northwest center for emerging technologies (nwcet). in addition to its fiveyear nsf funding, the center has received support from boeing and frommicrosoft. to support the needs of industry, nwcet has defined standards for eight information technology positions (career clusters): database administration associate, information systems operator/analyst, interactive digital media specialist, network specialist, programmer/analyst, software engineer, technical support representative, and technical writer. (box b.6 provides further discussion and details.) although itbegan at a different starting point, nwcet has come to many of the sameconclusions as this and the scans report.determined and validated through an extensive survey process, thesestandards were developed to establish agreedupon, industryidentifiedtable b.1a comparison of fitness capabilities and scans workplace competenciesfitness capabilitiesscans competencies1.engage in sustained reasoningpedagogical strategy2.manage complexitysystems (monitor)3.manage problems in faultysystems (design)solutions4.test a solutionsystems (design)8.expect the unexpectedsystems (understand, monitor)9.anticipate changing technologiessystems (understand, monitor)10.think about informationsystems (understand)technology abstractly6.collaborateinterpersonal skills5.organize and navigateinformation (organize,information structures evaluate)7.communicate to other audiencesinformation (communicate) the scans competencies are as òdeepó and intellectually demandingas the fitness capabilities. for example, the information competency includes the ability to write coherent and persuasive prose as well as effectively use a word processor. moreover, the scans competencies havebeen found to apply to domains other than employment. an understanding of economics and the federal budget is as important to the averagecitizen as understanding copyright and encryption.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94being fluent with information technologybox b.5sample criteria from new york state technology standards:high school levelto demonstrate technology competency in the seven areas described inthe main text, students should be able to do the following in each area(only selected items are provided):¥engineering design: initiate an investigation, identify needs and opportunities for technological invention and innovation, generate creativesolution ideas, break ideas into the significant functional elements, andexplore possible refinements.¥tools, resources and technological processes: explain tradeoffs, anddescribe and model methods to control processes and monitor system outputs.¥computer technology: understand basic computer architecture anddescribe the function of computer subsystems and peripheral devices; select a computer system that meets personal needs; attach a modem to acomputer system and telephone line, set up and use communications software, connect to various online networks, including the internet, and access needed information using email, telnet, gopher, ftp, and websearches.¥technological systems: explain why making tradeoffs among characteristics, such as safety, function, cost, ease of operation, quality of postpurchase support, and environmental impact, is necessary when selectingsystems for specific purposes; explain how complex technological systemsinvolve the confluence of numerous other systems.¥history and evolution of technology: explain how technological inventions have caused global growth and interdependence, stimulated economic competitiveness, created new jobs, and made other jobs obsolete.¥impacts of technology: explain that although technological effectsare complex and difficult to predict accurately, humans can control thedevelopment and implementation of technology; explain how computersand automation have changed the nature of work.¥management of technology: use computerbased scheduling andproject tracking tools; discuss the role of technology in successful u.s.businesses; help to manage a group to gain understanding of the management of dynamics.source: adapted from new york state department of education. 1996. learningstandards for mathematics, science, and technology, revised edition, albany, newyork, pp. 5053.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b95box b.6an example of the nwcet standardsthe technology standards of the northwest center for emerging technologies (nwcet) are tied to specific types of jobs. for example, a programmer analyst (also known as a systems analyst, an applications analyst,an applications engineer, an operating systems programmer/analyst, anoperating systems engineer, or a test engineer) is said to analyze, design,develop, test, implement, and maintain computer applications systems tomeet functional objectives of a business. his or her job functions includeanalysis, design, development, testing, implementation, project management, and task management.to establish a context, the standards provide a thumbnail job description:as a programmer or analyst, you design and update the software that runsthe computer. . . . often, youõll participate in design meetings where youhelp determine the best way to approach a problem or implement a desired feature for the new version of the software. because of the complexity of the software and because parts of the software interconnect, this cantake quite some time, depending on the magnitude of the change. youmost likely will also be responsible for writing the specifications and keeping the specifications current for your part of the software.youõll code the changes, and then test and debug the software, which maytake a year or more of intense and focused work, including evenings andweekends. the challenge, of course, is to keep the software as lean aspossible, while making it robust, powerful, and expandable. in most cases,the programmer, analyst, or engineer must also ensure backwards compatibility with application software written for previous versions of thesoftware. periodically, the software team compiles the code. this softwarebuild is tested, and you correct any problems which fall into your area ofthe code.the core of the standards is a description of the primary tasks and functions involved in this scenario. these tasks and functions are selected fromlonger òmasteró lists of tasks and functions on the basis of their applicability to the scenario provided. for example, the scenario described abovecalls for the following:¥analysis (gather data to identify customer requirements; interpret andevaluate requirements; define scope of work to meet customer requirements; develop highlevel systems and functional specifications; developalternatives),¥design (develop detailed design specifications; develop entity relationships; prepare and conduct design review), and¥project management (evaluate project requirements; report onproject status).source: adapted from material found online at <http://nwcet.bcc.ctc.edu/skills/example/paf.htm>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96being fluent with information technologyknowledge, skills, and abilities required to succeed in the workplace, thusproviding benchmarks of skill and performance attainment that are behavioral and measurable. without such information, employers do notknow whom to hire or how to evaluate employees, employees and newentrants to the workforce do not know what is expected of them, andeducators do not know how to prepare students for the challenges of theworkplace. industryidentified skill standards also serve as a vehicle forcompanies to communicate their expectations for worker performance.skill standards provide a common framework for communication ofworkplace expectations between business, education, workers, students,and government.b.2philosophyone influential author who has explored the potential of informationtechnology as a tool for reconceptualizing the educational process isseymour papert.29 as noted in chapter 1, papert believes that a deepunderstanding of programming can result in many significant educationalbenefits in many domains of discourse, including those unrelated to computers and information technology per se. however, he also expressesconcern about the education communityõs conventional response to thecall for increased integration of computer technology into the school bycreating computer labs and a formal learning sequence comparable to thatof other elective business courses. while òassimilatingó computers intothe traditional system is a natural first step, papert asserts that the computer cannot be a transforming tool within the rigid constraints of traditional school structure. instead, he believes that students can experiencethe genuine power of computers to transform their educational understanding, and ultimately develop new ways of thinking, only through amore fluid, freer environment of exploration. for this to occur, computers must be integrated throughout the curriculum, including leaving roomto revise and reform the curriculum. this objective must be pursued byteachers who are comfortable with computers and with a creative andunrestricted structure, and who are supported by a likeminded educational community.a complementary view regarding information technology literacy isoffered in the report digital literacy: survival skills for the information age(bit3m partners, under the auspices of sri consulting), which was commissioned to address how to create a digitally literate workforce. the29seymour a. papert. 1999. mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas, secondedition, basic books, new york.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b97report defines digital literacy as òthe ability to communicate successfullyusing digitally encoded information in any medium or formató (p. 1), andit states that to survive and prosper in the information age, people mustlearn new skills and knowledge to become digitally literate. those whodo will be empowered to use the digital medium effectively; those whodo not will be increasingly excluded.the report describes literacy as cumulative, without a definitive set ofsymbols and images to master. rather, literacy is a competencyñan ability to produce a useful resultñrequiring a combination of knowledge,skills, and attitude. the three broad categories defined to cover usersõdiffering needs for digital literacy are technical, informational, and cultural. developing digital literacy requires a combination of formal instruction, selfinstruction, trial and error, peer discussion, and a computerõs online help facility. the report concludes that, althoughtechnology is destined to become more powerful and applications easierto use, the informational and cultural qualities of digital literacy are becoming increasingly important but also more difficult to master. thesequalities depend on having the skills and knowledge òto ensure that [technology reflects] our values and assumptions or, at least, that we understand [technology]ó (p. 11).b.3model curricula and coursesb.3.1acm model high school computer science curriculumthe acm (originally the association for computing machinery) produced recommendations for collegelevel computer science curricula in1968, 1978, and 1991. in 1989, the precollege committee of the education board of the acm addressed the need for a high school computerscience curriculum standard. aimed at 10th grade, the acm òmodel highschool computer science curriculumó was originally published in 1993.30it proposed that computer science education should be required for allhigh school students, similar to the curriculum requirements for the natural sciences: òthe study of computer science is composed of basic universal concepts that transcend the technology and that comprise an essentialpart of a high school education. it is these concepts that enable the student to understand and participate effectively in our modern world.ó therecommended topics and areas listed below are based on this premise.30task force of the precollege committee of the education board of the acm. 1993.òmodel high school computer science curriculum,ó communications of the acm, 36(5):8790.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98being fluent with information technologyinformed by the acm computing curriculum for colleges and universities, the acm model curriculum for high school computer science identifies the following core topics:¥algorithms;¥programming languages;¥operating systems and user support;¥computer architecture;¥social, ethical, and professional context; and¥computer applications.core content is specified in all topics except computer applications,for which it is recommended that applications in the following areas beincluded:¥computer aided design/computer aided manufacturing;¥computer speech, music synthesis, and art;¥database systems;¥electronic mail and bulletin boards;¥multimedia and presentation graphics;¥scientific analysis (e.g., mathematica, mathlab), spreadsheets, anddata analysis;¥word processing and desktop publishing.other òadditional topicsó were also recommended to illustrate thecurrent state of the art in the computer science discipline itself. examplesinclude the following:¥artificial intelligence, e.g., games, expert systems, robotics, knowledge representations;¥computational science, e.g., scientific visualization, modeling;¥graphics, e.g., image generation, two and threedimensional animation;¥simulation and virtual reality;¥software engineering, e.g., system development, software development cycle, modeling, and diagramming.secondary schools have not embraced computer science as an essential discipline for all students, and so the acm model high school curriculum has not been widely implemented. instead, students with a specialgift or interest in computer science can, in some high schools, take anadvanced placement course in computer science. this type of curricubeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b99lum, however, is far more specialized (focused on programming) thanthat which would meet the fitness needs of high school students.b.3.2collegelevel coursesfor many years, college computer science programs have offeredcourses for nonmajors. these courses have evolved rapidly as technology has evolved. some years ago, they concentrated on teaching studentsbasic skills with word processing, spreadsheets, and presentation graphics. today, many of these courses provide experience with web pagedesign and use of the internet for communication. overall, however, thesecourses have had a rather limited vision, one of providing basic technological skills to students who might use them in their own major field ofstudy.more recently, some colleges and universities have added a specificcomputer literacy requirement for graduation. this requirement is defined in various ways, depending on the kinds and amount of facultyresources that can be dedicated to these courses. for example, students atmarist college fulfill its computer literacy requirement by completing anyone of a variety of 1credit courses taught by faculty in different disciplines.31 other institutions of higher education, like wake forest university, are engaged in vigorous faculty development projects that will helpindividual faculty members learn to integrate the use of technology intoexisting courses across the curriculum.32 still others, like bowdoin college, take a more laissezfaire approach, expecting that their faculty andstudents will, by one means or another, become computer literate withoutany special efforts as they progress through their course work.most colleges and universities now provide a full range of computingand networking resources,33 expecting that their students will use technology effectively in their various courses of study. overall, many believe34 that we have entered the era of ubiquitous computing on collegecampuses, an era in which computers are commonplace and inexpensive,and are effectively deployed to serve the needs of all students and faculty.the content of specific computer literacy courses for noncomputerscience majors varies widely among colleges. many of these courses are31see <http://vm.marist.edu:80/~courinfo/descriptions/csis.html>.32see, for example, < http://www.wfu.edu/celi>.33see <http://www.bowdoin.edu/cwis/admissions/resources/electronic.html>, forexample.34mark weiser. 1998. òthe future of ubiquitous computing on campus,ó communications of the acm, 41(january):4142.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100being fluent with information technologylimited to teaching a collection of skills with modern software packages,and thus do not embrace the idea of fitness as it is described in the mainbody of this report. however, there are some exceptions. at duke university, the computer literacy course focuses on the theme òwhat computers can do and what they canõt do, now and in the future.ó35 it assumesno prior computing experience, and in a single semester introduces students to the fundamentals of programming, hardware and software, andthe limits of computation. at brown university, the computer literacycourse òconcepts and challenges of computer scienceó introduces students to programming and other problemsolving tools, as well as a widerange of topics that relate computing to daily life.36 sample assignmentsin this course include home budgets, client database management, andwriting a java script to play the game tictactoe. at both duke andbrown, the computer literacy courses are handson laboratorybasedcourses with a high level of interaction among students and instructors.vocational and technical colleges also offer a wide range of coursesthat contribute to information technology literacy. for instance, the university of maine at augusta offers a twoyear degree program in computer and information systems. the core curriculum covers various areasof technology, including computer systems, networking, databases,administration of computing facilities, applications programming, andworking with the world wide web. it emphasizes handson learning andpractical applications of information systems.37b.4other approaches toinformation technology literacyskills with and knowledge about information technology may also begained through various informal channels. for instance, dozens of teenagers and community leaders have benefited from the u.s. westfoundationõs new technology academy, which uses children as teachersof computer technology. this program is hoping to spread the word thateven in the poorest communities, kids with their uninhibited curiosityand wealth of time to òfiddle and exploreó may very well be the nationõsmost natural teachers and maintainers of technology. programs that useyoung computer òwhizzesó as òcomputermaintenance technicians,35alan w. biermann. 1994. òcomputer science for the many,ó computer, 27(february):6273.36see, for example, <http://www.cs.brown.edu/courses/cs002>.37see <http://www.uma.maine.edu/academics/uacadcisbrochure.html>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b101troubleshooters and oneonone tutors for fellow students, teachers andeven school principalsó are popping up across the nation.38b.4.1acm code of ethicsthe acm code of ethics and professional conduct is designed as aguide for computer professionals.39 the code is very pragmatic and necessarily has an information technology literacy component. moreover, itreflects the expectation that acm members not only remain technicallycompetent themselves but also contribute to the technical education ofothers. although the code has little information about specific technological competencies, it does require that members conduct their lives in away that respects the copyright, privacy, and other ethical aspects of technology and digital information that they encounter in their work.b.4.2on and offthejob trainingthe skills for learning about email, voice mail, ònetiquette,ó and theimpact of electronic communication on an organization are often taughtinhouse. the advantage is that curricula can be customized to the particular needs of the organization. for example, kinkoõs information technology training needs are satisfied by extensive onthejob training and a2hour course that teaches the basics of files, disk storage, hierarchies,directories, removable media, and networks, in a windows or macintoshenvironment.a number of private companies, such as compusa (http://www.compusa.com) and new horizons (http://www.newhorizons.com), offer information technology training courses for the employees of largeorganizations and individuals. for example, compusa òoffers computer training for the corporate client as well as the general public. itspecializes in the programs that people use at home and in the office.classes are generally offered six days a week and twice a week duringthe evenings. there are over 150 compusa training centers locatednationwide with several new training supercenter plus sites opening ingreater metropolitan areas. the new centers specialize in novell software, project management software, visual basic, lotus notes, andmicrosoft access.ó38elizabeth heilman brook. 1998. òwhiz kids are given a chance to teach their stuff,ónew york times, april 23. available online at <htmlresanchor http://www.nytimes.com/library/tech/98/04/circuits/articles/23kids.html>.39for more information, see <http://www.acm.org/constitution/code.html>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102being fluent with information technology102appendixcindividuals who briefed the committeeaugust 1920, 1997john c. cherniavsky, office of crossdisciplinary activities, cisedirectorate, national science foundationpeter j. denning, computer science department, george masonuniversitynancy devino, committee on undergraduate science education,national research councilbarry w. johnson, department of electrical engineering, university ofvirginiapam b. newberry, technology for all americans projectgreg pearson, national academy of engineeringharold pratt, division on k12 policy and practice, national researchcouncilwilliam a. wulf, national academy of engineeringapril 34, 1998andrea disessa, graduate school of education, university of california,berkeleymark guzdial, graphics visualization and usability center,college of computing, georgia institute of technologyyasmin kafai, psychological studies in education, university ofcalifornia, los angelesnancy butler songer, university of michiganbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d103103appendixdworkshop participants andquestions posted on the internetd.1participants in the january 1997 workshoprobert b. allen, bellcorerobert h. anderson, randronald e. anderson, university of minnesotarobert m. ballard, north carolina central universityalan w. biermann, duke universitytony brewer, pivot partnerspeter p. chen, louisiana state universitymartin dickey, university of washingtonlinda s. dobb, bowling green state universitymichael b. eisenberg, syracuse university and eric clearinghouse oninformation and technologyzorana ercegovac, university of california, los angelessusan gerhart, applied formal methods, inc. and roi joint venturestephen a.b. gilbert, massachusetts institute of technologyconnie hendrix, san francisco unified school districtcharles f. kelemen, swarthmore collegeallen klinger, university of california, los angelessusan landau, university of massachusettslarry long, long and associatesnote: pointers to many of the position papers presented by these participants can be foundonline at <http://www2.nas.edu/cstbweb>.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104being fluent with information technologyellen meltzer, university of california, berkeleydavid g. messerschmitt, university of california, berkeleyjeanine meyer, pace universitypaul nielson, manitoba library associationjim perry, kinkoõs inc.viera k. proulx, northeastern universityrichard s. rosenberg, university of british columbialinda loos scarth, mount mercy collegegreg w. scragg, state university of new york at geneseomary shaw, carnegie mellon universityralph d. westfall, university of southern californiamarsha cook woodbury, university of illinois, urbanachampaignd.2questions about information technologyliteracy posted on the internetd.2.1questions for computer and communicationsscientists and engineers1. for purposes of this discussion, the committee provisionally distinguishes in a loose and informal way between fundamental concepts, applications of fundamental concepts, and engineering and design principlesused in applying concepts. to illustrate, a concept might be òinstructioninterpretation.ó an application of that concept might be òjava bytecodeinterpretation.ó an engineering principle might be òdesign under constraintó (e.g., designing a java interpreter under the constraint of limitedmemory or bandwidth).1a. what are the fundamental concepts of information technologythat an educated adult should know? (interpret information technologybroadly to include computing and communications.) for each concept:¥describe it;¥identify the age or educational level at which you believe it shouldfirst be introduced; and¥explain how it might be introduced.1b. what are the essential applications of the fundamental concepts?¥describe it;¥identify the age or educational level at which you believe it shouldfirst be introduced; and¥explain how it might be introduced.being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d1051c. what are the essential engineering and/or design principles relevant to information technology?¥describe it;¥identify the age or educational level at which you believe it shouldfirst be introduced; and¥explain how it might be introduced.2.how do you expect the essential concepts, applications, and engineering/design principles described in your answers to change over time (asinformation technology evolves)? how should the pedagogical processdeal with such changes? how can/should individuals be taught to learnabout how to use new and neverbeforeseen computational artifacts (e.g.,new applications, services, hardware devices, software packages)?3.how should concepts and skills be balanced in information technology literacy? how do/should concepts and skills complement each otherin information technology literacy? how do they compete with eachother? in other words, how and to what extent is there a tradeoff inlearning about concepts versus skills? (for purposes of this discussion,the committee regards a òskilló as facility with a specific computationaltool or artifact such as a spreadsheet.)4.how can individuals best learn the limitations of information technology? how can they learn to make informed personal/social/policydecisions about issues that involve information technology?d.2.2questions for employers and labor professionals1.what information technology skills and knowledge will workers needto do their jobs in the early 21st century? please indicate whether theperspective from which you are answering this question is that of manufacturing or services, and provide separate answers for entrylevel, midlevel, technicallevel, and executivelevel positions. (for purposes of thisdiscussion, a òskilló is òfacility with a specific computational tool or artifact such as a spreadsheet.ó òknowledgeó might be something likeòknowledge of programming,ó though not necessarily knowledge of aspecific programming language.) an example of an entrylevel skill mightbe òdata input and use of the internet.ó skills required in midlevel positions might include word processing, database, and spreadsheet skills.an executivelevel skill might be the use of teleconferencing. (these examples are intended only as possible illustrations.)being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106being fluent with information technology2.the generic competencies underlying the workplace of the 21st century are generally thought to include project planning, budgeting andscheduling, using/communicating/organizing information, understanding/monitoring systems, and interpersonal skills. in your view, howshould workers use computers and telecommunications technology inthese five domains? (for example, today a person involved in planningmight use spreadsheets, project planners, and flow charts. a person usingand organizing information might use word processor or presentationsoftware. a person exercising interpersonal skills might use decision support software.)3.what is the mix of general and specific knowledge of informationtechnology that you expect to seek in new entrylevel hires? more specifically:¥what artifacts do you need them to know about?¥what ability to use new information technology do you expect orneed them to have?¥should these individuals acquire such knowledge and skills frominhouse employer training, informal education, or in some other venue?why?4.what learning or educational experiences would best prepare theemployees most likely to be hired? what would enable them to cope withfuture technological changes and information technology tools with whichthey have no previous experience?d.2.3literacy project: questions for k12 andpostsecondary educators1.what should information technology (it)literate individuals be prepared to do in the future? what sorts of lifelong personal, career, andpolicy decisions should such individuals be prepared to make? why?(by òit literacy,ó we mean not only an itliterate personõs ability to effectively use computers and other information technology tools, but also hisor her understanding of how such technology works, and the role of suchtechnology in society.)2.what should all high school graduates/students know about information technology to achieve information technology literacy? pleasedescribe each element of this knowledge (e.g., how to troubleshoot a softbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d107ware problem or how to make an informed decision about a public policydecision that involves information technology) and briefly say why youbelieve this is important. for each element, suggest what about it youbelieve should be taught at what grade levels.3.what learning experiences do students need to achieve the technological literacy described in answer to question 2? (òlearning experiencesó can include both inschool and outofschool activities.) please bespecific, using examples from your own teaching if possible.4.what technological environment (computers, networks, software, resources, etc.) do precollege teachers need to teach technological literacy?what is the minimum technological environment needed today? what isthe ideal technological environment needed today? why? please describethe relationship of the elements you provided in question 2 to the natureof this environment. (for example, what kinds of computers or connections to the internet are minimally adequate?)d.2.4questions for librarians1.in an online information community, what should every citizen knowabout information technology in order to make effective use of the capabilities it enables? please describe each element of this knowledge (e.g.,how to perform an internet search, how to understand its results) andbriefly say why you believe this is important. for each element, suggestwhat about it you believe should be taught at what grade levels.2.two particularly important examples of new capabilities are those ofinformation searching and information presentation. what are the basicprinciples that guide an effective search or presentation? at what levelshould these principles be taught? how should people learn about thelimitations of searches and presentations?3.what learning experiences do students need to obtain the skills andknowledge described in answer to questions 1 and 2? (learning experiences can include both inschool and outofschool activities.) please bespecific, using examples from your own teaching if possible.4.what technological environment (computers, networks, software, resources, etc.) is needed to support the learning experiences described inquestion 3?being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108being fluent with information technologyd.2.5questions for commercial and business informationtechnologists (e.g., mis support, chief information officers)1.what will every worker need to know about information technologyin order to make effective use of the capabilities it enables? it might beuseful to distinguish between information technology skills (i.e., òfacilitywith a specific computational tool or artifact such as a spreadsheetó) andknowledge (i.e., òknowledge of programming,ó though not necessarilyknowledge of a specific programming language). please describe eachelement of this required knowledge and these required skills.2.the generic competencies underlying the workplace of the 21st century are generally thought to include project planning, budgeting andscheduling, using/communicating/organizing information, understanding/monitoring systems, and interpersonal skills. in your view, howshould workers use computers and telecommunications technology inthese five domains? (for example, today a person involved in planningmight use spreadsheets, project planners, and flow charts. a person using and organizing information might use word processor or presentation software. a person exercising interpersonal skills might use decisionsupport software.)3.what is the mix of general and specific knowledge of informationtechnology that you expect to see in new employees? more specifically:¥what specific artifacts (e.g., spreadsheets, word processors) do youneed them to know about?¥what ability to use new information technology do you expect orneed them to have?¥what conceptual knowledge is essential?how does your answer change with the employeeõs seniority in theorganization? should these individuals acquire such knowledge andskills from inhouse employer training, in formal or informal education,or in some other venue? why?4.what learning or educational experiences would enable the employees you support to cope with future technological changes and information technology tools with which they have no previous experience?being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e109109appendixemembers of the committeelawrence snyder, chair, has been a professor of computer science andengineering at the university of washington since 1983, following facultyappointments at purdue university and yale university. he has been avisiting scholar, massachusetts institute of technology and harvard university (19871988), and a visiting professor at sydney university, sydney,australia (19941995). dr. snyder received his ph.d. from carnegiemellon university in computer science (1973) and a b.a. from the university of iowa in mathematics and economics (1968). dr. snyder has servedon the computer research associationõs board of directors and on numerous advisory panels formulating future research directions in vlsitechnology and parallel computation. he is cofounder and general chairof the acmõs symposium on parallel algorithms and architectures. hechaired the cstbõs study on academic careers of experimental computerscience and engineering; he also serves on the nrcõs army researchlaboratory technical assessment board. dr. snyder is a fellow of theieee and a fellow of the acm.alfred v. aho is associate research vice president, communications sciences research, at bell laboratories, lucent technologies. from 1995 to1997, he was a professor in and chair of the computer science department at columbia university, and from 1991 to 1995 he was the generalmanager of the information sciences and technologies research laboratory at bellcore. prior to holding these appointments, he was director ofthe computing science research center at bell laboratories from 1987 to1991. he joined bell laboratories in 1967 as a member of the technicalbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110being fluent with information technologystaff in the computing techniques research department, and in 1980 hewas appointed head of the computing principles research department.dr. aho received a b.a.sc. (engineering physics, 1963) from the university of toronto and a ph.d. (electrical engineering/computer science,1967) from princeton university. dr. ahoõs personal research is centeredon data networking, multimedia information systems, database systemsand query languages, programming languages and their compilers, algorithms, and the theory of computing. he has published more than 60technical papers and ten widely used textbooks in these areas. he is a coinventor of the awk programming language and other unix systemtools. dr. aho is a fellow of the acm, the american association for theadvancement of science, bell laboratories, and the ieee. he is a formerchair of the acmõs sigact and a former member of the computer science and telecommunications board.marcia c. linn is professor of development and cognition and of education in mathematics, science, and technology in the graduate school ofeducation at the university of california, berkeley. a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science, she researches the teaching and learning of science and technology, gender equity, and the designof technological learning environments. in 1998, the council of scientificsociety presidents selected her for its first award in educational research.from 19951996 she was a fellow at the center for advanced study in thebehavioral sciences. in 1994, the national association for research inscience teaching presented her with its award for lifelong distinguishedcontributions to science education. the american educational researchassociation bestowed on her the willystine goodsell award in 1991 andthe women educatorõs research award in 1982. twice she has won theoutstanding paper award of the journal of research in science teaching(1975 and 1983). she has served on the board of the american associationfor the advancement of science, the graduate record examination boardof the educational testing service, and the mcdonnell foundation cognitive studies in education practice board. her publications include computers, teachers, peers ð science learning partners, with sherry hsi(lawrence erlbaum & associates, in press); òkey to the information highwayó in communications of the association for computing machinery (1996);òthe tyranny of the mean: gender and expectationsó in notices of theamerican mathematical society (1994); designing pascal solutions, with m.c.clancy (w.h. freeman, 1992); and òthe case for case studies in programming instruction,ó with m.c. clancy in communications of the associationfor computing machinery (1992).being fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e111arnold h. packer is a senior fellow at the institute for policy studies atjohns hopkins university and recently served as executive director of theu.s. labor department secretaryõs commission on achieving necessaryskills (scans). he is currently chair of the scans/2000 center. dr.packer has extensive experience in the fields of restructuring u.s. education and policymaking and is coauthor of workforce 2000, a publicationthat has influenced the national conversation about human resource education. he has worked extensively with distinguished representativesfrom business, labor, education, and government to define the skillsneeded by all high school graduates to succeed in the workplace. dr.packer previously served as the assistant secretary for policy, evaluation,and research at the u.s. department of labor, where he formulated theadministrationõs approach to workbased welfare reform and to retraining workers dislocated by economic change. his most recent book isschooltowork: reinventing the learning enterprise.allen b. tucker is professor of computer science at bowdoin college; hehas held similar positions at colgate university and georgetown university. he served for 16 years as department chair in these institutions and2 years as associate dean of the faculty. he held the john d. and catherinet. macarthur chair in computer science while at colgate from 1983 to1988. professor tucker earned a b.a. in mathematics from wesleyan university in 1963 and an m.s. and ph.d. in computer science from northwestern university in 1970. he is the author or coauthor of several booksand articles in the areas of programming languages, natural language processing, and computer science education. he has also served as a consultant to several colleges, universities, and other public and private institutions, in several areas of computer science curriculum, software design,programming languages, and natural language processing application. afellow of the acm, professor tucker cochaired the acm/ieeecs jointcurriculum task force that developed òcurricula 1991,ó for which hereceived the acmõs outstanding contribution award and shared theieeeõs meritorious service award. most recently, he served as editorinchief of the 2600page crc handbook of computer science and engineering(crc press, 1997), a comprehensive professional handbook that coversthe entire discipline. he is a member of the acm, the ieee computersociety, computer professionals for social responsibility, and the liberalarts computer science (lacs) consortium.jeffrey ullman has been a professor at stanford university since 1979.he has also served as a visiting professor at the university of california,berkeley, and as an einstein fellow at the hebrew university in jerusalem. dr. ullman is a member of several professional organizations andbeing fluent with information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112being fluent with information technologyhas functioned as the chair at numerous symposiums including the acmsymposium on principles of programming languages and the technioninternational symposium on machines and computations. dr. ullmanhas served on the national science foundation panel on computer science and was the chair of the examination committee for the cs gre.dr. ullman is the author and coauthor of more than ten books and ofseveral journal articles. he received his b.s. in engineering mathematicsfrom columbia university in 1963 and his ph.d. in electrical engineeringfrom princeton university in 1966.andries van dam is thomas j. watson, jr., university professor of technology and education and professor of computer science at brown university, and was one of the computer science departmentõs founders andits first chair, from 1979 to 1985. his research has concerned computergraphics, text processing, and hypermedia systems. he has been workingfor more than 30 years on systems for creating and reading electronicbooks for use in teaching and research. the current project in this research, exploratories, addresses the educational challenges implicit in arapidly changing, webbased environment. an exploratory is a computerbased combination of an exploratorium and a laboratory that embeds in a hypermedia environment a multifaceted interactive microworldthat models objects, phenomena, and concepts. in addition, he has beenconcerned with teaching objectoriented programming and design, including elementary design patterns, in an introductory computer sciencecourse. professor van dam received the b.s. degree with honors fromswarthmore college in 1960 and the m.s. and ph.d. from the universityof pennsylvania in 1963 and 1966, respectively. he cofounded acmsiggraph, has been on the editorial board and served as editor of several computer graphics journals, and is on the technical advisory board ofseveral startups and of microsoft research. his honors include these:1974, the society for information displayõs special recognition award;1984, the ieee centennial medal; 1988, the state of rhode islandgovernorõs science and technology award; 1990, the national computergraphics associationõs academic award; 1991, siggraphõs steven a.coons award; 1994, the karl v. karlstrom outstanding educator award,the ieee fellow award, and the acm fellow award; 1996, elected to thenational academy of engineering; 1999, ieee james h. mulligan, jr. education medal.