detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9460distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources,summary of a workshop136 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309065405 | doi 10.17226/9460panel on distributed geolibraries, national research councildistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distributed geolibrariesspatial information resourcessummary of a workshoppanel on distributed geolibrariesmapping science committeeboard on earth sciences and resourcescommission on geosciences, environment, and resourcesnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.idistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.support specifically for this project was provided by the national science foundation and thedefense advanced research projects agency. the project also utilized resources provided to themapping science committee by the national imagery and mapping agency, the u.s. geologicalsurvey and the federal geographic data committee, the bureau of transportation statistics, thenational oceanic and atmospheric administration, the bureau of land management, and thebureau of the census. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in thispublication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the agencies that provided support for this project.international standard book number (isbn) 0309065402copies of this report are available frommapping science committeeboard on earth sciences and resourcesnational research council2101 constitution avenue, nwwashington, dc 20418cover: backdrop for the collage is a digital orthophoto of the boston, massachusetts, area. the figure was downloaded from the internet from mit/massgis digital orthophoto project (seeappendix d)copyright 1999 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaiidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panel on distributed geolibrariesmichael f. goodchild (chair) university of california, santa barbaraprudence s. adler, association of research libraries, washington, d.c.barbara p. buttenfield, university of colorado, boulderrobert e. kahn, corporation for national research initiatives, reston,virginiaannette j. krygiel, national defense university, ft. lesley j. mcnair,washington, d.c.harlan j. onsrud, university of maine, orononrc staffthomas m. usselman, senior staff officerjennifer t. estep, administrative assistantiiidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mapping science committeemichael f. goodchild (chair) university of california, santa barbarakaren c. siderelis (vicechair) north carolina center for geographicinformation and analysis, raleighbrian j. l. berry, the university of texas at dallasclifford a. behrens,+ telcordia technologies, morristown, new jerseybarbara p. buttenfield,* university of colorado, bouldernicholas chrisman, university of washington, seattledavid j. coleman, university of new brunswick, frederictonmichael j. folk,* university of illinois, urbanahenry l. garie, new jersey department of environmental protection,trentonbarry glick, carillon consulting, arlington, virginianina sn. lam, louisiana state university, baton rougejoel l. morrison,+ ohio state university, columbusharlan j. onsrud, university of maine, oronoc. stephen smyth, microsoft corporation, redmond, washingtonrex w. tracy, gde systems, inc., san diego, californiaa. keith turner, colorado school of mines, goldenlyna l. wiggins, rutgers university, new brunswick, new jerseynrc staffthomas m. usselman, senior staff officerjennifer t. estep, administrative assistant+ term of appointment began in 1999.* term of appointment ended december 31, 1998.ivdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.board on earth sciences and resourcesj. freeman gilbert (chair) university of california, san diegojohn j. amoruso, amoruso petroleum company, houston, texaspaul b. barton, jr., emeritus, u.s. geological survey, reston, virginiakenneth i. daugherty, marconi information systems, reston, virginiabarbara l. dutrow, louisiana state university, baton rougerichard s. fiske, smithsonian institution, washington, d.c.james m. funk, shell continental companies, houston, texaswilliam l. graf, arizona state university, temperaymond jeanloz, university of california, berkeleysusan m. kidwell, university of chicago, chicago, illinoissusan kieffer, kieffer & woo, inc., palgrave, ontariopamela luttrell, mobil corporation, dallas, texasalexandra navrotsky, university of california, davisdianne r. nielson, utah department of environmental quality, salt lakecityjill d. pasteris, washington university, st. louis, missouriedward m. stolper, california institute of technology, pasadenajohn r. g. townshend, university of maryland, college parkmilton h. ward, cyprus amax minerals company, engelwood, coloradonrc staffanthony r. de souza, directortamara l. dickinson, senior program officeranne m. linn, senior program officerthomas m. usselman, senior program officerverna j. bowen, administrative assistantjennifer t. estep, administrative assistantjudith l. estep, administrative assistantvdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on geosciences, environment, andresourcesgeorge m. hornberger (chair) university of virginia, charlottesvillerichard a. conway, union carbide corporation (retired), s. charleston,west virginiathomas e. graedel, yale university, new haven, connecticutthomas j. graff, environmental defense fund, oakland, californiaeugenia kalnay, university of oklahoma, normandebra knopman, progressive policy institute, washington, d.c.kai n. lee, williams college, williamstown, massachusettsrichard a. meserve, covington & burling, washington, d.c.john b. mooney, jr., j. brad mooney associates, ltd., arlington, virginiahugh c. morris, el dorado gold corporation, vancouver, british columbiah. ronald pulliam, university of georgia, athensmilton russell, university of tennessee, knoxvillethomas c. schelling, university of maryland, college parkandrew r. solow, woods hole oceanographic institution, woods hole,massachusettsvictoria j. tschinkel, landers and parsons, tallahassee, floridaean zen, university of maryland, college parkmary lou zoback, u.s. geological survey, menlo park, californianrc staffrobert m. hamilton, executive directorgregory h. symmes, associate executive directorcraig schiffries, associate executive director for special programsjeanette spoon, administrative and financial officersandi fitzpatrick, administrative associatemarquita smith, administrative assistant/technology analystvidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverseperspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures approved bythe nrc's report review committee. the purpose of this independent review isto provide candid and critical comments that will assist the authors and the nrcin making their published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the reportmeets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the content of the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thankthe following individuals for their participation in the review of this report:christine l. borgmanpresidential chair in information studiesuniversity of california, los angelesedward a. foxdepartment of computer sciencevirginia polytechnic institute and state universityblacksburgkenneth d. gardelsresearch program in environmental planning and geographic informationsystemscollege of environmental designuniversity of california, berkeleyjohn l. kingdepartment of information and computer scienceuniversity of california, irvinexavier r. lopezspatial products/data server divisionoracle corporationnashua, new hampshireacknowledgment of reviewersviidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clifford a. lynchexecutive directorcoalition for networked informationwashington, d.c.hugh c. morrisel dorado gold corporationvancouver, british columbiajane smith pattersonsenior advisor for science and technologyoffice of the governorraleigh, north carolinajames f. williams iidean of librariesuniversity of colorado, boulderwhile the individuals listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this report restssolely with the authoring committee and the nrc.acknowledgment of reviewersviiidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe mapping science committee serves as a focus for external advice tofederal agencies on scientific and technical matters related to spatial datahandling and analysis. the purpose of the committee is to provide advice on thedevelopment of a robust national spatial data infrastructure for making informeddecisions at all levels of government and throughout society in general.the concept of a national spatial data infrastructure (nsdi) was firstadvanced by the mapping science committee (msc) in its 1993 report, toward acoordinated spatial data infrastructure for the nation. subsequent msc reportshave addressed specific components of the nsdi, including partnerships(promoting the national spatial data infrastructure through partnerships, 1994), basic data types (a data foundation for the national spatial datainfrastructure, 1995), and future trends (the future of spatial data andsociety, 1997).when the nsdi was defined in 1993, few users or producers of geospatialdata* made much use of the internet or the worldwide web (www). althoughthere was emphasis on digital geospatial data, the primary method ofdissemination was by magnetic tape. there were virtually no digital onlinecatalogs of geospatial data or methods for searching for data across computernetworks. moreover, since most useful geospatial data were produced by a smallnumber of federal agencies, there was little problem locating the appropriatesource. today, the www has grown into an enormously successful tool and hashad a profound impact on the entire environment for geospatial data acquisition.at the same time, it has presented a growing problem as the number of potentialsuppliers has mushroomed, in its inability to deal effectively with the task of* the report follows evolving practice in the nsdi community by adopting the termgeospatial to refer to maps and images of the earth's surface and near surface and theirdigital equivalents. the terms geographic and spatial are often used almost synonymouslybut are avoided here.prefaceixdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discovering what geoinformation exists and of locating an appropriate source.this report can be understood therefore as an updating of the msc's conceptof the nsdi in the era of the www. in organizing this effort and producing thisreport, the committee is expressing its view that the www has added a new andradically different dimension to its earlier conception of nsdi, one that is muchmore user oriented, much more effective in maximizing the value of the nation'sgeospatial data assets, and much more cost effective as a data disseminationmechanism. distributed geolibraries reflect the same basic thinking about thefuture of geospatial data, which emphasizes sharing, universal access, andproductivity but in the context of a technology that was almost impossible toanticipate prior to 1993.a panel under the aegis of the msc convened a workshop to explore thefollowing topics:ł development of a vision for geospatial data dissemination and access in2010. comparison of current efforts in digital library research, clearinghousedevelopment, and other data distribution and search activities. suggestion of short and longterm research and development needed toachieve the vision. identification of the policy and institutional issues, particularly forconvergence of efforts to realize the vision.by clarifying the vision of distributed geolibraries and identifying some ofthe key issues, it is hoped that the workshop and this report will provide acommon focus for the many efforts already under way and will stimulate new andexpanded efforts. the workshop was only a first step in this process, and manyissues remain to be clarified by further discussions, research, and development ofprototypes.the report makes extensive use of the traditional library as a framework fordiscussion because it is so familiar and well understood. undoubtedly, muchfuture work in researching and developing distributed geolibraries will occurwithin this framework,prefacexdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but the framework will also be constraining in some respects. exactly howdistributed geolibraries develop and how closely they follow the metaphor of thelibrary remain to be seen. moreover, the metaphor is used selectively, since manyof the functions of libraries that may have no equivalent in distributedgeolibraries were not discussed at the workshop, and may not be relevant.the workshop began on monday, june 15, 1998, and followed the agendagiven in appendix c. workshop participants were selected in such a way that allmajor sectors of the nsdi community and geospatial data activity wererepresented by their respective stakeholders, with an appropriate balance amongthem. of the participants, 35 percent were from federal and state government, 39percent were from academia, 12 percent were from the private sector, and 14percent were from other sectors (e.g., associations). see appendix a for a list ofparticipants. another way of considering the participants is by their primaryfocusš44 percent with a geospatial background, 36 percent from computingscience and engineering, 12 percent from the library sciences, and 8 percent''other."the panel on distributed geolibraries coordinated the preparation of a seriesof white papers in advance of the workshop to stimulate discussion on certain keyissues. these were posted on the www several weeks prior to the workshop andwere available to participants and others who happened across them. titles of thewhite papers for the workshop are given in appendix b.this report reflects the consensus of the panel regarding the discussions thattook place at the workshop, the issues that arose there and in the white papers,and the workshop's broader context.prefacexidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences. the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering. the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institutedicine. the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council. www.nationalacademies.orgxiidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 1 characteristics and benefits of distributed geolibraries 2 the national spatial data infrastructure 2 contents, services, and functions of distributedgeolibraries 3 architecture of distributed geolibraries 4 intellectual property issues 5 organizational issues 51 introduction 7 examples 8 emergency response 8 housing relocation 10 public health 11 natural resource planning 12 a common theme 132 a vision for distributed geolibraries 15 recent developments 15 a library vision 19 defining a distributed geolibrary 20 a distributed library 20 geoinformation 22 characteristics of a distributed geolibrary 25 distributed geolibraries and the nsdi 28 distributed geolibraries and digital earth 32contentsxiiidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3 the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context 35 local focus 36 library considerations 37 the library as an institution 37 economic considerations 38 distributed geolibraries and the existinglibrary institution 39 data, information, and knowledge 40 intellectual property concerns 42 uses of data, information, and knowledge 43 access 45 summary and additional issues 474 services and functions 53 library services 53 distributed geolibrary services 55 the need for distributed geolibrary services 56 services as collections of function 57 necessary distributed geolibrary functions 58 search by geographical location 58 search by place name 60 search by subject theme or time period 61 item display and description 62 collection creation and maintenance 63 searching over distributed assets 65 integration, analysis, and manipulation 66 assisting users 69 assessment and feedback 69 options for the delivery of distributed geolibraryservices 705 building distributed geolibraries 73 requirements 73 standards and protocols 75 data sets 77 georeferencing 79contentsxivdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. cataloging 80 visualization 81 knowledge construction 82 research needs 82 institutional needs 85 measuring progress 876 conclusions 89 revisiting the rationale for distributed geolibraries 89 distributed geolibraries in context 90 references 93 appendixes appendix a: workshop participants 99appendix b: contributed white papers 103appendix c: workshop agenda 105appendix d: example prototypes 109appendix e: biographical sketches of panel members 117contentsxvdistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvidistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summarya distributed geolibrary is a vision for the future. it would permit users toquickly and easily obtain all existing information available about a place that isrelevant to a defined need. it is modeled on the operations of a traditional library,updated to a digital networked world, and focused on something that has neverbeen possible in the traditional library: the supply of information in response to ageographically defined need. it would integrate the resources of the internet andthe world wide web into a simple mechanism for searching and retrievinginformation relevant to a wide range of problems, including natural disasters,emergencies, community planning, and environmental quality. a geolibrary is adigital library filled with geoinformationšinformation associated with a distinctarea or footprint on the earth's surfacešand for which the primary searchmechanism is place. a geolibrary is distributed if its users, services, metadata,and information assets can be integrated among many distinct locations.this report presents the findings of the workshop on distributedgeolibraries: spatial information resources, convened by the mapping sciencecommittee of the national research council in june 1998. the report is a visionfor distributed geolibraries, not a blueprint. developing a distributed geolibraryinvolves a series of technical challenges as well as institutional and social issues,which are addressed relative to the vision.executive summary1distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.characteristics and benefits of distributedgeolibrariesa wide variety of human activities could benefit from the services ofdistributed geolibraries. the activities include many for which the timelyprovision of information could minimize loss of life or result in more timely andeffective use of existing information resources.the contents of a distributed geolibrary are not limited to informationnormally associated with maps or images of the earth's surface but include anyinformation that can be associated with a geographic location. in this sense thevision thus extends far beyond the context of the national spatial datainfrastructure (nsdi).new technological developments make it possible for people to gather datagermane to their own needs more readily, extract data from online and otherelectronic repositories, develop the information products they need, use theproducts for decision making, and contribute their locally gatheredgeoinformation and derived products to libraries or other repositories. developingthe technical and institutional means to support incorporation of local knowledgeinto networked repositories presents a novel challenge.although many projects currently exhibit elements of the vision ofdistributed geolibraries, the lack of a clear statement of that vision impedescoordination and leads to duplication of effort. a clear statement can provide asense of common purpose.new technological initiatives such as the next generation internet andinternet ii are likely to provide extensions to internet and world wide web(www) protocols and ordersofmagnitude increases in bandwidth. many ofthese developments are expected to be relevant to distributed geolibraries.the national spatial data infrastructurethe vision of the nsdi as expressed by the mapping science committee in1993 (nrc, 1993) did not anticipate theexecutive summary2distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enormous impact and potential of the internet and www. by emphasizing theproblems of production of digital geoinformation, it underemphasized theimportance of effective processes of dissemination to users. user communitiesare growing rapidly and are likely to grow even more rapidly if currentdifficulties associated with finding geoinformation on the internet can beaddressed.distributed geolibraries provide a useful framework for discussion of theissues of dissemination associated with the nsdi in addition to organization andaccess issues. the vision is readily extendible to a global context.an essential component of a distributed geolibrary is a comprehensivegazetteer, linking named places and geographic locations. a national gazetteerwould be a valuable addition to the framework data sets of the nsdi. theseframework data sets are being coordinated by the federal geographic datacommittee (fgdc), which also has the responsibility for associated standardsand protocols. production and maintenance of the national gazetteer could bethrough the national mapping division of the u.s. geological survey (usgs) incollaboration with other agencies and could be an extension of the usgs'sgeographic names information system.contents, services, and functions of distributedgeolibrariesa distributed geolibrary would allow users (and computers) to specify arequirement, search across the resources of the internet for suitable information,assess the fitness of that information for use, retrieve and integrate it with otherinformation, and perform various forms of manipulation and analysis. adistributed geolibrary would thus integrate the browsing functions of the wwwwith those of geographic information systems and related technologies.in addition, a distributed geolibrary would support collaborative work, suchas multidisciplinary research by teams, decision making by groups ofstakeholders, and classroom projects byexecutive summary3distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.groups of students. it would provide mechanisms for capturing the knowledgethat results from such work and making it accessible to others as appropriate. itcould also provide mechanisms for storing and archiving such knowledge.many important applications of distributed geolibraries are best located inthe field, using portable systems and wireless communications. delivery ofservices to the field is important in emergency management, agriculture, naturalresource management, and many other applications.the united states possesses vast archives of information that could beincorporated into distributed geolibraries and made accessible to users whoseneed for information is defined by geographic location. linking much of thisinformation to geographic locationšin other words, to transform it togeoinformationšwould be valuable within a geolibrary context.significant research problems will have to be solved to enable the vision ofdistributed geolibraries. research needs include problems of indexing,visualization, scaling, automated search and abstracting, and data conflation. inaddition, there are a variety of social and institutional issues that need furtherinvestigation. research on these issues targeted to improve access to integratedgeoinformation might be pursued by the national science foundation and otheragencies sponsoring basic science, as well as by the national mapping divisionof the usgs, and the national imagery and mapping agency.architecture of distributed geolibrariesthere are several alternative architectures for distributed geolibraries,including a single enterprise sponsored by a wellresourced agency, analogous to anational library; a network of enterprises with their own sponsors, analogous to anetwork or federation of libraries; and a loose network held together by sharedprotocols, analogous to the www.executive summary4distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.intellectual property issuesthe development of distributed geolibraries will need to consider issuesrelated to intellectual property rights. these need to be considered in the broaderinternational debates about the nature of electronic information and databases asintellectual property. a distinction with respect to intellectual property rightsneeds to be drawn between raw data and knowledge works as they appear verydifferently from the perspective of the functions and services of a library. strongarguments are presented for focusing distributed geolibraries on knowledge,rather than merely providing access to raw data.organizational issueswhile traditional production of geospatial data has been relativelycentralized, the vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly basedrestructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination ofgeospatial data, one that is much more bottomup, decentralized, and voluntary.many prototypes that include elements of a distributed geolibrary alreadyexist, but it will take many years to realize the full vision, and it will be importantto be able to measure and monitor progress. the vision of distributed geolibrarieshas distinct aspects that may not be addressed effectively by current programsaimed at digital libraries in general. the success of a distributed geolibrary islargely dependent on the ability to integrate information available about a place.that ability is severely impeded today by differences in formats and standards,access mechanisms, and organizational structures. integration is a formidableproblem for today's users of geospatial data.executive summary5distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary6distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionthe internet and world wide web (www) provide users withunprecedented access to information resources. in many ways they emulate thefunctions of traditional libraries, by making it possible to search and locateinformation using simple tools. but the potential is far greater in areas such aselectronic commerce and in supporting new ways of finding information that gofar beyond the services of the traditional library. one such possibility is thedistributed geolibrary, the subject of this report. a distributed geolibrary wouldallow its users to search the resources of the www for information about aplace,1 to evaluate the information, and to retrieve and work with it asappropriate.a geolibrary is a digital library filled with geoinformation and for whichthe primary search mechanism is place. geoinformation is informationassociated with a distinct area or footprint on the earth's surface. ageolibrary is distributed if its users, services, metadata, and informationassets can be integrated among many distinct locations. chapter 2develops a more detailed vision for geolibraries.this report begins with a series of four examples to illustrate the range andimportance of the practical problems that could be addressed by the services ofdistributed geolibraries. the following1 the term place is used throughout this report to refer to a location of interest on ornear the earth's surface. it might be a single point or an extended area or a volume aboveor below the surface; it might be defined by name or by coordinates, and it might be exactor illdefined.introduction7distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chapters discuss the full vision, social and institutional context, and steps thatwill need to be taken to make distributed geolibraries a reality. because this is thefirst discussion of the topic, it falls short of a complete blueprint, and much moreexploration will be needed. but this report is perhaps the first step in thatdirection.place is a common theme in many events, activities, emergencies, andissues. terrorist acts like the world trade center bombing and natural disasterslike hurricane andrew affect specific locations on the earth's surface and call forrelief efforts that must occur quickly and that are sharply focused in space.accurate knowledge of the place at which an emergency occurs and ofsurrounding conditions is of critical importance in dispatching ambulances andother forms of relief. place is important in learning about the world and inunderstanding its environment.distributed geolibraries are intended to provide new kinds of placebasedinformation services that are not available from the traditional library or from thecurrent www. the user of a distributed geolibrary should not be required to bean information retrieval expert, to be proficient in computer technology, or to livein a metropolitan area. the distributed geolibrary envisioned in this report couldbe an information service for every americanš for students and teachers,scientists, community members, government officials, business men and women,and familiesšby allowing ready access to available information about any placeon the earth's surface. the following hypothetical examples illustrate some of thepotential uses and the critical importance of distributed geolibraries.examplesemergency responsea tanker truck carrying hazardous chemicals is traveling on the highwayaround a major metropolitan area. just as the driver approaches a bridge his truckcollides with the car in front of him. the truck flips, pinning both drivers insidetheir vehicles andintroduction8distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rupturing the tanker. from the debris a plume slowly rises from the chemicalspill and is carried by the wind into the surrounding neighborhood. a liquidchemical drips over the bridge into the water below.to deal with the emergency, metropolitan officials need to alert schools,residences, and businesses in the neighborhoods nearby. there has been a recentbuilding boom, and new roads have been constructed. local maps are out of date.evacuations must be discussed and planned; routes need to be determined andreassessed; and the effects of weather on the plume need to be monitoredcontinuously. will it drift to the nearby airport as well? meanwhile the spill mustbe contained, the traffic rerouted from the accident scene, and the way cleared formedical assistance. what human health hazards might be related to thecontaminant? hospitals and medical centers in the affected area must be put onalert.dealing with the potential contamination of the river requires considerableattention as well. what is the current rate of flow and level of the water? who andwhat will be affected? information is immediately required on towns, public andprivate sites, and beaches and harbors along the river. what access to these sitesis possible? how can containment be achieved? the fastrunning river passesmany small communities and runs between two states. data from many sourcesmust be integrated and used in order for officials to deal with the effects of theaccident. other needs will emerge after the emergency is contained, such asdealing with the effects on wildlife habitat along the river and the fishing intereststhat flourish in the area.but the immediate information needs are critical. although emergencyofficials have access to their own local sources, they know some of their ownmaps are not current, so other data should also be checked. and the small townsalong the river have limited information resources. the officials need servicesthat allow them to access and browse available imagery, thematic maps, currentpublic and private data resources, and even services available throughcommercial subscriptions. they need to reach other librariesintroduction9distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and online sites that specialize in key information, including contaminants. theyneed to identify personnel in other cities who have dealt with similar spills. inshort, they need access to the best information available to cope with theemergency.information resources through distributed geolibraries could greatly assistrapid response to such emergencies and longerterm efforts aimed at preventionand mitigation. moreover, it is important that information be available where it isneeded most, which in many instances will be at the location of the emergency orin a local command center. the tools to access and work with information mayhave to operate in difficult environments using specialized field computers(palmtops, portables, or pen computers) and wireless communication. newsensors may be brought to the site, supplying data that will have to be integratedwith existing data. decision makers will want access to powerful aids for decisionsupport and for rapid simulation of future scenarios.housing relocationa family is relocating to southern california. they want to find a home in asuitable environment. they are concerned about earthquake hazards and wantinformation that might help them avoid vulnerable areas and fault lines. afterhaving identified several possible home sites, they further refine their search byexcluding undesirable areasšsuch as highcrime districts or hazardous materialsstorage sites. they have read newspaper stories about brush fires. has there been ahistory of such brush fires in any of the neighborhoods they are considering?they look at maps for the locations of churches, schools, shops, and parks.special medical services are needed for one family member. what services areclose? they consider distances to workplaces. they also worry about the wisdomof such a large investment. will their home retain value? what are theneighborhood's economic trends?the family wants to know about the place where they will live, work, andplay. as responsible citizens they want to be informed about issues affecting theirneighborhood. if such information is readily accessible, it could make asignificantintroduction10distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.difference in their choice of where to live. today they might not have theresources, skills, or special education to find the answers to all of these questions,whereas most of this information would be available through the services ofdistributed geolibraries. in the future, however, they may be able to accessinformation using wireless links directly to their vehicle as they explore potentialneighborhoods.public healtha researcher begins the task of analyzing the association of environment anddisease in a particular urban area. she needs access to housing information andpopulation characteristics, as well as health and medical histories in thegeographic area of interest. she needs to examine health care facilities, types ofbuildings, disease rates, even summer heat fatalities, as well as environmentalaspects, all over several decades. incidents with contaminants and pollutants inthe area must be located, assessed, and factored into her research. finding theinformation will require searches through countless government institutions,media reports, and scientific journals.she begins her work by visiting the local library; contacting responsiblelocal, state, and federal agencies, talking with colleagues; and using searchengines on the www. finding the appropriate information, dealing with issuesof confidentiality of health data, and putting the information into a form that canbe integrated with other data about a given place can be time consuming;eventual success depends heavily on her background, technical training, andexperience. paradoxically, a request that can be expressed in very simple terms("give me everything available about environment and disease in this place")turns out to be enormously and unreasonably complex, using the limited toolsavailable today, and to consume the vast majority of the resources available to theproject. better tools for data access and management would allow more time tobe spent on data analysis.introduction11distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.natural resource planningthe year is 2010. more than 1,000 summer homes have been built within 10miles of the boundaries of yellowstone national park, grand teton nationalpark, and the bridgerteton wilderness area. numerous pets have been killed bygrizzly bears, wolves, and coyotes, particularly in the early summer of 2009,when heavy snowpacks kept many wild animals from moving into the highcountry. the conflicts were capped by the deaths of a brother and sister, ages 7and 8, following an attack by a grizzly bear, which was subsequently killed bywildlife authorities.the national park service and the fish and wildlife service are concernedabout everincreasing conflicts between wildlife and humans. pressure from newresidents and from ranchers has led to the death of 20 percent of the reintroducedwolves. counties, once hungry for the economic growth brought by theconstruction of luxury summer homes, are now concerned about degradation ofwater quality and the demands of new residents that their assets be protected fromwildlife. fire management has become an increasing concern at multiple levels ofgovernment; officials recognize the need for frequent exposure of forests to firesin order to reduce fuel load, but with greatly increased private property near theforest they have found it increasingly difficult to allow fires to burn without riskto structures.local and federal agencies recognize the need to draw on common dataresources that describe terrain, vegetation, and wildlife habitat in order to solvecommon problems of resource management. these data must be integrated acrossmany different themes, topics, and disciplines and must be readily available tousers needing to assess and plan effectively based on place.the distributed geolibraries available to these stakeholders in 2010 allowthem to assemble quickly information in the archives of the various levels ofgovernment, nongovernmental organizations, and citizen groups that are relevantto an issue centered at a particular place on the earth's surface. throughdistributed geolibraries, decision makers also may learn quickly whatintroduction12distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information is not available elsewhere and therefore may need to be collected.additional tools support the decisions and choices that need to be made. withthese new tools, development of longrange plans that allow growth whileminimizing conflicts with fire and wildlife is progressing after long delays.several developments have now been completed in places where fire and wildlifeconflicts are minimized and where drainage and sewage management haveprovided excellent protection of water quality.a common themea common theme in these examples is the current inability to locate andintegrate information quickly and simply based on place. although place is thedefinitive element in many issues, it is currently easier to find information about anamed individual, an agency, or a field of scientific knowledge than about a placeon the earth's surface. this report explores opportunities that will improve ourability to find, access, integrate, and use information by exploiting thetechnologies of the internet, the www, geographic information systems, anddigital computers.finding 1a wide variety of human activities could benefit from the services ofdistributed geolibraries. they include many where the timely provision ofinformation could minimize loss of life or result in more timely and effectiveuse of existing information resources and others where the costs of baddecisions could be avoided.distributed geolibraries could provide information services directedspecifically at the needs of communities. in a speech given at the brookingsinstitution on september 2, 1998, vice president gore argued that increasedpublic access to information through mechanisms such as those discussed in thisreport will put "more control, more information, more decisionmaking powerinto the hands of families, communities, and regions, to give them all the freedomand flexibility they need to reclaim their uniqueintroduction13distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.place in the world." the services of distributed geolibraries that are discussed andelaborated in this report could enhance education, improve the quality of daytoday living, and provide economic benefits. they could support scientific researchby furnishing new tools for search, analysis, data fusion, and visualization. theycould provide the means by which officials cope with emergencies, addressissues of health and social services, troubleshoot crime, and accomplish urbanplanning. they could help provide economic benefits by enabling people toresearch, manage, market, and grow their business ventures.many of the components of distributed geolibraries already exist or are beingdeveloped, and many existing www sites offer some limited form of distributedgeolibrary services. this report goes beyond the present to articulate a vision ofwhat might be, with the objective of providing a common target and of pullingdisparate threads together into a unified effort to achieve that vision in the not toodistant future.introduction14distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2a vision for distributed geolibrariesrecent developmentsthe past two decades have seen rapid developments in informationtechnology. hardware components have become smaller and more powerful,enabling the development of the personal computer and bringing the ability toprocess information to field environments that are far removed from the officeand desktop. software has grown more sophisticated, empowering individualswith little technical training to make effective use of computers in ways thatwould have been inconceivable 25 years ago. developments in wirelesscommunications allow networked access virtually anywhere. most recently,applications of the internet and world wide web (www) have captured thepopular imagination and spawned entire industries of electronic commerce andinformation dissemination.these developments have in turn driven massive changes in the way societydisseminates and accesses information of various types. the role that informationplays in everyday activities is changing, as people come to rely on access to uptotheminute information on weather, markets, politics, and entertainment via theinternet. changes seem especially challenging and profound in the area ofinformation that is tied or related to a geographic place, that is, a location at ornear the surface of the earth. millions of people access such www sites asmapquest (www.mapquest.com) or microsoft's terraservera vision for distributed geolibraries15distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(www.terraserver.com) each day, which offer maps, driving directions, satelliteimages, and other forms of raw or processed information and related services (seeappendix d for examples). similar changes are reflected in the proliferation ofgeospatial data clearinghouses, digital spatial data libraries, geographicinformation system software, and new highresolution imaging satellites.several factors help explain the high level of interest in the internet andwww as technologies for disseminating these particular types of informationand related services. first, the methods of storage and dissemination oftraditional productsšpaper maps, atlases, and photographic imagesšarecumbersome in comparison to digital data products and often require specialcabinets and awkwardly shaped shipping packages. digital methods make it aseasy to store or send a map as it is to handle text. second, geoinformation is oftenrelated to a specialized interest, and it may be hard to justify maintaining anextensive collection in a local library or bookstore; the www is ideally suited tothe distribution of such information in response to specialized needs because thecosts of maintaining a server are low, and universal access to the internet meansthat only one server is needed. finally, geoinformation needs to be timely, but itcan take years for a paper map to be produced, printed, and disseminated; thewww allows users to access information as soon as it is posted.at the same time there are potential disadvantages to use of the www as amechanism for storing and disseminating geoinformation that will have to beaddressed. little of the information now available via the www has beensubjected to the mechanisms that ensure quality in traditional publication andlibrary acquisition: peer review, editing, and proofreading. there are no wwwequivalents of the library's collection specialists who monitor library content. butit is easy to be misled into believing that quality control problems of the wwwand distributed geolibraries are somehow different from conventional ones. usersof distributed geolibraries will tend to trust data that come froma vision for distributed geolibraries16distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reputable institutions, with documented assurances of quality, and to mistrust dataof uncertain origins, just as they do today.a common theme in all of these efforts to exploit the internet and the wwwhas been the enabling role of technology; many people with an interest ingeoinformation and an awareness of the potential of the www and relatedtechnologies like the java programming language have begun exploring theiruse. five years after the first explosion of interest in the www is an appropriatetime to pause and ask some basic questions:ł is there a vision that drives the efforts to build clearinghouses and otherwwwbased access and dissemination mechanisms forgeoinformation? what need are these efforts satisfying, from the perspectives of the usersand producers of geoinformation and the providers of related services? what problems impede progress, and on what problems should efforts beexpended? highpriority research needs exist? how should public resources best be expended, and what new forms ofcollaboration are needed?the mapping science committee convened a workshop1 in june 1998 toexplore these issues. the workshop on distributed geolibraries: spatialinformation resources was designed to explore longterm visions of how ongoingactivities may evolve, to explore possible development strategies, and to identifycommon needs (see finding 2). workshop participants were selected to representa number of communities with interests in these issues:1 the workshop (and this report) focused on the discovery, access, integration, and useof geoinformation. other technical issues (e.g., archiving, quality control and assurance,standards development, telecommunications and computational capabilities), althoughcritical in the development of the distributed geolibrary concept, were not extensivelyconsidered.a vision for distributed geolibraries17distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.experts in dissemination of geoinformation; leaders of current activities;specialists in the relevant technologies; and specialists in the associatedinstitutional, legal, social, and economic issues. a list of participants is providedin appendix a.finding 2although many projects currently exhibit elements of the vision ofdistributed geolibraries, the lack of a clear statement of that vision impedescoordination and leads to duplication of effort. a clear statement can providea sense of common purpose.prior to the workshop, participants were asked to contribute a "white paper"on issues they found relevant to the topic. these papers, which provided usefulbackground to the meeting, are listed in appendix b and are available on thewww.this report was prepared by the panel that organized the workshop (a list ofpanel members appears in the beginning of this report). thus, it reflects theconsensus of the panel, regarding the discussions that took place at the workshop,the issues that arose there and in the white papers, and the workshop's broadercontext.the workshop did not attempt to bound the scope of distributed geolibrariesprecisely, and even if that were possible it would have been unreasonable toexpect it in a workshop of such limited duration. many basic questions remainunanswered, and this report should be read as a first effort in this area and as astimulus for further work and discussion, rather than as a precise blueprint.the workshop participants were almost entirely from the united states, andthis report necessarily adopts a u.s. perspective. nevertheless it is hoped that itwill be read by nonu.s. researchers and developers interested in distributedgeolibraries and that it will help to achieve a greater degree of convergence inresearch and development at the international level.a vision for distributed geolibraries18distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a library visionthe organizers of the workshop chose to frame the discussion by referenceto the functions, services, and institutional arrangements of the library, for twomajor reasons: first, to engage the library community, with its long experience inproviding access to information, in the development of a vision for a new kind oflibrary and, second, to provide a familiar and concrete starting point for thediscussion. it is possible that libraries will be the principal means wherebycitizens gain access to the services of the distributed geolibraries of the future; itis also possible that libraries will play no significant part in that process.the metaphor of the library is powerful because it immediately suggests anumber of important issues. for example, one way to think of a library is as astorehouse of the intellectual works of society, and millions of people from allwalks of life have contributed works to our current library system. can we expectto see a similar diversity of contributors in the distributed geolibraries of ourfuture? what incentives are needed to motivate people to make their worksaccessible? if a library exists to serve a community, its first responsibility shouldbe to provide the information needed by the community. how important isgeospatial information about the community itself, produced perhaps within thecommunity, compared to information about areas outside the community perhapsproduced by others? will a local geolibrary, responsible to a local community,acquire and make available very different works and databases than a universitybased geolibrary, state geolibrary, federal agency geolibrary, or a privategeolibrary?there are many types of libraries and much variation in the functions theyperform. some of the comments in this report refer to all types of libraries, andsome are more appropriate for the research library, the institution maintained by auniversity, or similar organization for the use of its community of scholars. ingeneral, it is the research library that provides the model of services discussed inthis report.a vision for distributed geolibraries19distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.however, the metaphor of the library should not be taken too far, and not allaspects of the operation of a library will be useful in envisioning distributedgeolibraries. many of these will be generic and of no specific relevance to thegeoinformation that is the focus of distributed geolibraries. such issues havealready been discussed at length in the library and digital library literatures, andno attempt is made to replicate those discussions here. for example, it is assumedthat distributed geolibraries will need to address issues of archiving andpreservation (particularly serious issues given the rate of technological change inthe digital world), but these are generic to all libraries and are not discussed atlength in this report.defining a distributed geolibrarythree ideas help to define the concept of a distributed geolibrary: it isdistributed, modeled on the concept of a library, and concerned with informationabout the earth. the next three sections discuss these ideas in detail and build anoutline of a vision for distributed geolibraries.a distributed librarythe term distributed refers to the locations of the physical and functionalparts of the library and the locations of its users. in a traditional library thevarious stages of putting useful information into the hands of users occur largelyin one place, in the physical structure known as the library. books arrive in anacquisitions department; they are cataloged by specialists employed by the libraryin a cataloging department, placed on shelves within the library in locationsdesigned to make it easy for patrons to browse through holdings on similartopics, retrieved by librarians and users, and signed out of the library at thecirculation desk operated by a circulation department. because these functionsoccur in one institution, it is sometimes difficult for an observer to separatea vision for distributed geolibraries20distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.them and difficult to distinguish the functions of the library from its physicalassets.in today's digital world it is possible for functions to occur in multiplelocations, held together and coordinated by communications networks like theinternet. catalog staff may work in locations far removed from the referencelibrarians who eventually use the catalog to help users find the information theyneed. moreover, today's technology is advancing to the point where patrons (orusers) can employ library services to combine data sets located in differentplaces. for many purposes the internet provides almost infinite connectivity, suchthat a user may conceive of a single database that is in reality distributed overmany different servers under different jurisdictions. users have the option ofprocessing data on their own computers or sending data to remote locationswhere processing capabilities are more powerful. wireless technologies providefor communication to virtually everywhere, and computing technology can nowbe packaged into electronic units that are readily transportable and in some caseswearable.libraries have responded to this new networked environment by establishingcoordinated, collaborative, and multiinstitutional relationships. the librarybuilding no longer houses all of the services it provides to its users; instead, theinstitution of the library obtains those services in whatever ways maximizeeffectiveness and minimize costs, by using resources in the building or from amyriad of sites distributed around the globe.traditionally, libraries have made a clear distinction between general andspecial collections, using the latter term to refer to assets that need specialtreatment or that are unique in some way to a particular library, such as thepapers of a particular literary or scientific figure. maps and images form specialcollections in many libraries, in part because they are difficult to handle and inpart because much of the collection may be unique. the transition to a digitalworld will mean that many of the difficulties of handling special mediadisappear, allowing such collections to become part of a library's informationmainstreama vision for distributed geolibraries21distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(although working with maps and images will always demand specially designedinterfaces and large monitors because of their visual content and broad bandwidthand powerful processors to deal with voluminous data). but the uniqueness of thespecial collection will become increasingly important in the digital world, inwhich any item in any collection is potentially accessible from anywhere.in this report the term custodian refers to the person or agency responsiblefor maintenance of a given data set. the custodian may be far removed from theserver on which the data set is mounted and from which it is disseminated, butnevertheless it is the custodian who holds the definitive version of the data andupdates it to account for changes. the custodian may have some form ofresponsibility for qualityšfor example, the custodian may decide which data areto be acquired and held based in part on quality or may provide assurances ofquality to users. the function of a custodian is different from that of arepository or archive, which is where data are preserved in static form.geoinformationgeoinformation is information that is specific to some part of the earth'ssurface or near surface. it includes maps, of course, which abstract and presentinformation about the locations of phenomena on the surface; it also includesimages from the air or space (aerial photos or remotely sensed images) thatcapture the appearance of the surface using energy (either visible or invisible)radiated from it in some part of the electromagnetic spectrum. such data wereearlier defined as geospatial. in addition, geoinformation includes the contents ofguidebooks, reports on specific areas, data sets with a geographic dimension, andany other information assets that serve to differentiate one geographic area fromanother. finally, it includes information about the atmosphere above the surface,the geology below the surface, and the oceans that cover twothirds of the planet'ssurface.all of these information assets are characterized by having some form ofassociated geographic footprint, a boundary defininga vision for distributed geolibraries22distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the geographic extent of the information, which is the defining characteristic ofgeoinformation as the term is used here. a map sheet has a footprint defined byits edges, whereas a guidebook to moscow has a footprint of the city limits (orthe city and the surrounding region). a photograph might have a footprint,defined as the area shown in the photograph; a piece of music (georgegershwin's "an american in paris," for example) might also be associated withsome particular location on the earth's surface. moreover, the footprint provides auseful way of finding information. just as author, subject, and title are ways offinding information assets in a traditional library, so the footprint ofgeoinformation gives the library the ability to identify all those assets that fit agiven geographic query. for example, if information assets in the library had afootprint, it would be possible to identify those assets relevant to a user wantinginformation on the state of missouri, or the caspian sea, by determining whetherthe footprint of the asset matched the footprint of the query in whole or in part. itwould be possible to ask the library to provide all available information about agiven place that is relevant to a defined need, in other words "everything relevantabout there."while the space of a search based on author or subject is discrete,geographic space is continuous and multidimensional, and there is no limit to thenumber of distinct, unique footprints that exist. any degree of overlap is possiblebetween a footprint and a query, making search by place inherently more complexthan search by other keys. geographic location is sometimes recorded in thesubject fields of library catalogs (for example, the melvyl catalog of theuniversity of california library system includes a placerelated subject in about30 percent of all records), and it is included in the dublin core standard(purl.org/dc). but distributed geolibraries would prioritize place as the primarykey and thus would require that footprints be explicit in all cases.two distinct methods are available for specification of footprints. an area ofinterest may correspond to one or more place names, or recognized terms fordescribing location. alternatively, the area may be defined by one or moreboundinga vision for distributed geolibraries23distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.coordinates, in some recognized system such as latitude and longitude. to becompatible, the two methods require the services of a gazetteer,  or an index thatrelates named places to coordinates. gazetteers are commonly used to indexatlases, though as the name suggests they typically include only places whosenames have some level of official recognition.the issues surrounding place as a search key are to some extent similar tothose surrounding time, or date. all of the examples in chapter 1 require searchby place, in many cases qualified by relevant intervals or points in time; perhapsit is possible to devise parallel examples that would require search by time,possibly qualified by place, to motivate the development of chronolibraries. similarly, an important but less compelling case can be made for a threedimensional approach to space, based on examples of data that relate to pointssubstantially above or below the earth's surface.spatial keys are not unique to geoinformation, and there are parallels toother domains that may be useful and informative in the development ofdistributed geolibraries. for example, the hytime hypermedia documentstructuring language (newcombe et al., 1991) includes standards for specificationof spatial windows in arbitrary coordinate systems within documents.geoinformation can be cumbersome for the traditional library because itcomes in many forms, on different media, and because there is no simple basisfor cataloging it. instead, map libraries and other stores of geoinformation havehad to maintain expensive and highly trained staffs to help users navigate throughtheir information resources, and users have had to look to numerous sources tomeet their geoinformation needs. users of geoinformation were often highlytrained experts, knowledgeable about sources, data quality, acronyms, and othertools of the geoinformation trade. in short, there has been no way for an averageperson to address a library with the query "tell me everything you have about thatplace that is relevant to me." yet such queries are common and immenselyimportant to a widea vision for distributed geolibraries24distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.range of human activities, as the examples in the opening chapter illustrate.although it is helpful to think of a distributed geolibrary as a container ofthe digital equivalent of maps, that metaphor may also be unduly limiting.geoinformation is not restricted to information that is static, or twodimensional,but includes information on the dynamic processes and changes happening at aplace, and threedimensional data about the atmosphere and subsurface. but asnoted earlier, the two horizontal dimensions are most likely to be the basis forsearch, possibly refined by time and the vertical dimension.characteristics of a distributed geolibraryone way to think about a geolibrary (in a world of paper documents) is toimagine walking into a library building and being confronted not with a cardcatalog, or its modern digital equivalent, but with a giant physical globe. supposewhat is needed is information about a particular part of patagonia, the southernextremity of argentina, for a project on charles darwin, who visited patagonia,or on the people of welsh descent who live there, or on the works of author brucechatwin, who wrote about his travels there. the library user finds patagonia onthe globe, points to it, and asks a nearby librarian about the relevant assets of thelibrary. some minutes later the librarian produces a list of those assets, withenough information to allow the user to evaluate their importance to the project.after the user narrows the list, the librarian disappears again, to return with therequested holdings.several aspects of this concept ensure that it has remained in the realms offiction for as long as libraries have existed. some aspects are technological. thereis no way to build a physical globe that can be repositioned at will or magnifiedon demand to display greater and greater detail. zooming would need to bepossible over several orders of magnitude; a large globe might reasonably beexpected to show features on the earth's surface that are 10 km in size, includinglarge lakes and large cities, but not features as small as a neighborhood; but theuser of a geolibrarya vision for distributed geolibraries25distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.might well want to consider a single city block, which requires a resolution finerthan 10 m, or a factor of 1,000 finer than the initial coarse view. such resolutionsare increasingly common in geospatial data.in addition to resolution, a physical geolibrary would be difficult to buildbecause many of its users would not be able to find their areas of interest on theglobe. not every user would be able to reposition and zoom to identify his or herown neighborhood, without the assistance of an expert. there are not enoughresources to support the necessary expert librarians and no way to transformautomatically a specified location into a list of assets. finally, there is no way toshelve the many different types of information so that they can be easily retrievedand so that two sources of information on similar topics or areas are located neareach other in the library. in other words, a physical geolibrary cannot be built.in a digital world, however, all of these objections disappear, apparentlywithout exception. it is possible to present the digital library user with a pictureof a globe; search for locations by name, address, or any other suitable andconvenient method; allow repositioning and zooming; search distributed archivesfor information assets whose footprints match the query, present them to the userin sufficient detail to permit evaluation; and deliver them for further examinationand analysis. but although a geolibrary is possible in principle, there arecountless technical, practical, economic, and institutional problems that will haveto be overcome. moreover, it is unclear how a geolibrary would deal with issuesof intellectual property and how it could be paid for and whether the costs wouldbe outweighed by the benefits. these issues are explored in greater detail inchapter 3.a distributed geolibrary would provide a much more sophisticated andpowerful layer of services above the internet and the www (figure 2.1). theinternet provides the means of communication between computers, using thetcp/ip standard. the www is supported by the internet, providing services thatallow any user to access information provided by any server. buta vision for distributed geolibraries26distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the combination of the two technologies falls far short of the services of adistributed geolibrary:figure 2.1.distributed geolibraries as a third layer of services above the www and the internet. the www does not have an equivalent of the library's carefullyconstructed catalog of assets. search services such as altavista, yahoo,and eblast that substitute for the services of a www catalog arecrude imitations of the sophisticated skills of information abstractionpossessed by the professional librarian. the number of www servers is now on the order of 107 and increasingrapidly. even the most powerful of today's search engines can access nomore than onethird of what is currently available, and this proportiondecreases daily (national public radio report dated 3 april 1998 in arecent article in science). footprints and other essential information are not normally present inwww information resources, and there are limited tools to look for themor to determine them automatically. chapter 4 of this report discussesexisting efforts to develop some of these services, and appendix dincludes examples of current projectsa vision for distributed geolibraries27distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and sites that offer some of the services of distributed libraries, such asthe university of california's alexandria digital library.ł users must rely on personal knowledge to find sites that contain neededinformation assets and must learn the specific protocols used by eachsite. there are no generally available services for combining information frommultiple sources or for support of analysis, visualization, andinterpretation of geoinformation by the user, although such services havebeen developed in limited contexts, including u.s. department ofdefense applications.in other words, a distributed geolibrary would constitute a level of servicesabove those provided by the internet and the www, geared to specific userneeds. distributed geolibrary services offer the potential for more intelligentorganization and access, for the creation of new knowledge through analysis ofraw data, and for the solution of practical problems. as such, distributedgeolibraries are one of a number of new types of internet services that exploitpreviously impractical ways of organizing and presenting information.distributed geolibraries and the nationalspatial data infrastructure"the national spatial data infrastructure is the means to assemblegeographic information2 that describes the arrangement and attributes of featuresand phenomena on the earth. the infrastructure includes the materials,technology, and people necessary to acquire, process, store, and distribute suchinformation to meet a wide variety of needs" (national research council, 1993,p. 2, emphasis added). the concept emerged in the2 the term geographic information here is synonymous with geospatial data as definedin chapter 1. but as noted earlier in this chapter, many additional types of informationqualify as geoinformation by virtue of having a geographic footprint.a vision for distributed geolibraries28distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.early 1990s in response to a number of potentially critical trends that wereaffecting the nation's supply of geospatial information and related services andinstitutions: budgets in the federal public sector were declining and were no longerable to meet the nation's growing needs for highquality, currentgeospatial data at minimal cost to users. improved and cheaper mapping technology was empowering local andstate governments to produce their own geospatial data to meet localneeds and stimulating a growing privatesector industry. advances in digital technology were making it possible to integrate andanalyze geospatial data and support decisions in more powerful ways.the mapping science committee's report toward a coordinated spatialdata infrastructure for the nation (national research council, 1993) and theefforts of many other individuals and agencies led in 1994 to executive order12906, by which president clinton ordered the development of the nationalspatial data infrastructure (nsdi). since then, several other committee reportsand extensive efforts by the federal geographic data committee (fgdc),national states geographic information council (nsgic), national associationof counties (naco), and other groups have refined the concept of the nsdi anddemonstrated its power and effectiveness (tosta and domaratz, 1997; moeller,1998; rhind, 1999).finding 3the contents of a distributed geolibrary are not limited to informationnormally associated with maps or images of the earth's surface but includeany information that can be associated with a geographic location. in thissense the vision extends far beyond the context of the nsdi.when the nsdi was defined in 1993, few users or producers of geospatialdata made much use of the internet, anda vision for distributed geolibraries29distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the www was virtually unknown; the first popular browser, mosaic, wasreleased by the national center for supercomputer applications early that year.although there was much emphasis on digital geospatial data, the primarymethod of dissemination was by magnetic tape; there were virtually no digitalonline catalogs of geospatial data and no methods for searching for data acrosscomputer networks. moreover, since most useful geospatial data were producedby a small number of federal agencies, there was little problem locating theappropriate source. wais (wide area information service) was the first ofseveral networkbased technologies that rapidly changed the nature of geospatialdata dissemination over the next few years. today, applications on the wwwhave grown into an enormously successful tool, and have had a profound impacton the entire environment for geoinformation acquisition (national academy ofpublic administration, 1998). at the same time, the www has presented agrowing problem in its inability to deal effectively with the problems ofdiscovering what geoinformation exists and locating an appropriate source, as thenumber of potential suppliers has mushroomed.finding 4the vision of the nsdi as expressed by the mapping sciencecommittee in 1993 (national research council, 1993) did not anticipate theenormous impact and potential of the internet and www. by emphasizingthe problems of production of digital geoinformation, it underemphasized theimportance of effective processes of dissemination to users ofgeoinformation. user communities are growing rapidly and are likely to groweven more rapidly if the current difficulties associated with findinggeoinformation on the internet can be addressed.this report and related efforts in general can be understood therefore as anupdating of the mapping science committee's concept of the nsdi in the era ofthe www. in organizing this effort and producing this report, the committee isexpressing itsa vision for distributed geolibraries30distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.view that the www has added a new and radically different dimension to itsearlier conception of the nsdi, one that is much more user oriented, much moreeffective in maximizing the value of the nation's geoinformation assets, and muchmore cost effective as a data dissemination mechanism. distributed geolibrariesreflect the same basic thinking about the future of geospatial data, with itsemphases on sharing, universal access, and productivity but in the context of atechnology that was not widely accessible prior to 1993.finding 5distributed geolibraries provide a useful framework for discussion of theissues of dissemination associated with the nsdi. the vision is readilyextendible to a global context.the nsdi fits well with the description of infrastructure provided by starand ruhleder (1996, pp. 111112):"it is both engine and barrier for change; both customizable and rigid; bothinside and outside organizational practices. it is product and process. . . . withthe rise of decentralized technologies used across wide geographical distance,both the need for common standards and the need for situated, tailorable andflexible technologies grow stronger."their defining dimensions of infrastructure provide useful guidance to thedevelopment of distributed geolibraries: they would be embedded in otherstructures, social arrangements, and technologies; their reach or scope wouldextend beyond a single site or practice; their procedures would be learned as partof membership of an organization or group; they would be linked withconventions or practice of daytoday work; they would be the embodiment ofstandards and would build upon an installed base; and they would be visible onbreakdown, since we would be most aware of them when they failed to work.a vision for distributed geolibraries31distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distributed geolibraries and digital earthdistributed geolibraries bear a strong resemblance to certain aspects of theconcept of digital earth, a concept that was defined by vice president gore injanuary 1998 and summarized in a speech given in los angeles. the vision isaptly summarized in the following extract:"imagine, for example, a young child going to a digital earth exhibit at a localmuseum. after donning a headmounted display, she sees earth as it appearsfrom space. using a data glove, she zooms in, using higher and higher levels ofresolution, to see continents, then regions, countries, cities, and finallyindividual houses, trees, and other natural and manmade objects. having foundan area of the planet she is interested in exploring, she takes the equivalent of a'magic carpet ride' through a 3d visualization of the terrain. of course, terrain isonly one of the numerous kinds of data with which she can interact. using thesystem's voice recognition capabilities, she is able to request information on landcover, distribution of plant and animal species, realtime weather, roads,political boundaries, and population. she can also visualize the environmentalinformation that she and other students all over the world have collected as partof the globe project. this information can be seamlessly fused with the digitalmap or terrain data. she can get more information on many of the objects shesees by using her data glove to click on a hyperlink. to prepare for her family'svacation to yellowstone national park, for example, she plans the perfect hike tothe geysers, bison, and bighorn sheep that she has just read about. in fact, shecan follow the trail visually from start to finish before she ever leaves themuseum in her hometown.a vision for distributed geolibraries32distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.she is not limited to moving through space, but can also travel through time.after taking a virtual fieldtrip to paris to visit the louvre, she moves backwardin time to learn about french history, perusing digitized maps overlaid on thesurface of the digital earth, newsreel footage, oral history, newspapers andother primary sources. she sends some of this information to her personal emailaddress to study later. the timeline, which stretches off in the distance, can beset for days, years, centuries, or even geological epochs, for those occasionswhen she wants to learn more about dinosaurs.''digital earth is also the title of a project3 of several years' standing atnasa's goddard space flight center, which also contains elements of the vicepresident's vision. it is also associated with a plan to place a satellite (tentativelynamed "triana") between the earth and the sun to deliver realtime images of thesunlit earth to a global audience.like distributed geolibraries, digital earth is about making use of the vastbut uncoordinated masses of geoinformation now becoming available via theinternet and about presenting it in a form that is readily accessible to the generaluser. like distributed geolibraries, its central metaphor for the organization ofinformation is the surface of the earth and place as a key to information access.in a similar vein the u.s. geological survey is exploring the earth's surface asthe organizing metaphor for public access to its data resources, and similar ideasare surfacing in other agencies (see appendix d).learning about places on the earth is a strong theme in vice presidentgore's vision for digital earth and a strong motivation for distributedgeolibraries. while the prevailing metaphor for humancomputer interaction isthe office or desktop, that metaphor may not be particularly helpful in organizinginformation about the earth. instead, access to a distributed geolibrary could bethrough the visual metaphor of the earth's surface itself; a student3 http://holodeck.gsfc.nasa.gov/digitalearth/digitalearth.htmla vision for distributed geolibraries33distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interested in thailand would manipulate a globe on screen until it centers onthailand and then zoom in for more detail, as in the digital earth vision.distributed geolibraries might make a useful contribution to the educationalopportunities of digital libraries, as outlined, for example, in previous reports ondigital libraries for science, mathematics, engineering, and technical education(see corporation for national research initiatives, 1998; national researchcouncil, 1998).the library service model that underlies the concept of distributedgeolibraries provides a useful way of structuring discussion and of thinking aboutthe resources and research that will be needed to make the vision a reality.chapter 3 discusses some of the societal and institutional challenges to realizingdistributed geolibraries. addressing many of these policy issues is crucial tocreating a conducive atmosphere for considering the potential services andfunctions of distributed geolibraries (see chapter 4) and the technicaldevelopments needed to build distributed geolibraries (see chapter 5).a vision for distributed geolibraries34distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3the distributed geolibrary in societal andinstitutional contextimplementation of a distributed geolibrary presents a host of challenges,ranging from the technical to the societal and institutional. the latter arediscussed in this chapter; technical issues are discussed in chapter 4.the policy challenges presented by distributed geolibraries include thefollowing: what are the legal, ethical, and political issues involved in creatingdistributed geolibraries? what problems must be addressed in the area ofintellectual property rights? how will these issues affect the technicaldevelopment of distributed geolibraries? who will pay for the creation and maintenance of distributedgeolibraries? what components might be in the public domain versusthose provided by the commercial sector?this chapter addresses many of these issues from the perspective ofgeoinformation at the local level, how distributed geolibraries might build off thelibrary model (and how traditional libraries have addressed or handled some ofthese societal and institutional issues), and some of the additional issuesintroduced by the digital context of distributed geolibraries. these issues are notnecessarily unique to distributed geolibraries as many have been discussedextensively within the context of recent digital library programs. the intentionhere is not to review or paraphrase excellent surveys of the social context ofdigital libraries, such as that of borgman et al. (1996), which readers interested in abroader perspective should consult.the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context35distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.local focusfive years ago discussions regarding geospatial data in the united statesfocused on the rapidly increasing use of such data throughout society and theneed to create a more formal infrastructure to coordinate geospatial data coverageacross the nation, minimize redundant data collection at all levels, and create newopportunities for use throughout the nation (national research council, 1993).much has been accomplished. concepts such as metadata standards, standardframework databases, and thematic databases have been developed and pursued(see www.fgdc.gov). the federal government in cooperation with state and localgovernments has been and continues to be well positioned to lead thedevelopment of the basic concepts and public domain databases upon which thensdi is being built.the nsdi now involves many stakeholders as a result of activities over thepast five years. its basic data will be assembled from diverse institutionsthroughout the nation, with institutions contributing those parts that are mostrelevant to their roles (tosta and domaratz, 1997; moeller, 1998; rhind, 1999).at the core of this vision is the concept of local generation of geoinformation.geoinformation is inherently local in nature and of greatest importance to those inthat local area. it makes sense that the tens of thousands of units of localgovernments in the united states understand their own geoinformation assets andneeds far better than do higher levels of government.new developments in technology make it possible for local people to gatherlocal data germane to their own needs more readily, extract data from online andother electronic repositories, develop the information products they need, use theproducts for decision making, and contribute their locally gatheredgeoinformation and derived products to libraries or other repositories. developingthe technical and institutional means to support incorporation of local knowledgeinto networked repositories presents a novel challenge.stakeholders across the nation are beginning to think and act around morecommon visions for the nsdi. a library service modelthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context36distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.provides an initial way to consider the organizational and institutionalarrangements for finding and accessing the geoinformation assets and digitalproducts being generated by numerous stakeholders across the nation.library considerationsthe library as an institutionin considering possible institutional arrangements for distributedgeolibraries, we begin with the assumption that libraries are social institutionsthat will continue to change but will not be made obsolete by the advent ofelectronic publishing. indeed, distributed geolibraries and digital libraries ingeneral will complement the traditional activities of libraries and relatedinstitutions. libraries respond to many complex societal needs. they are used forresearch, teaching, selflearning, and entertainment. they serve as social andactivity centers for many communities, whether these be small towns,neighborhoods, or institutions. the opportunities that libraries provide range fromlearning about practical matters to exploring science, art, history, or literature forthe sheer pleasure of doing so. they are places for children to learn how to readand places for disadvantaged members of communities to seek solutions andsolace (crawford and gorman, 1995, p. 118). the library system serves as arepository and by doing so preserves most aspects of our culture. libraries rangefrom small to large, urban to rural, and public to private but cooperate through acommon professional culture and set of procedures, sharing information formutual benefit. in short: "libraries exist to acquire, give access to, and safeguardcarriers of knowledge and information in all forms and to provide instruction andassistance in the use of the collections to which their users haveaccess" (crawford and gorman, 1995, p. 3).libraries have incorporated information technologies in all aspects of libraryservices. most recently, libraries have embraced networkbased programs thatsupport collaboration amongthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context37distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutions and the sharing of resources. in addition, consortia have beenestablished on state, regional, and librarytype bases throughout the united statesto share information, negotiate licenses, engage in collection development, andfor many other purposes. a useful distributed geolibrary of the future will need toparticipate in these activities as an entity that will accumulate, make available,and conserve electronic carriers of georeferenced knowledge.economic considerationsexisting public libraries do not buy most books or subscribe to mostmagazines or journals, yet they are highly valued by the estimated twothirds ofamerican adults who use them (crawford and gorman, 1995, p. 127). a typicalrobust public library will lend out 10 items per person per year based on thepopulation served by the library and will answer two questions per person peryear for its service population. typical circulation of a robust library is twice itscontent (i.e., a library with a collection of 1 million volumes will lend out 2million volumes during the year). inlibrary use of volumes in poor and ruralcommunities often exceeds circulation, and inlibrary use at academic librariesoften exceeds circulation by two to three times.public libraries provide these high use and service rates at a cost ofapproximately five cents per day per capita for their service population, whilepublic libraries in economically healthy areas aspire to 10 cents per day per capitaas a reasonable starting point for funding a robust library (crawford and gorman,1995, p. 139). these expenditures appear to be a bargain for the access andservices provided, and any proposal for supplanting current library services withelectronic services would need to compare costs realistically.conversely, would an electronic digital library be available to at least thetwothirds of american adults who currently use existing libraries? would itserve children and the disadvantaged to the same extent or greater than existinglibrary facilities and resources?the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context38distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.there is an economic conundrum that in the face of a proportionately higherdemand some communities might not have the available resources to supportdistributed electronic delivery services, even though the delivery technology isdropping in price. in terms of distributed geolibraries, this may be an issue, as arecent survey of public libraries in colorado (gayon, 1998) indicates that rurallibraries receive a larger than expected proportion of requests for geographicinformation (maps, images, and digital data).libraries have the effect, although not a priority purpose, of introducinglibrary users to works, authors, and publishers. libraries thereby serve theeconomic function of creating markets for intellectual works. would a geolibraryhave the same effect? these are some of the institutional questions that will needto be addressed as the technological capabilities for distributed geolibraries arebuilt over time.distributed geolibraries and the existing library institutionmight distributed geolibraries develop as part of existing libraryarrangements or complement them? although the possibility exists thatdistributed geolibraries might develop in tandem with libraries and beinterconnected with them, the duplication of all the roles of libraries in a newinstitutional environment would make little sense. a useful analysis of theseissues is presented by hawkins (1994) in the context of digital libraries. indeed,the way distributed geolibraries evolve will depend in large part on access toresources in existing library institutions.some of those things that traditional libraries have never been able to dowell might be better done by digital means. one of these functions might be theprovision of access to geoinformation. the size and shape of the sheets on whichpaper maps are produced often depend on the information or the story that thecartographer is attempting to convey graphically, the scale required to presentinformation adequately, and the shape of the geographic area being addressed.owing to the wide variability in map sizes and the nonstandard placement ofinformation on them, the classification, cataloging, and storage of maps havebeen farthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context39distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.more problematic for librarians than handling books, journals, magazines, andrecordings. thus, in some instances, maps may be ineffective uses of print onpaper, and many maps might be better represented, accessed, and used in digitalform.thus, the advent of distributed geolibraries is likely to alter the relativeadvantages of paper and electronic map production. paper map collections inlibraries are unlikely to be completely eliminated. because of the increasing userfriendliness of mapping software and the ready availability of digitalgeoinformation, the ability to produce sophisticated maps and communicatethrough them is now available to many more people. as a result, we may witnesssubstantial increases in both paper and digital maps that may be of interest tomembers of communities and made available in their local libraries.although a geolibrary is defined earlier in this report as digital in nature, anypractical or useful geolibrary from an institutional perspective will need to beable to accommodate a multiplicity of forms for conveying knowledge. thevarious means and forms for conveying geographic knowledge each haveweaknesses and strengths. diversity in the means for conveying knowledge is agood thing. the institutional geolibrary must maintain a complexmultidimensional web of mixed media, knowledge sources, collections, andservices (crawford and gorman, 1995, p. 78). the expectation is that this will beaccomplished by merging and embedding geolibrary technological advancementsinto the existing library information infrastructure of the nation.data, information, ad knowledgegeolibraries should play a key role in providing access to carriers ofgeographic knowledge. in addition, some geolibraries also will want to focus onproviding access to the ability to process geographic data. in one sense, all adistributed geolibrary need consist of is a good gazetteer in which users can lookup information based on location. the "look up" might be accomplished bydrawing a box around an area on a computer screen or by indicating a namethe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context40distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of a place or specifying other information contained in the metadata for aparticular item of geoinformation. this would allow a user to find out whethergeoinformation covering an area of concern exists in the geolibrary network. ifdatabases exist, the system returns metadata on them so the user can furtherassess the nature and utility of the databases. performing this role is consistentwith the traditional role of libraries. in addition, gazetteers are one of the primeexamples of library documents that were never very efficient in paper form.conversion to electronic form makes sense since both searching of the gazetteerand updating are made much easier.if it is legal to copy the databases located through the electronic gazetteer(e.g., public domain geographic databases) or to "check them out" from theholdings within the distributed geolibrary (e.g., the conditions of lending mightbe determined by licensing agreements), the distributed geolibrary as aninstitution should be capable of supporting these functions. that is, direct accessto the library's holdings should be provided. again, this function is parallel to andcompatible with the traditional roles of the library as an institution.the level of services and functions (see chapter 4) provided by thetraditional library can be different in geolibraries. should the services andfunctions of distributed geolibraries extend beyond providing users with efficientaccess to the geoinformation in the library's holdings? or do the technologies thatcould be provided by distributed geolibraries extend the services and functions inan attempt to provide answers to complex questions rather than guide users toresources where answers may (or may not) be found?to place this concern in context, we should first define some terms, althoughno attempt is made here to add to the extensive literature on the nature ofinformation (see, for example, buckland, 1991; losee, 1997). the terms listed inthe following order are sometimes used to describe an ascending continuum:data, information, knowledge, understanding, and wisdom. crawford and gorman(1995, p. 5) define these terms as follows:the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context41distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datafacts and other raw material that may be processed into usefulinformation.informationdata processed and rendered useful.knowledgeinformation transformed into meaning through action of the humanmind, such that it can be recorded and transmitted.understandingknowledge integrated with a world view and a personalperspective, existing entirely within the human mind.wisdomunderstanding made whole and generative within the human mind.whereas the substantive content and focus of geographic infrastructurebuilding have focused on data and information (e.g., the nsdi), the substantivecontent of traditional libraries has focused on collections of knowledge and to alesser extent collections of information. traditional libraries collect and catalogprimarily knowledge works for good reason. the reading and contemplation ofworks of knowledge such as books and journals provide context and conveymeaning. currently, such works are one of the best means by which we are ableto acquire understanding. "works of knowledge" are largely synonymous with"intellectual works" and are thus the primary expressions protected by ourintellectual property laws.intellectual property concernsthe goal of copyright law, and the effect of copyright law in librarysettings, has been to strike a balance between giving authors sufficient incentiveto make their works available on the one hand and supporting the rights of usersto use the intellectual works of others for socially constructive purposes on theother. this balance is complex, but the balance in interests supported by ourcurrent intellectual property laws has made libraries highly successful and valuedsocial institutions. a similar balance of interests has not yet been achieved in theonline world. a background discussion of current intellectual property andcopyright issuesthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context42distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.possibly related to distributed geolibraries appears at the end of this chapter.there is a growing collection of geoinformation available online that is inthe public domain because no copyright can exist in some databases due to theirnature (e.g., those with no creativity or originality in the arrangement of facts).claims of copyright in some databases have been rescinded by the authors, andthe copyright for other works has expired. additionally, there are the equivalentsof online bookstores and online mapstores that sell or license databases tocustomers. for the commercial products, libraries have explored several licensingarrangements that attempt to bring together commercial interests and publicrights interests to arrive at solutions that support the interests of all stakeholders(see, for example, barker et al., 1995, and gladney and lotspiech, 1998).in the vision of distributed geolibraries, there is a possibility of creatingknowledge and making it available through the distributed geolibrary itself; thisraises additional concerns about the status of such derivative knowledge from theperspective of rights and intellectual property. collections of information, bycontrast, gain very little protection under copyright law principles.finding 6developers of distributed geolibraries will need to consider issuesrelated to intellectual property rights. there are significant differences inboth the public access library model and the commercial bookstore modelthat need to be considered in the broader international debates about thenature of electronic information and databases as intellectual property.uses of data, information, and knowledgesuppose a student wishes to know more about yosemite national park andhas access through a distributed geolibrary to two different types of information: adigital elevation model (dem), giving the elevations of points spaced 30 m apartacross the park; and a landscape description by john muir. in principle both aredescriptions of terrain, but one is a raw database of measurementsthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context43distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the public domain, and the other is a creative knowledge work. in anotherexample the couple searching for a home in chapter 1 might access either adatabase of socioeconomic statistics or a collection of news reports on thechanging characters of neighborhoods.both types of information are valuable, depending on the circumstances andthe skills and requirements of their users. to a distributed geolibrary they bothlook like collections of bits with footprints, and both are retrievable using thesame mechanisms. traditionally, one might have looked for the raw data in a dataarchive, such as the eros data center of u.s. geological survey, or a censusdata center, and for the description in a library. but distributed geolibraries wouldprovide a unified means of access.in doing so, however, geolibraries raise issues concerning the relative valueof the two types of information. to a specialist equipped with sophisticated toolsof analysis, the raw data may be more useful than the landscape description andmore acceptable as a source of information for scientific understanding. to astudent without sophisticated tools, only the description may be of value.moreover, the work of the scientist may result in the production of new data, tobe fed back into the distributed geolibrary for use by others (such as estimates ofsolar radiation based on topography combined with a suitable numerical model)or the production of knowledge works in the form of journal articles, whichmight also be added to the distributed geolibrary. in this sense a distributedgeolibrary would be much more than a repository of knowledge because it wouldsupport the creation of new knowledge by individuals or groups, in addition tothe dissemination of existing knowledge. a student might wish to create personalknowledge as a result of investigation and use a geolibrary to share thatknowledge with others in the class.both forms of information seem indispensable. there are many questions ofa geographic nature that cannot be answered by a right answer but require carefulreflection based on both data and prior knowledge works. providing new dataquery, search, and display capabilities and services may be important in some distributedthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context44distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.geolibraries but providing access to digital works of knowledge is likely to beimportant in all distributed geolibraries.finding 7a distributed geolibrary would support collaborative work, such asmultidisciplinary research by teams, decision making by groups ofstakeholders, and classroom projects by groups of students. it wouldprovide mechanisms for capturing the knowledge that results from suchwork and making it accessible to others as appropriate.in summary, a distinction needs to be drawn between raw data andknowledge works because they appear different from the perspective of thefunctions and services of a library and with respect to intellectual property rights.although the nsdi is concerned primarily with the production and disseminationof raw geospatial data, distributed geolibraries could also provide an effectivemechanism for the dissemination of knowledge.accessthe concept of access in an institutional distributed geolibrary environmenthas two major aspects. one involves technical efficiency and effectiveness infinding desired geoinformation, determining its appropriateness and authenticity,linking to and acquiring it, and electronically processing it if needed. to enablesuch access, knowledge works and databases must exist somewhere on thenetwork with sufficient metadata and tools available in the system to allow thesetasks to be accomplished.the second major aspect of access involves the legal and economic abilityof the distributed geolibrary as an institution to provide the geoinformationresources desired by its users, either directly or through the network. if access tointellectual works is barred by legal or economic constraints, powerfulcomputational capabilities and userfriendly search software will not be of anyuse to the user. legal rights to materials may alone be an insufficient condition,but they are a critical and necessary condition for access. acquiring legal rights tointellectual worksthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context45distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and databases can cause a financial burden on the distributed geolibrary and thecommunity it serves.although distributed geolibrary collections might be anywhere, they must besomewhere. those institutions or people with the greatest vested interest inensuring that specific geoinformation is available, maintained, and accessible arelogical candidates for providing those specific collections and resources fordistributed geolibraries. for instance, local libraries typically focus on the needsof the local community, and therefore local geolibraries would likely be theprimary collectors and maintainers of local geographic information of relevanceto local culture.another major assumption in the traditional library model is that acquisitionor access to commercially provided geoinformation will be through institutional,not individual, payments (hawkins, 1994). equity is a fundamental principle oflibrary access. to uphold this principle, the community rather than the individualtypically pays for the library and its services (crawford and gorman, 1995, p.101). just as the poorest americans can freely borrow books from publiclibraries, so too should they have equitable access to geolibrary services if acommunity library chooses to provide those services.an unanswered issue that will be continually debated in the distributedgeolibrary vision is that of access to geoinformation in the public domain andtraditional library services versus access to geoinformation and services that areonly available on a commercial basis. embedded in this issue are additionalissues of public and private rights and intellectual property. these issuesšmostof which are not unique to distributed geolibrariesšare being debated in thebroader library community and the digital information arena (see, for example,two 1997 national research council reportsšbits of power: issues in globalaccess to scientific data and more than screen deep: toward every citizeninterfaces to the nation's information infrastructure).in pursuing solutions there is a pressing need to develop new legal,economic, and institutional models that support the public goods benefits oftraditional libraries while providing sufficient incentives for private individuals,private publishers, andthe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context46distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government publishers to make their geoinformation available through distributedgeolibrary settings. the practical benefits and drawbacks of institutional modelswill need to be thoroughly explored from economic, legal, and organizationalperspectives. prototype models will need to be developed and tested. it is highlylikely that the most appropriate incentive models for privatesector firms will varyfrom the incentive models that might best encourage local, state, and federalagencies to make their databases available through distributed geolibraryenvironments.summary and additional issuesthis chapter discussed many institutional and societal issues that will have tobe addressed by distributed geolibraries, especially if they attempt to replicatemany of the services and functions of the traditional library. the major issues aresummarized in this section, together with other issues that appear important butwere not discussed at length at the workshop.1. how will local needs for and production of geoinformation beaccommodated in a library system that has traditionally emphasizedaccess to books and information with a more general than localfocus?2. libraries are addressing the need for access to electronic informationby developing consortia and networks. how will these newinstitutional arrangements accommodate and affect the developmentof distributed geolibraries?3. traditional libraries play a significant role in archiving andpreserving information. can this role be accommodated bydistributed geolibraries?4. how can distributed geolibraries deal with inequities of access toelectronic systems?5. will distributed geolibraries have the effect of enhancing moreconventional markets for the information they disseminate?6. will distributed geolibraries develop as part of existing libraryarrangements or complement them?the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context47distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7. should the services and functions of distributed geolibraries extendbeyond providing users with efficient access to geoinformation toinclude tools to process and analyze information and create newknowledge?8. how will distributed geolibraries find an appropriate balancebetween supplying data and supplying knowledge works?9. how will each custodian site acquire, give access to, and safeguardthe geoinformation in its own collections?10. how will the distributed geolibrary provide instruction and assistancein the use of digital geographic products and databases? should usersfrom schoolchild to scientist be expected to be their own referencelibrarians in the distributed geolibraries of the future?11. as greater numbers of geographic knowledge works and databasesare accumulated in the system over time, will it become increasinglydifficult to mine useful information from the available flood?12. how will the records of humankind be conserved in the distributedgeolibrary as an institution?13. while inclusion of traditional works such as maps in librarycollections caused few personal information privacy concerns in thepast, would the geolibrary's provision for access to detailed databasesprovide a much greater likelihood for personal information privacyintrusions? what are the principles by which distributed geolibrarieswould operate in order to protect privacy? how may the principles beenforced and what are the means by which safeguards may beprovided in distributed environments?14. if the generation of knowledge works depends on the resources andintellectual contributions of many persons and institutions, howmight intellectual property rights in these works be appropriatelyaccounted for and how might each custodian manage such rights?15. how can distributed geolibraries assure that geographic knowledgeworks and databases are not rewritten or revised by government,private firms, or others to their own benefit? that is, how may oneassure that databases are authentic?the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context48distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16. what incentives other than or in addition to future economic rewardscould be effective in convincing individuals, businesses, universities,government agencies, and others to make their geographicknowledge works and databases available over a distributedgeolibrary network?17. who should decide what is in and what is out of a distributedgeolibrary? should there be a gatekeeper, modeled on the function ofa library subject specialist, or should distributed geolibraries operateon the principle of caveat emptor?intellectual property and copyright issues: background andcontext for distributed geolibrariesover the past several years there have been discussions nationally andinternationally regarding how to best update the copyright and intellectualproperty laws to reflect the networked environment. internationally, theworld intellectual property organization (wipo) has taken the lead ininitiating debate on these extremely important yet contentious issues.nationally, the u.s. congress has considered a host of intellectual propertyand copyright issues, many of which originated in wipo forums.in december 1996, wipo member delegates from 160 countries met toconsider proposed changes to copyright law with a particular focus on thedigital environment. three draft treaties sought to update copyright lawconcerning works delivered in digital form, to enact protections forperformers in and producers of sound recordings, and to enact a newintellectual property regime to protect databases.at the close of this diplomatic conference, the delegates adopted twonew versions of the three draft treaties originally proposed: one relating tocopyrighted works in digital form and the second to enact protections forperformers in and producers of sound recordings. consideration of the thirdtreaty regarding database protection was deferred with the recommendationthat wipo convene another session at a later date to consider a schedulefor future discussions on database protection. wipo failed to move forwardon the draft treaty for additional database protection for a number ofreasons: lack of time to fully consider the draft treaty within each membercountry prior to the diplomatic conference, lack of time during theconference to adequately address thethe distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context49distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.draft treaty, and most importantly, deep concerns, indeed opposition,by many delegations to the draft treaty.responding to wipo's actions, members of the u.s. congressintroduced legislation that would implement the wipo treaties. a series ofhearings and ensuing negotiations between concerned stakeholders on anumber of issues such as online service provider liability, fair use,preservation, distance education, and more were undertaken throughout1997 and 1998. on october 28, 1998, president clinton signed into law thedigital millennium copyright act of 1998.wipo's decision to defer action on a draft database treaty did not determembers of the house of representatives from considering additionalintellectual property protections for databases. rep. coble (chair, housesubcommittee on courts and intellectual property) introduced h.r. 2652,the collections of information antipiracy act. this legislation addressesseveral concerns of certain parts of the information industry, in particular,legal publishers such as reedelsevier and thompson. they wereconcerned with the 1991 supreme court decision, feist v. ruraltelephone, which held that comprehensive collections of facts arranged inconventional formats were not protected under copyright and could notconstitutionally be protected under copyright. the decision rejected thenotion that a compiler's ''sweat of the brow" could ever substitute for the"original authorship" that the statute and the constitutional copyright clauserequire as the condition of copyrightability.in addition, some members of the information industry were concernedwith a 1996 european union directive on the legal protection of databases.this directive calls for each member nation to implement a database law bythe end of 1997. the directive includes the notion that databases created innonec countries will not be granted legal protection; thus, a fear of lack ofreciprocity is also prompting segments of the industry to advocate newprotections.during two hearings on h.r. 2652 in the house of representatives,widespread opposition to the proposal surfacedšfrom the librarycommunity, segments of the commercial sector, the scientific and researchcommunities, the education community, and more. some of the concernsinclude the following: provisions in the bill would prohibit a transformative use of informationšreuse of information to create a new type of product or informationresource.the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context50distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the exceptions for scientific and educational use are circular andineffective, and because the legislation is outside the scope of copyrightfair use, related library and education exemptions would not apply. overall the bill would fundamentally threaten the basic paradigm of dataexchange by providing unprecedented new legal protection forinformation. provisions in h.r. 2652 would likely increase the costs of researchsignificantly, as scientists and researchers would have to pay for datathey now receive for minimal cost. certain provisions would prevent the creation of "valueadded"databases by substantially increasing the cost of the information includedin the databases. as a consequence, the elimination of competition fromvalueadded publishers would reduce the incentive for established upstream publishers to innovate and contain prices.in a letter to sen. hatch (chair, senate committee on the judiciary), thepresidents of the national academy of sciences, the national academy ofengineering, and the institute of medicine expressed "deep concerns aboutthe proposed changes to intellectual property law" and noted that thelegislation "would grant owners of information unprecedented rights in thecontrol of digital information while severely restricting the rights of scientistsand engineersšand everyone elsešto access and use that information."moreover, the anticompetitive nature of h.r. 2652 "may have othernegative economic impacts on our information economy by raising pricesfor data consumers, by stifling important activities of commercial users whoadd value to existing data, and encouraging the unproductive independentrecompilation of the same or similar data."other significant concerns were noted by the u.s. department ofjustice, office of legal counsel, which raised serious questions regardingthe constitutional basis of h.r. 2652. the federal trade commission notedserious reservations with the legislation, commenting that certain provisionscould have "deleterious effects on competition and innovation." finally, theu.s. department of commerce speaking to the concerns of theadministration stated that the legislation as drafted could "increasetransaction costs in data use, and . . . that legislation not createinappropriate opportunities of incentive to 'capture' government informationor governmentfunded data with relatively small investments inmaintenance, organization, or supplemental data."the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context51distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.although h.r. 2652 was passed by the house of representatives, itwas not considered by the senate. members of the house and senatejudiciary committees have commented that legislation that increasesintellectual property protection for databases will be a priority in the 106thsession of congress.a common theme throughout the copyright and intellectual propertydebates in the united states has been the importance of focusing onappropriate public policy choices for the united states, even though thismay conflict with the need for harmonization with other countries'intellectual and copyright laws. according to this argument, the pressurefrom the european union directive on databases, for example, should notdictate u.s. information policies with regard to the need for additionalprotection for databases. given that the united states is the leader in theinformation industry, there is an appreciation that legislating in this arenacould have significant economic consequences if not done correctly.the distributed geolibrary in societal and institutional context52distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4services and functionslibrary servicesdigital library developments are redefining the nature of the library, itsservices, and its limitations. the traditional library focuses on making it easy forthe user to identify, find, browse, and retrieve the contents of a book or journal,but its responsibilities end when the item is in the user's hands. although thecontents of books and journals are essentially immutable, in a digital library theinformation provided is digital and readily manipulated. many libraries todayhave holdings of geoinformation, or provide the means to obtain such data fromother sites. some provide geographic information systems and other tools forusers who wish to manipulate or analyze data. users who access data remotelyover the internet now often have a choice between downloading the data to beanalyzed by their own software or sending queries and instructions for executiondirectly on the data's host. when applied to geospatial data, this remoteprocessing is termed the giservices model to distinguish it from the moretraditional local processing of the gisystems model. for example, sites such asmapquest (www.mapquest.com) use the giservices model in providing drivinginstructions based on geospatial data because the analysis is performed by thehost and no data are transmitted to the user. on the other hand, sites such asmicrosoft's www.terraserver.com and various u.s. geological survey sites aim toprovide data for local processing, following the gisystems model.services and functions53distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the www has made everyone a potential publisher and distributor ofinformation, blurring old distinctions between authors, publishers, distributors,and librarians. the important library function of collection building, whichinvolves the library staff in making careful decisions about what should or shouldnot appear in the library, has no equivalent on the www, where there are nogatekeepers or custodians of quality.if library information assets can be accessed from anywhere, how will eachlibrary determine what to collect or acquire, if anything? in a digital world andbarring direct control and restriction on access, a library will be able to leavemore general resources to others and to emphasize those information assets that italone is best qualified to provide. there would be little value, for example, inserving recent issues of a journal if the journal's publisher and other librariesalready provide the needed service at no charge. unique assets might include theproducts of the parent institution's own research and scholarship, uniqueinformation resources donated to the library by bequests, or information on thelibrary's own local region.in short, the library of the future will be able to make a clear distinctionbetween the services it provides in helping its users find, access, and useinformation and the information assets that it collects, builds, and maintainsitself. metadata, or data about data, are likely to become much more important, aslibraries seek to refine the services they provide by including more and moretools designed to assist in search, evaluation, and use. just as today's libraryneeds a catalog that tells users where to look in its stacks for given informationresources, so tomorrow's digital library will need the tools (cataloging, indexing,abstracting) that help users navigate the vast communications networks anddistributed information resources of the future.this chapter addresses the services and functions of distributed geolibrariesagainst this background of traditional and novel library services. as noted inchapter 2, the functions and services of a library are often less obvious than andconfused with its physical structure. some, like information abstraction andservices and functions54distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.collection building, are less obvious than others, like the physical stacks orcirculation desk. some of the services discussed here have long historicalantecedents, while others are entirely novel.distributed geolibrary servicesa service can be defined generally as a provision of whatever is necessaryfor installation and maintenance of a machine, organization, or operation.services for a machine such as a car include those found at a gas station or amechanics shop. a small consulting organization might provide sales services toits clients, payroll and training services for its employees, and marketing orresearch services to maintain steady growth.the services of a distributed geolibrary fall into several categories, includingservices for search and retrieval of items of particular interest, item descriptionand display services, dataprocessing services, and services for collectionmaintenance and growth. these classes of service relate to the four types ofactivity that go on in any library: (1) looking for specific books or other referenceinformation by author, title, subject, or identifying code; (2) creation of the librarycatalog; (3) using various library tools to manipulate or interpret information; and(4) taking care of or improving the library collection.the nature of these services differs dramatically in a distributed geolibrary,however. the ability to manipulate data, and to integrate data from a number ofsources, is greatly enhanced because all data are in digital form. while locationwas handled as one of a number of possible forms of subject in the traditionallibrary, it is the primary basis of search in a distributed geolibrary. the distributednature of the geolibrary also makes collection building far more challengingbecause there are no gatekeepers and no one is in charge of the entire collection.moreover, a distributed geolibrary would offer something that is not possiblein the traditional library, with its traditional form of catalogšthe ability to searchbased on geographic location.services and functions55distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the power of this concept has already mobilized many individuals, groups,and agencies. for example, the open gis consortium (www.opengis.org) issued arequest for proposals in march 1998 on the subject of catalogs for geospatialdata, anticipating that by doing so it would help move the community toward thedevelopment of interoperable catalog specifications. the consortium includesroughly 150 vendors, integrators, educators, and users, from both public andprivate sectors.the need for distributed geolibrary servicesthere are three reasons for developing distributed geolibrary services. thefirst is economic. traditionally, geospatial data have been distributed in the formof paper maps, disks, and tapes, which are costly to produce, slow andcumbersome to distribute, and difficult to update. to meet the national mandateto make data collected at public expense available to the public, federal agenciesare looking for new ways to disseminate data more widely and effectively,primarily via the internet (jones, 1997). by utilizing the internet and networkcommunications, a distributed geolibrary could deliver online informationservices quickly and economically. agencies and companies can also sell dataand recover income more effectively using the internet's growing andincreasingly reliable tools for electronic commerce. finally, encryptiontechnologies could provide assurance against unauthorized use and distribution.the workshop was not an appropriate forum for the development of acomprehensive economic model of geoinformation dissemination or for detailedanalysis of the costs and benefits of implementation. these are important issuesand could be the focus of a useful and productive research effort. a good startingpoint would be a recent study by the national academy of public administration(1998), which includes a comprehensive summary of what is known about theeconomics of geospatial data production and dissemination.services and functions56distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the second reason involves the decentralization of geoinformationmanagement. in a distributed geolibrary there is no need for data to be collectedin one place; instead, data can be held by a custodian until needed. because theinternet provides universal access, it is sufficient that there be a custodian serving agiven data set, and with a single server there are no problems maintainingconsistency across copies if data must be updated. ideally, the custodian wouldalso be the person or agency responsible for updating the data and for assuringtheir accuracy. in practice, however, some mirroring of data may be needed toovercome the effects of network delays and server downtime (worboys, 1995).a third reason for a distributed framework for geolibrary services is thedemand for access. public access to geoinformation, particularly by students, cansupport improvements in national levels of geographic literacy by making itpossible for classes to obtain information quickly and easily about any part of theearth's surface. ready access to geoinformation about local areas (neighborhood,city, county, region) can help to develop a more informed citizenry and improveopportunities for participation in the democratic process (adler, 1995; craig,1995).services as collections of functionsservices have been described using broad categories of response todemands. functions are the actual commands or activities that implementservices, and a given function may contribute to more than one service. afunction can deliver all or part of a service. functions that make up car servicesat the gas station include changing fluids, changing filters, inspecting brakes ortires, and so forth. at the mechanic shop, the service known as a tuneup wouldbe comprised of functions such as changing spark plugs, adjusting engine timingor belt alignment, and so forth.various efforts over the past few years have implemented limited functionsof a distributed geolibrary. they include two of the projects of the nationalscience foundationnational aeronautics and space administration (nasa)defense advanced researchservices and functions57distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.projects agency digital library initiative (at the university of california'sberkeley and santa barbara campuses), efforts of the federal geographic datacommittee (fgdc) under the rubric of the nsdi, various state and localgovernment projects; dissemination mechanisms developed by suppliers of earthimagery, and numerous efforts in other countries. some selected examples ofthese prototypes are described in appendix d. although there are sharpdifferences in approach and scope, there is now a degree of consensus on thefunctions that can best deliver the services of a distributed geolibrary.necessary distributed geolibrary functionsnecessary functions for search and retrieval include searches bygeographical location, searches by geographical place name, and searches bysecondary requirements such as subject theme or time. retrieval functions requirea workspace to hold the items, criteria for sorting and ranking items depending ontheir assessed relevance to the user's needs, a tagging mechanism to select andretrieve specific items, and links to other functions for display and description.the following sections describe these in more detail.search by geographical locationthe basemap provides the image of the earth on which a user can specifyareas of interest. its level of geographic detail defines the most localized spatialsearch that is possible. it should include all of the features likely to be relevant to auser wanting to find and define a search area, including major topographicfeatures and place names. the importance of such features will vary betweenusers, as will levels of detail, so it will be necessary to establish protocols thatallow use of specialized basemaps for particular purposes. for example, ahydrologist might want the basemap to emphasize hydrological features such asrivers and watersheds,services and functions58distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.whereas a climatologist might want to see weather stations and topography.this function would first display a basemap, allowing users to point at aplace to target either a specific point or a footprint. users would be allowed tozoom to greater detail and to pan across the earth's surface. widgets such as the"rubber rectangle" would allow users to specify footprints in a number of ways.there should also be support for "fuzzy" footprints that are not precisely orcrisply defined, allowing users to define approximate areas of search.there are many current examples of sites that support search by geographiclocation based on standard www browser software (e.g., microsoft's internetexplorer or netscape's navigator). many (see, for example, the archive of digitalorthophoto quadrangles at the massachusetts institute of technology(ortho.mit.edu); other examples are listed in appendix d) present the user with amap divided into tiles; by pointing to a tile the user accesses data for that tile'sgeographic area. the alexandria digital library project's current prototype(alexandria.ucsb.edu) uses a java application, including rubber rectangles andother tools. these prototypes use projected basemaps and do not yet implement asense of interacting with the curved surface of the earth, as suggested by thevision of distributed geolibraries, which would require threedimensionalvisualization technologies such as vrml (virtual reality modeling language).the current alexandria browser includes the ability to "paint" data onto thebasemap; in vice president gore's vision of digital earth the user is able to "fly"through a full threedimensional rendering of the earth's physical environment.several suitable sources of data exist for basemaps: digital topographic data, available for the entire land area of the planetat 1:1,000,000 in the digital chart of the world, and for smaller areas atlarger scales. for the continental united states theservices and functions59distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.usgs provides digital topographic data at 1:100,000 and for limitedareas at 1:24,000.1 imagery from space, available from the landsat satellite at 30mresolution, from the french spot satellite at 10m resolution, fromrussian satellites at 2m resolution, and anticipated in 1999 commercialsatellite imagery for selected areas at 1m resolution. digital elevation data, available for parts of the united states. at 30mresolution, and for the entire planet at 5km resolution. global coverageat 30m resolution is planned.the costs of these data vary enormously; those from federal sources areavailable at the cost of reproduction, but other sources operate on a commercialbasis.search by place namegazetteer is a technical term for an index that links place names tolocations. as often found associated with published atlases and city maps,gazetteers provide links to map sheets and locations within map sheets. in thecontext of distributed geolibraries, a gazetteer connects place names togeographic coordinates. this connection allows the user of the distributedgeolibrary to define a search area using a place name, instead of by finding thearea on a basemap, which may be difficult to many users. the gazetteer mayinclude place names that are not well defined. for use in a geolibrary a gazetteermust include extents, or digital representations of each place name's physicalboundary. links between place names allow searches to be expanded ornarrowedšthey can be vertical,1 this ratio or representative fraction compares the distance between two points on apaper map with the distance between the same pair of points on the surface of the earth.digital data created from paper maps by digitizing and scanning are also characterized bythis ratio, which also defines the set of features shown on the map and the degree ofgeometric generalization of those features. in rough terms a database created from a mapwith a given representative fraction depicts features larger than 0.5 mm across on the mapand achieves a similar positional accuracy.services and functions60distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.identifying places that include or are included by other places, and alsohorizontal, identifying neighboring places.because a gazetteer is an essential building block of the distributedgeolibrary and something that can be shared between large numbers of users, itsavailability is a critical factor in progress toward the vision of distributedgeolibraries. at this time no one agency is identified as being responsible forproduction and maintenance of a common national or global gazetteer. mostgazetteers that exist, such as the usgs geographic names information system(gnis) or equivalent commercial products, provide in most cases only a centralpoint for each feature, and their coverage of the world's place names is uneven.progress would be aided by identification of the gazetteer as a fundamentalcomponent of the nsdi framework. progress would also be aided by thedevelopment of a standard gazetteer protocol to ensure that users or groups ofusers who create their own specialized gazetteers could use them to accessdistributed geolibraries in place of generalpurpose gazetteers. additionally, thereare significant problems to be overcome in dealing with varied alphabets,diacritical marks, ambiguities of spelling, place names with indeterminateboundaries, and so forth.search by subject theme or time periodin a physical library the card catalog indexes library holdings by subjectdomain. an electronic catalog may include a thesaurus, which matches synonymsof search topics, providing associations in a search query, for example, between"slough" and "swamp" and "wetland." for cataloging functions to work, itemsmust be stored in a standard format, following an agreed protocol. likewise,users must also specify searches in an agreed protocol; this is often accomplishedby a query dialogue function, which converts a formbased user search requestinto whatever protocol is required. the basis of such protocols already exists instandards, e.g., marc (machine readable cataloging, see lcweb.loc.gov/marc/)and the fgdc's content standards for digital geospatial metadata(www.fgdc.gov), and in projects such as the alexandria digitalservices and functions61distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.library. the fgdc has also made progress in standardizing conventions fornaming geographic features, and similar progress has been made in othercountries.distributed geolibraries should allow their users to narrow specifications ofneed by including subjects, dates, and other identifying characteristics, as well asneeded level of geographic detail, and imposing them on the search in addition togeographic location. although location is the primary key in searching adistributed geolibrary, other aspects allow the user to limit the number of items ofgeoinformation identified in a search to reasonable levels. distributedgeolibraries also should be capable of ranking items identified in a search by theirsuitability to the user's needs. they also should inform the user of the number ofhits, and provide other ways of summarizing them in readily understood ways.item display and descriptionthese functions include visualization tools and metadata browsing tools.visualization tools are useful for displaying items retrieved from the archive.geoinformation data sets are often massive, creating problems for users who mayneed to browse through many data sets to find one that is suitable for use, giventhe limited bandwidth of many internet connections. in such cases it is clearlyimpossible to examine the full contents of each data set, and some system must bedevised to allow users to examine a summary or generalized sketch of thecontents that can be retrieved quickly. display functions also make it possible tocreate a visual index (the base map and the map browser, described above) forpatrons to search the library for information about a particular place.in general terms, metadata describe the content, quality, condition, and othercharacteristics of data. the major uses of metadata include (1) managing andmaintaining an organization's investment in data, (2) providing information todata catalogs and clearinghouses, (3) providing information to aid data transferand use, and (4) providing information on the data's history or lineage.services and functions62distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.although the second use is essentially the function performed by thetraditional library catalog, it is clear that the functions of metadata in thedistributed geolibrary extend well beyond this (fgdc, see www.fgdc.gov). under(3), metadata provide the essential information necessary to allow a data set fromsome distant archive to be recognized and opened at the user's site. in general,geoinformation data sets are not interoperable in this way, especially if thearchive and the user have adopted different geographic information systems(gis). problems of interoperation between gis are addressed by goodchild etal. (1998), and much recent work by the gis industry has gone intoimprovements in interoperability in gis, through the efforts of the open gisconsortium (www.opengis.org). note, however, that the problems of distributedgeolibraries in this area go well beyond those of gis interoperability becausedistributed geolibraries are not just limited to geospatial data.in the context of distributed geographic information services, metadatainclude information that supports the exchange of processing operations betweenclient and server (open gis consortium, see www.opengis.org ). to date, littleresearch has reported on formalization of such metadata to describe distributedgeographic information services, though tsou and buttenfield (1998) showedthat they should include two major parts: system metadata and data operationrequirements. the system metadata describe methods and behaviors for systemcontrols and program specifications, whereas dataoperation requirements specifythe requirements for data input to, and output from, specified operations.collection creation and maintenancea range of tools are needed to support the creation and publication ofgeoinformation. most new geospatial data are either published in digital form orgo through a digital stage during production. but the predigital legacy ofgeospatial data is largely in the form of paper maps and photographic images,which must be laboriously digitized or scanned to be suitable for distributedgeolibraries. although massive investments have been made inservices and functions63distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recent years, by such organizations as the library of congress, which has mademuch of its historical map collection available over the www, it is doubtful thatthe vast majority of the larger legacy residing in scattered collections andarchives will ever be digitized because anticipated levels of use of mostindividual items cannot justify the cost.the nation currently possesses vast stores of data about or associated withgeographic locations but for which no locational footprint is readily available.these stores include large archives of information on health, the economy, socialconditions, and demographics, broken down in some cases to very fine levels ofgeographic detail. such data could be incorporated into distributed geolibraries,and place  could provide a very effective search mechanism, particularly whensuch data need to be integrated with other geoinformation. a coordinated plan isneeded to link as much of this information as possible to geographic location. forexample, use of census data could be considerably enhanced if the names andextents of its reporting zones (census tracts, counties, metropolitan areas) couldbe organized in gazetteer form for use in distributed geolibraries.effective description of geoinformation can be difficult, and the fgdc'scontent standard for digital geospatial metadata extends to several hundredfields. while federal agencies are mandated to create such metadata and haveaccess to extensive resources, there is often little incentive for a local agency tocreate metadata for its own holdings. many agencies have suggestedsimplifications of the fgdc standard; the alexandria digital library(alexandria.ucsb.edu), for example, uses a subset of 35 fields to describe itsholdings. dublin core is another effort to simplify the description of informationusing standard fields (purl.org/dc).the www makes it possible for virtually anyone to contribute informationby creating and maintaining a www site. distributed geolibraries could takegreat advantage of this potential by making it possible for users to double asproviders of information, especially information that is the result of abstraction,services and functions64distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.manipulation, interpretation, or synthesis of other information. for example,papers written based on distributed library resources could be contributed back todistributed geolibraries. the distinction being made here between raw data andderived knowledge is discussed at greater length in chapter 3.searching over distributed assetsin a traditional library the catalog provides an index to the library's contents.in a distributed geolibrary the contents and the users are distributed, and fiveoptions can be identified for the catalog:1. a unified catalog exists in one place and can be searched by users. inthis option each custodian of data submits metadata describing eachavailable data set to a central site, where the records are assembledinto a searchable database. each record directs users to theappropriate location of the data set. for geoinformation, which tendsto use specialized formats, this option requires the strongest centralcontrol and the highest level of cooperation from participatingcustodians.2. each custodian of data assembles metadata describing each data setaccording to a standard, forming a distributed catalog. users submitrequests to a central site, and these are then automatically executedby search agents that examine each custodian's metadata.performance of this solution degrades as the number of custodiansincreases.3. a collectionlevel catalog exists that identifies the generalcharacteristics of each custodian's holdings and uses them to directsearches. for example, searches for data on some part of new yorkstate might be directed to a custodian in albany known to have alarge collection of that state's data. the efficiency of this optiondepends on how precisely custodians' holdings can be differentiated.in effect it implements the kinds of expert knowledge that allowusers to find data on the www in the absence of effectivecataloging.services and functions65distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4. use a catalog built by a search service. search services such asaltavista and yahoo build catalogs automatically by usingintelligent agents or web crawlers, but they do so strictly on the basisof words found in text and are not effective ways of building acatalog for a distributed geolibrary. nonetheless, it may be possibleto build a new generation of specialized agents capable ofrecognizing geoinformation and extracting its important metadatadescriptors. such agents have been built on a prototype basis in thecase of imagery; they successfully recognize the formats of imagery,open them, and compute such indices as shape, texture, and color foruse in catalogs.5. no catalog exists. this reflects the situation on the www beforewww search services became available (and even today substantialparts of the www's resources remain unindexed by searchservices). search for geoinformation without a catalog relies on theuser's personal knowledge of the www's resources. whereas a userof a research library can assume with some confidence that anyresearch library will contain a copy of a major monograph or apopular journal, the principle of the www is almost exactly theopposite: a given item of information is most likely available at onlyone site. search under these circumstances can be like looking for theproverbial needle in a haystack, with order 107 sites to search. in thecase of geoinformation, the likelihood that a given item will be on aserver increases with proximity to the item's footprint for severalreasons: interest in the item is likely to be higher near or within thefootprint; custodians in proximity to the footprint are more likely tohave responsibility; and sponsorship of the data's collection andacquisition is more likely closer to the footprint. but the effect islikely to be weak and as such will provide an unreliable strategy forsearch.integration, analysis, and manipulationunlike books, which exist largely to be read, much geoinformation is raw innature and is obtained for purposes that include detailed interpretation, analysis,and manipulation. a user requesting a remotely sensed image, for example,might submit itservices and functions66distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to extensive operations that include correction for various known distortions,classification, and integration with other data obtained through similar processes.the end result of obtaining a landsat image from an internet site might be astatistical assessment of the amount of change that has occurred in an area overthe past 10 years, following several months of detailed analysis andmanipulation.digital libraries differ from their traditional predecessors in the potential tosupport extensive manipulation of information once it has been retrieved. thismanipulation might include: correction for known distortions; to obtain statistical summaries; rubber sheeting to register geospatial data sets to known locations or toeach other; projection changes, and datum changes; use as input to complex environmental models for purposes ofcalibration or prediction; use in complex decisionmaking processes involving many stakeholders;or generalization, classification, interpretation, and other forms ofinformation abstraction.finding 8a distributed geolibrary would allow users to specify a requirement,search across the resources of the internet for suitable geoinformation,assess the fitness of that information for use, retrieve and integrate it withother information, and perform various forms of manipulation and analysis.a distributed geolibrary would thus integrate the functions of browsing thewww with those of gis and related technologies.over the past three decades there has been enormous progress in thedevelopment and adoption of technologies for manipulating geoinformation,including gis and imageprocessing systems. today, most users of such systemsrely heavily on theservices and functions67distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ability to obtain input data from internet resources, despite the lack of effectivetools such as those envisioned for distributed geolibraries. five steps characterizethis gathering process:1. specification of requirements, including coverage area, date, theme,level of detail, and other important characteristics.2. search over known or likely sources, using a combination ofpersonal knowledge and the limited capabilities of internet searchservices.3. assessment of the fitness for use of possible data sets, by comparingtheir documented characteristics with the specified requirements.4. retrieval of suitable data sets.5. opening of retrieved data sets on the user's system, includingnecessary changes of format and other steps needed to integrate dataeffectively.many uses of geoinformation involve group activityšmultidisciplinaryresearch projects involving several investigators, planning projects involvingseveral stakeholders and decision makers, group classroom projects involvingseveral students. distributed geolibraries should provide services to support suchcollaborative work (see finding 7, chapter 3).many of the activities that could benefit from distributed geolibraries arebest carried out away from the office desktop in the field. emergency reliefoperations call for decisions that are best made in the presence of the emergency,where the emergency and its context can be observed directly. access todistributed geolibraries could usefully augment the power of other fieldbasedtechnologies, including the global positioning system, and mobile computing.wireless connections could be used to search for and download information fromdistant servers and to upload new information gathered in the field.services and functions68distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finding 9many important applications of distributed geolibraries are best locatedin the field, using portable systems and wireless communications. deliveryof services to the field is important in emergency management, agriculture,natural resource management, and many other applications.assisting usersalthough the demand can never be fully satisfied, libraries provide largeamounts of assistance to their users, funded through library budgets. the internetprovides limited assistance, and users of the www are very much on their own,forced to rely on the limited assistance of online help, manuals, and otherdevices. if distributed geolibraries are to function as a more powerful evolutionof the library model, effective ways must be found to help users navigate throughtheir complexities and ambiguities. the problem is, if anything, more severe forgeoinformation, which has always required a disproportionately high level ofhuman assistance and user expertise.we have little experience with the problems that are likely to occur wheninexperienced users begin to make widespread use of geoinformation. problemsposed by the important metadata variable level of geographic detail are discussedin this context by goodchild and proctor (1997), who conclude that newmetaphors are needed to make it possible for general users to conceptualize theirneeds. for example, the metaphor of height of viewpoint above the surface of theearth (move higher for less detail, descend for more detail) can be readilyunderstood and used by children.assessment and feedbacklibraries also employ staff who listen to their users, another function that isdifficult to replicate in the impersonal digital environment of the internet. on theother hand, many new and exciting mechanisms for eliciting feedback have beendeveloped on the www, and distributed geolibraries would doservices and functions69distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.well to exploit these. for example, each custodian site might invite comments onits geoinformation from users and make these remarks available to others.extensive assessment will be needed of the designs of user interfaces, to evaluatewhether they achieve the objectives of distributed geolibraries, before they arewidely released and adopted. such designs should evolve through proceduresfamiliar in the field of humancomputer interaction, including evaluation studiesand interactive refinement.options for the delivery of distributedgeolibrary servicesideally, we see a distributed geolibrary functioning as a single homogeneousentity capable of responding to a single query from a user, just as altavista iscapable of responding to a query about some combination of key words. inpractice, however, a number of configurations are possible, combining aspects ofthe following extremes:1. onestop shopping. one server provides a onestop shoppingservice, perhaps to a limited user base via an intranet or to auniversal base via the internet. either the entire catalog is mountedon the server or a query to the server results in transparent access to adistributed catalog. similarly, geoinformation resources are servedeither directly or transparently through automated access todistributed resources. the agency operating the central server alsomaintains it, develops and enforces standards and protocols, anddirects future development. several servers currently approximatethis mode of operation over substantial thematic and geographicdomains, including the usgs's eros data center, and nasa'seosdis. this option works well in areas where the resources tocreate geoinformation come from a single source that can also funddissemination. problems arise when jurisdictions or thematic areasoverlap significantly. for example, are data about the city of atlantamore likely to be found in a server operated by the city, county,state, orservices and functions70distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.federal government, or by the united nations? are data about soilsmost likely to be found on a server operated by the u.s. departmentof agriculture or the usgs?2. distributed responsibility. this option follows the example of thewww, for which policies are established by volunteer grassrootsorganizations that recognize need, devise solutions, and make themfreely available to the user community. protocols and standards allowany individual or group to participate in distributed geolibraries,subject to very loosely defined constraints. whereas this modelapproximates the www, it differs sharply from the mode ofoperation of the traditional library, with its substantial resources,gatekeepers, and quality control. the function of cataloging on thewww, for example, which is approximated by the search services,exists because certain companies saw business opportunities inproviding a service that was compatible with www standards andmet an obvious need. similarly, quality control in distributedgeolibraries might be achieved not by a central gatekeeper authoritybut by independent groups analogous to the good housekeepinginstitute that assess and certify geoinformation on a forprofit ornonprofit basis.finding 10there are several alternative architectures for distributed geolibraries,including a single enterprise sponsored by a wellresourced agency,analogous to a national library; a network of enterprises with their ownsponsors, analogous to a network or federation of libraries; and a loosenetwork held together by shared protocols, analogous to the www.geolibrary services can be freely combined and used based on applicationneeds. for geolibraries to operate in a distributed (clientserver) computingenvironment, services and functions must operate on a network of servers andclients. the availability of services must take into account server characteristics,such as file sharing and application serving, and whether there is a "thin" or"thick" client. in networking terminology a thick client isservices and functions71distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.defined as having operations and calculations executed on the client, consistent inthis context with the gisystems model. a "thin" client may require that selectedfunctions run on the server, consistent with the giservices model. whether theclient should be thick or thin will depend on the task and associated performancerequirements. for example, it may be appropriate to use thick clients for mapdisplay services, allowing the patron to take over the many intuitive decisions ofgraphic design, layout, and so forth, as well as to accommodate whatever outputdevices are available.still other functions may deliver services best by avoiding transmission oflarge amounts of repetitive data across a network. for map browsing and placename searches, a geolibrary might use a "hybrid" approach by storing thebasemap and gazetteer on the client but leaving the catalog functions on theserver. basemap information is voluminous and not likely to change frequently,so rather than transmit it repeatedly from a server it may be more efficient to storeit locally in a specialized hybrid browser. suitable basemaps include digitaltopographic maps and also images of the earth's surface. additional detail can beprovided by digital elevation data, so the basemap provides a close resemblanceto the actual surface of the earth. "the role of client and server componentsshould be dynamic and changeable. the balance of functionality between clientservices and server components will be a critical issue for the success of . . .distributed systems" (tsou and buttenfield, 1998).services and functions72distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5building distributed geolibrariesrequirementsprevious sections of this report outline the vision of distributed geolibraries,discuss the problems and issues related to their social and institutional contextand define their services and functions. this chapter addresses the process ofbuilding distributed geolibraries, the steps that will need to be taken to implementthe vision, and related issues. it is impossible to be precise, of course, because ofuncertainties surrounding future technologies, because the outcomes of researchare in principle impossible to anticipate, and because many issues can only beresolved by constructing and working with prototypes. given these constraints,this report attempts to address a number of key questions and to find answerswhere possible: will it take to build distributed geolibraries? what economic incentives can be put in place such that stakeholders inall sectors of the community (business, education, government) can andwill participate? what arrangements need to be put in place in the form of institutions,regulations, standards, protocols, committees, and so forth? what research needs to be done to address problems and issues for whichno methods or solutions currently exist? how long will this researchtake?building distributed geolibraries73distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. what data sets need to be constructed, and what mechanisms might beused? software needs to be written, and who is likely to write it?at a higher level one might ask how it is possible to know the answers tothese questions. complex software systems and new institutions arise through aniterative process in which the end result may not be apparent until the process hasbeen under way for some time. creating a vision is part of that process, but thevision may be wrong or unachievable. largescale prototypes are sometimesbuilt in part because it is difficult or impossible to know what is possible withoutsuch largescale experimentation. without building a distributed geolibraryprototype, it may not be possible to identify exactly what it will do successfullyand what it will not do. it may be difficult to know at an early stage how much adistributed geolibrary will cost or whether its costs will be exceeded by itsbenefits.the panel' vision of distributed geolibraries views them as a primarydistribution mechanism for getting geospatial data and geographic knowledgeresources into the hands of all stakeholders. traditionally, the primary source ofgeospatial data in the united states, as in many other countries, has been thenational mapping agency. dissemination has been predominantly a onetomanyoperation, as a single source provided information to a distributed user base. thevision of the national spatial data infrastructure (nsdi) is very different andreflects an increasing degree of empowerment of individuals and agencies assignificant producers of geospatial data. this vision is manytomany, replacing asingle source with a much more complex array. it is also complicated by the factthat the user/producer distinction is no longer as clear. many users of geospatialdata add value and become producers, and many users serve their own networksof clients. many users of geospatial data are producers of geographic knowledge,which they may want to publish or make available through the mechanism ofdistributed geolibraries.building distributed geolibraries74distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the manytomany paradigm is familiar to librarians, who have traditionallyacted as brokers between the publishers and the users of information. thus, theparadigm shift that is occurring in geospatial data dissemination, in part through aprocess of technological empowerment, provides a strong reason to look to thelibrary as a metaphor for new dissemination models and suggests that the libraryis a good place to look for models of distributed geolibraries and for solutions toproblems and issues that may arise in building them. on the other hand, thetimescale of library operations has been far slower than is normal with digitaldata dissemination. it may take years for information to pass fully through thecomplex process of publication and cataloging until it is finally available to thetraditional library user. users of the www are accustomed to delays on the orderof minutes not years. thus the library model will be useful only if its customarytimescales can be compressed by many orders of magnitude.the following sections address the needs of distributed geolibraries in termsof standards and protocols, data sets, georeferencing, cataloging, visualizations,and knowledge creation. later sections discuss research needs and institutionalarrangements. the final section of the chapter discusses the measurement andassessment of progress in building distributed geolibraries.standards and protocolsgeospatial applications are already supported by a large number ofstandards and protocols, and many more are in various stages of development.the set of particular relevance to distributed geolibraries includes: the metadata standard developed by the federal geographic datacommittee (fgdc) and known as the content standards for digitalgeospatial metadata (http://www.fgdc.gov). this standard allowscatalogs of geospatial data sets to be constructed using welldefinedcontent. it is elaborate, and substantial effort is needed to achievecompliance. a very similar general metadata standard is inbuilding distributed geolibraries75distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the international organization for standardization (iso) review processunder the iso technical committee 211 (isotc 211). general file format standards for geospatial data. these includestandards mandated under fips 173 and known as the spatial datatransfer standard (sdts), the scientific data standards hdf andnetcdf, the imagery standards tiff and geotiff, the military standarddigest, and many more. interoperability specifications. the open gis consortium(www.opengis.org ) is developing a wide range of specifications forgeospatial objects to support interoperation and is strongly supported bythe gis software industry.other standards of relevance to distributed geolibraries include those underdiscussion on intellectual property rights in digital data, standards of geospatialdata quality, definitions of geographic feature types, and general mappingstandards. they are being developed through a multitude of standardsorganizations, including, for example, the iso, the american national standardsinstitute (ansi), the fgdc, and the international cartographic association.the internet and the www are built on a series of standards and protocolsthat have been widely accepted not because of any compulsion or mandate butbecause they clearly work and enable interesting applications. they includetcp/ip and http. in the coming years it is likely that these standards will beextended repeatedly, and it appears that the architecture of the nextgenerationinternet will be significantly enhanced. although none of these developmentshave been driven or are likely to be driven by the special needs of distributedgeolibraries, as in the past we can expect them to be exploited in whatever waysare interesting, valuable, and appropriate.finding 11new technological initiatives such as the nextgeneration internet andinternet ii are likely to provide extensions to internet and www protocolsand orders of magnitude increases in bandwidth. many of thesedevelopments are expected to be relevant to distributed geolibraries.building distributed geolibraries76distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data setslibraries assist their users in many ways; some of the most important are themechanisms of abstraction employed to help users find relevant information. theprocess of cataloging is assisted by a number of data sets known as authorities that provide essential indices and lists.in distributed geolibraries an essential authority is the gazetteer. adistributed geolibrary's gazetteer will differ in several key respects from thetraditional version found in the back pages of atlases: support for extents, defined as the bounding coordinates of placenames.traditional gazetteers, and their digital equivalents such as thegeographic names information system provide only point referencesfor most features. in contrast to point locations, extents are needed toresolve the relevant discrepancies between the given footprint of anasset and the footprint of a user query. because there is only marginalvalue in a highly precise footprint (since adding additional precision to aboundary's location will only marginally increase the effectiveness of asearch), it may be sufficient to provide only bounding coordinates (e.g.,minimum and maximum latitude and longitude).extensibility, defined as the ability of a user to insert additional placenames of interest into a local copy of a standard authority gazetteer.specialization, defined as the ability of a user to define gazetteers forspecial applications. many application domains have their ownequivalents of recognized place names. hydrologists use standard waysof indexing watersheds, for example, and remote sensing specialists usestandard numbering systems for the images derived from satellites suchas landsat. translations from these systems to standard coordinates willbe important data sets in support of the functions of distributedgeolibraries. support for fuzziness. traditional gazetteers literally provide authorityonly for officially recognized place names. while thebuilding distributed geolibraries77distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.footprint of a city name may vary depending on context and usage, theofficial footprint is most often defined by the city limits. users ofdistributed geolibraries will want to be able to search based on placenames that are not officially recognized but nevertheless in commonusage, such as "downtown."finding 12a comprehensive gazetteer, linking named places and geographiclocations, would be an essential component of a distributed geolibrary. anational gazetteer would be a valuable addition to the framework data setsof the nsdi. these framework data sets are being coordinated by thefgdc, which also has the responsibility for associated standards andprotocols. production and maintenance of the national gazetteer could bethrough the national mapping division of the u.s. geological survey(usgs) in collaboration with other agencies and could be an extension ofthe usgs's geographic names information system.another type of authority used by libraries is the thesaurus. in thegeoinformation case, various kinds of authorities would be useful: lists ofstandard feature types, standard data themes, standard attribute definitions. forexample, it would be useful if the meaning of vegetation and associated termscould be standardized, and much effort by the fgdc has been devoted over thepast few years toward this end. in a world in which everyone can be a dataproducer, it is no longer possible to rely solely on the federal government todefine essential mapping terms.at the same time it is important that distributed geolibraries reflect thecontemporary social norms of their users. the very term authority  suggests acommandandcontrol philosophy that may be orthogonal to the prevailingculture of the internet and the www, which is dominated by individualempowerment and voluntary consensus. an authority for a distributed geolibraryis clearly something different from a traditional library authority, and digitaltechnology must be used to serve different ends. instead of a single authoritycreated by a central agency and enforced topdown on the community throughregulation, mandate, or incentive, digitalbuilding distributed geolibraries78distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology should be used to support translation and interoperability between avariety of different meanings and interpretations in a bottomup process thataccommodates diverse communities and groups and their associatedterminologies. if the term downtown means something different to user a than touser b, distributed geolibraries should use the power of digital technology tomake the two meanings interoperable, rather than to support the imposition of asingle interpretation on all users.georeferencingthe system of latitude and longitude has been subject to internationalstandards since the late nineteenth century. however, the definitions of latitudeand elevation are dependent on the mathematical function used to approximatethe shape of the earth, and many such functions are in use. thus, latitude is notfully interoperable, and two points near each other on the earth and measuredfrom opposite sides of certain international boundaries do not converge perfectly.additional complications occur in the use of other world coordinate systems, suchas utm (universal transverse mercator coordinate system) and between theu.s. state plane coordinate systems. if distributed geolibraries are to be useful topeople who do not understand the complexities of geodetic datums andcartographic projections, it will be necessary for systems to be developed that arecapable of hiding such details or making them fully transparent to the user. thus, auser ought to be able to access data sets in different projections and based ondifferent datums and expect the system to handle the differences automatically.such transparency is not yet available in standard geospatial software productsand data sets, and its feasibility has not been demonstrated.other general ways of referencing the surface of the earth are gainingpopularity because of interest in global environmental change and other processesthat operate at the global level. these include standard hierarchical grids such asqtm (dutton, 1984) and the sampling grids used by the emap program (whiteet al., 1992).building distributed geolibraries79distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.such hierarchical systems may be important internally as indexing schemesfor distributed geolibraries (goodchild and yang, 1992).catalogingreference was made earlier to the need to compress the traditionaltimescales of the library world. nowhere is this more important than incataloging, which serves the critical function of abstracting the information usersneed to find, examine, assess, and retrieve data. in effect, metadata are the key tothe manytomany structure that allows many users to search across manypotential suppliers, and its timely creation will be crucial if distributedgeolibraries are to function. unfortunately, the process of metadata creation fordigital geospatial data can be as lengthy and labor intensive as its traditionalequivalent. the task of creating a full metadata record for a geospatial data setusing the fgdc metadata standard can be much greater than the task ofcataloging a simple book. the geospatial data community appears to haveaccepted the notion that metadata creation is largely the responsibility of theproducer, whereas the prevailing notion in the library community is thatcataloging is the responsibility of the librarian. this reflects a distinct differencein philosophy, since the library practice is based on the notion that the librarianmay be more skilled in abstracting information on behalf of the user than is theproducer of the information.if time is of the essence in the digital world of the internet, it makes goodsense to try to replace the laborintensive cataloging process with automatedmethods. the internet world's solution to this problem has been the www searchservice, exemplified by altavista, yahoo, and excite. to be successful, a searchservice designed to help the user of distributed geolibraries find geospatial dataand geographic knowledge would have to place heaviest emphasis on thedetermination of an information object's geographic footprint, either by detectingor inferring coordinates or by identifying an appropriate place name, to beconverted to coordinates using a gazetteer. such tools would perform thefunctions of abstracting and metadata creation automatically. suchbuilding distributed geolibraries80distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.automated discovery, indexing, and abstracting tools do not yet exist and willrequire extensive research and development. three models that providealternatives to the search service are described in chapter 4. they are technicallymuch simpler, but require practices that appear to be incompatible or onlypartially compatible with the culture of the internet.visualizationone of the most powerful advantages of the concept of distributedgeolibraries is the ability for the user to interact with a representation of thesurface of the earth. information about the earth's surface is naturallyconceptualized as belonging to the surface, and globes, which are actual scaledrepresentations of the earth, provide a familiar and easily understood informationsource. the notion of doing the same in the digital world, of presentinginformation as if it were actually located on the surface of the globe, is termed thedigital earth metaphor, and lies behind the idea described earlier in chapter 2.some types of geoinformation illustrate close approximations to actualappearance and can be rendered by draping onto a curved surface. these includeoptical imagery and falsecolor imagery, where colors are used to renderinformation that corresponds to some other possibly invisible part of thespectrum.other information in distributed geolibraries is not rendered so easily. how,for example, would one portray economic information such as average householdincome using the digital earth metaphor? in some cases there may be cleverways of making visible what is normally invisible; in other cases it may benecessary to represent the presence of information using symbols that exploitsome other metaphor, such as books or library shelves. this is a novel area withno obvious guideposts, and research will be needed to determine how best tomake the user of distributed geolibraries aware of the existence of informationand of its important characteristics. in particular, we know almost nothing abouthow to render dynamic geospatial data or how to indicatebuilding distributed geolibraries81distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.availability, yet we anticipate that such data will be increasingly available to theusers of distributed geolibraries.knowledge constructionusers of distributed geolibraries will need tools for analysis, modeling,simulation, decision making, and the creation of new geographic knowledge. animportant component will be the workspace in which the user can process datausing many of the functions found in today's gis, along with other functions suchas those described earlier in chapter 4. given the massive investment in gis, theeasiest way to achieve this will be through collaboration between the builders ofdistributed geolibraries and the developers and vendors of gis software.compatibility and interoperability between gis products and distributedgeolibraries will be needed. for example, the metadata used to discover, assess,and retrieve data should be processed and updated by the gis as data aremanipulated and used to create new data sets. metadata should be generatedautomatically when new knowledge is created by analysis and modeling. currentsoftware products are generally incapable of these functions, and much researchremains to be done to make them generally available.research needsmany of the topics discussed in this report fall under the heading of ''thingswe do not yet know how to do." in some cases, such as the building of adistributed geolibrary itself, there may be no obviously missing piece of theory orunderstanding; rather, it may be that we have not yet tried and that givensufficient resources the necessary knowledge will be available. but other itemsrequire more focused research. among them are the following:scalability. we have no experience with building and operating datahandling systems on the massive scales envisioned here.building distributed geolibraries82distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interface design. most information technologies are designed for skilledusers. distributed geolibraries will be used by everyone, over a widerange of levels of cognitive understanding, and will require newmethods of interface design that embody sound principles, some ofwhich have yet to be discovered.merging data. we have very little experience with the massiveredundancy anticipated in distributed geolibraries, where many sourcesof the same data will be available. we do not have techniques formerging data from different sources, across different scales and levels ofaccuracy, or across different data models or ontologies, or for combiningor conflating the desirable properties of sources. distributed geolibrarieswill be one of a growing number of applications that depend on theability to register multiple data sets quickly and easily and to removeobvious discrepancies.indexing. our methods of indexing data have been developed for the flattwodimensional world of maps and images. distributed geolibrarieswill require comprehensive approaches to indexing that are capable ofsupporting "drilling down" over a wide range of scales.visualization. while techniques for visualizing static twodimensionaldata are well understood, particularly in cartography, we do not have thesame level of understanding of appropriate ways to visualize data on thecurved surface of the earth, especially when the data are timedependent. much more research is needed into appropriate metaphors,techniques, and user responses before these will be as easy as traditionalcartographic visualization.finding 13the success of a distributed geolibrary will be largely dependent on theability to integrate information available about a place. that ability isseverely impeded today by differences in formats and standards, accessmechanisms, and organizational structures. removal of impediments tointegration should become a high priority of government agencies thatprovide geospatial data.building distributed geolibraries83distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.finding 14significant research problems will have to be solved to enable thevision of distributed geolibraries. research is needed on indexing,visualization, scaling, automated search and abstracting, and dataconflation. research on these issues targeted to improve access tointegrated geoinformation might be pursued by the national sciencefoundation and other agencies sponsoring basic science, as well as by thenational mapping division of the usgs, and the national imagery andmapping agency.many mechanisms and programs already exist to move this research agendaforward. examples include the following:the digital library initiative. funded first in 1994 by nsf, nasa, anddarpa, this program was recently reannounced (www.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf9863/nsf9863.html), and is expected to fund research through 2003.among the six projects funded by the first round, those at the universityof california's berkeley (elib.cs.berkeley.edu) and santa barbara(alexandria.ucsb.edu) campuses are particularly relevant to distributedgeolibraries.digital earth. as discussed in chapter 2, vicepresident gore describeda vision of digital earth that bears substantial resemblance to distributedgeolibraries. in the next few years this vision may develop into asubstantial funded research program.digital government. nsf recently announced research opportunities in anew program to build stronger ties between the research community incomputer and information science and engineering and variousgovernment departments with very significant investments in systemsand data integration (nsf program announcement 98121). thisprogram may be a suitable vehicle for promoting the research needed tosupport distributed geolibraries.knowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi). nsf's kdi programannouncement (nsf program announcement 9855) has strongrelevance to the vision and issues of distributed geolibraries.building distributed geolibraries84distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the august 1998 interim report of the president's informationtechnology advisory committee (www.ccic.gov/ac) called forsubstantial increases in federal information technology research anddevelopment and for a series of virtual expeditions in specific areas. aneffort in distributed geolibraries seems to fit the intent of the report well.in addition to these formal mechanisms, significant research anddevelopment activities are under way in the private sector among vendors of gissoftware and among defense and intelligence contractors that can be expected topush in the direction of distributed geolibraries over the next few years. forexample, the vendors of new commercial space imagery could use systems likedistributed geolibraries for the dissemination of their data products to the broaduser community. the fgdc is also a potential source of research initiatives inthis area, given its relevance to the future dissemination mechanisms of thensdi.many of the research needs identified here are basic in nature, and it may bemany years before solutions can be found. on the other hand some issues such asthe need for better methods of data integration, are so widely recognized,technical in nature, and strongly motivated that significant progress can beexpected in a comparatively short period.institutional needsalthough elements of a distributed geolibrary already exist in the form ofprototype clearinghouses and other projects, it is easy to lose sight of the broaderconcept and the degree to which it represents a radical departure from current andpast practices as reflected in our institutions and their accepted functions. morespecifically: traditional production and dissemination of geoinformation have beencentralized, as functions of the upper levels of government. thesearrangements made good sense in the past, but the empowerbuilding distributed geolibraries85distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ment that has occurred as a result of the almost universal adoption ofinformation technologies, especially geographic informationtechnologies, over the past two decades has called them into question.yet such institutions as the national mapping agencies still reflect thislegacy. the vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly basedrestructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination ofgeospatial data and one that is much more bottomup, decentralized,and voluntary. the institutional arrangements of the www provide anexcellent model. the implications of distributed geolibraries for intellectual propertyrights, the library as an institution, and the economics of information useare discussed at length in chapter 3. traditional production and dissemination practices for geoinformationhave emphasized the horizontal integration of information at the expenseof vertical integration. today it is much easier to obtain and make use ofthe same type of data for different areas than it is to obtain and make useof different types of data for the same area. a distributed geolibrarywould prioritize vertical integration to obtain responses to such queriesas "what have you got about there ?" producers and distributors ofgeospatial data could make it much easier to integrate different types ofdata. the usgs, for example, could make it easier to obtain digitalelevation data, digital topographic data, and digital orthophoto data forthe same area. today that ability is severely impeded by differences informats and standards, access mechanisms, and organizationalstructures, as well as in the basic geometric and positional problemsassociated with varying accuracy and varying definitions of shorelinesand other features.finding 15while traditional production of geospatial data has been relativelycentralized, the vision of distributed geolibraries represents a broadly basedrestructuring of past institutional arrangements for the dissemination ofgeospatial data and one that is much more bottomup, decentralized, andvoluntary.building distributed geolibraries86distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some of these issues are specific to geoinformation and geospatial data, butothers are generally applicable to the emerging information society, which isbeing driven by technological change and by the desire for greater access toinformation. lopez and larsgaard (1998) discuss this relationship between theneeds of the geospatial data and the broader institutional setting of the evolvingdigital library. that relationship is complex, and it is clear that distributedgeolibraries are part of a larger vision of the digital library of the future. but thecentral role they give to searches based on location makes them clearly distinct,as do the research problems identified in the previous section. the developmentof distributed geolibraries will require a unique set of partnerships betweendevelopers of information technologies, geographic information scientists,application domain specialists, and user communities. it is unlikely, therefore,that the vision of distributed geolibraries will be realized through broadly basedefforts to research and develop digital libraries in general; instead, efforts areneeded that are directed specifically at distributed geolibraries andgeoinformation. funding and coordination are needed to develop prototypes,stimulate basic research, and build partnerships that specifically address thevision of distributed geolibraries.measuring progressthe workshop convened by the mapping science committee (see preface)was designed to help identify a vision of distributed geolibraries and the stepsneeded to realize that vision. an important element of building distributedgeolibraries is, therefore, the measurement of progress: how will we know howmuch progress has been made and how much remains to be done? in this sectionwe offer some possible bases for measurement.querybased. if the objective of distributed geolibraries can be expressedin the ability to issue the query "what information is available aboutthere?", a simple measure of progress can be based on the amount ofinformation available to a user of the www inbuilding distributed geolibraries87distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.response to queries of that nature. some of the sites listed in appendix dcan already respond to that type of query. a simple measure would becomplicated by the various conditions under which information isavailable, such as cost, intellectual property restrictions, and quality.analysisbased. rather than base progress on the availability of data, amore sensitive and powerful measure might be one based on the abilityof the user to obtain services that involve analysis. information thatinvolves processing in its creation from raw data, and information thatrepresents knowledge, can be of more value that the raw datathemselves. if distributed geolibraries are to involve a vision of servicesrather than simple data supply, measures based on the complexity ofanalysis will be important indicators of progress.costbased. one way to assess a traditional library is on the basis ofcost: how much does it save its users to have access to resources such asbooks or databases via libraries in lieu of the user purchasing them? ifeconomics is the real driver of the library system, the same argument canbe made about distributed geolibraries: specifically, how much is savedwhen data are shared rather than recreated in multiple archives?abstractionbased. another view of the traditional library is that it is asuccessful abstraction mechanism, allowing its users to find and retrieveinformation objects (books) without direct knowledge of their contents,through the mechanisms used by the library to abstract and catalog. onemight measure the progress of a distributed geolibrary on this basis, bydeveloping indicators of the amount of work required on the part of theuser to find a given item of information. the library has clearly failed ifthis can be done only by inspecting the contents of every informationobject in the library.in addition, progress toward the vision of distributed geolibraries could bemeasured through the volume of accumulated research results, the sophisticationof prototypes, and the lessons learned from each.building distributed geolibraries88distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6conclusionsrevisiting the rationale for distributedgeolibrarieschapter 1 presents a limited set of examples for which the ability to accessinformation by place from distributed resources would be useful. in the firstexample, a truck accident has caused the potential for major environmentaldisaster and possibly loss of life. the accident's impact is directly dependent onthe ability of those responding to gather the necessary information on which aneffective response strategy can be based. knowing exactly where the accidentoccurred can reduce the time taken to make the first response. knowing what islikely to happen to the spilled liquids or gases can reduce their impact, lead tomore rapid cleanup, and avert many possible costly outcomes.actual benefits of improved access to information in such circumstances areextremely difficult to estimate. many of them are intangible and thus difficult toexpress in dollar terms. outcomes of such events vary enormously in severity,yet the difference between a life lost and a life saved is immense. in the case ofthe 1995 oklahoma city bombing, for example, it has been suggested that the useof a computerbased model of the murrah federal building, along withsimulations of how the explosion modified the structure and of where theoccupants were likely to be found, shortened the total duration of the rescueeffort by several days and significantly increased the probability that victimswould be found alive.conclusions89distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the other examples in chapter 1, the value of improved access togeoinformation lies in the intangible benefits of a betterinformed citizenry andof improved access by stakeholders to the information resources of governmentsand other agencies. in these examples, place  provides by far the most effectivemeans of searching for information when the issue is localized to aneighborhood, city, or region and when it spans many different themes,disciplines, and areas of responsibility. location is the only way to linkinformation from diverse themes in such circumstances, and our current inabilityto do that is a major impediment to informed debate on many of the issues thatconcern society.if a distributed geolibrary in some form is not developed, a majoropportunity made possible by recent developments in information technologywill be lost. with a geolibrary the time needed to respond to emergencies couldbe reduced, as those responsible for dealing with emergencies would have vastlyimproved means to assemble needed information. and with distributedgeolibraries the average citizen and stakeholder will have a greater opportunity tobe better informed about many local and regional issues.distributed geolibraries in contextchapter 2 describes a physical geolibrary as a building containing a largeglobe with which users would specify their areas of interest; in response, thelibrary would provide all of the information relevant to that area. the conceptwas presented as a thought experiment, since clearly such a physical geolibrarycould not be built. however, the concept suggests two questions that should beaddressed: (1) to what extent is the geolibrary an extension of the traditionallibrary with its card catalog and search mechanism based on author, title, andsubject? (2) how will the geolibrary complement traditional libraries?the workshop and this report have focused almost exclusively on queriesdefined primarily by location, arguing thatconclusions90distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for many reasons such queries have been difficult to handle in the traditionallibrary and that the kinds of materials best found through such queries areconsequently less likely to be found in the traditional library. thus, the geolibraryis distinguished by both a distinct search mechanism and a somewhat distinctcollection.it is important not to give exclusive emphasis to placebased searches, evenin the case of geospatial data. consider, for example, the following query "doyou have a picture of a hurricane?" queries of this form are common ineducation, for example, or the news media, and although they require geospatialdata in response, such as an image from space, the data's footprint on the earth'ssurface is actually irrelevant to the search.the panel suggests that the geolibrary is complementary to the traditionallibrary in the sense that it adds a new search mechanism to the traditional one. byadding placebased search to searches based on author, title, and subject, thedistributed geolibrary allows users with needs defined by place to search thedistributed archive of the www in new ways. in turn it encourages producersand custodians of geoinformation to make their information assets accessiblethrough the www. whether a distributed geolibrary evolves into a distinct set ofsoftware, protocols, and institutions or whether it becomes fully integrated intothe distributed digital library of the future remains to be seen.the ability to search by place should provide a strong stimulus to theproducers and custodians of geoinformation to add specifications of footprintsand to make use of metadata formats that include such information, including thefgdc's content standards for digital geospatial metadata (www.fgdc.gov ) andsuitably extended versions of the dublin core (purl.org/dc). governmentagencies could take a lead in this direction by developing a coordinated plan tolink as much information as possible to geographic footprints. this is alreadyunder way in those agencies represented on the fgdc, since such agencies aremandated to produce metadata according to the fgdc standard for all of theirgeospatial products. but the united states possesses vast archives of informationthat could be incorporated in aconclusions91distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.distributed geolibrary collection and made accessible to placebased search if itcould be linked to a footprint. linking much of this information to geographiclocationšin other words, to transform it to geoinformationšwould be valuablewithin a geolibrary context.several programs discussed in chapter 5 might provide support for thedevelopment of the distributed geolibrary, although none is targeted to thespecific research problems associated with placebased information resources.funding will be needed to stimulate the development of prototypes, supportresearch, and build partnerships directed specifically at distributed geolibraries, sothat the vision outlined in this report can become a reality and the problems ofdata access identified at the outset in chapter 1 can be addressed effectively.conclusions92distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesadler, p. s. (1995). geographic information systems and academic libraries: an introduction , thejournal of academic librarianship (special issue) 21(4): 233235.barker, j., et al. (1995). rights manager system: permissions manager subsystem (version 2 draft),library collections services, case western reserve university.borgman, c. l., m. j. bates, m. v. cloonan, e. n. efthimiadis, a. gillilandswetland, y. kafai, g.l. leazer, and a. maddox (1996). social aspects of digital libraries, final report to thenational science foundation; computer, information science, and engineering directorate;division of information, robotics, and intelligent systems; information technology andorganizations program. http://www.gslis.ucla.edu/dl/buckland, m. k. (1991). information as thing, journal of the american society for informationscience 42(5), 351360.corporation for national research initiatives (1998). nsf smete lib study: report of the smetelibrary workshop. washington, dc. http://www.dlib.org/smete/public/report.htmlcraig, w. j. (1995). public data access: another side of gis data sharing, in sharing geographicinformation, h. j. onsrud and g. rushton, eds., center for urban policy research, rutgersuniversity, new brunswick, n.j., pp. 107118.crawford, w., and m. gorman (1995). future libraries: dreams, madness and reality, americanlibrary association, chicago.dutton, g. h. (1984). geodesic modeling of planetary relief. cartographica 21(2,3), 188207.gayon, t. (1998). local geographic information and technology in colorado public libraries,master's thesis, department of geography, university of colorado, boulder.references93distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.gladney, h. m., and j. b. lotspiech (1998). safeguarding digital library contents and users: storing,sending, showing, and honoring usage terms and conditions, dlib magazine, may 1998.http://www.dlib.org/goodchild, m. f., and j. d. proctor (1997). scale in a digital geographic world. geographical andenvironmental modeling 1(1), 523.goodchild, m. f., and s. yang (1992). a hierarchical spatial data structure for global geographicinformation systems, cvgip: graphical models and image processing 54(1), 3144.goodchild, m. f., m. j. egenhofer, r. fegeas, and c. a. kottman, eds. (1998). interoperatinggeographic information systems, kluwer, new york.hawkins, b. l. (1994). creating the library of the future: incrementalism won't get us there! theserials librarian 24 (34), 1747.jones, j. (1997). federal gis projects decentralize. gis world 10(8), 4651.lopez, x. r., and m. larsgaard (1998). towards a california geospatial digital library: a strategy fornetworked knowledge. cartography and geographic information systems 25(3), 133141.losee, r. m. (1997). a discipline independent definition of information, journal of the americansociety for information science 48(3), 243269.moeller, j. (1998). the national spatial data infrastructure: an overview, office ofintergovernmental affairs newsletter 5, u.s. general services administration, washington,d.c., pp. 1213. http://policyworks.gov/intergovnational academy of public administration (1998). geographic information for the 21st century:building a strategy for the nation, washington, d.c., 358 pp.national research council (1993). toward a coordinated spatial data infrastructure for thenation. mapping sciencereferences94distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee, national academy press, washington, d.c., 171 pp. http://pompeii.nap.edu/books/0309048990/html/index.htmlnational research council (1997). bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data , committee on issues of transborder flow of scientific data, national academy press,washington, dc, 235 pp. http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/bitsofpower/national research council (1997). more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to thenation's information infrastructure, computer science and telecommunications board,national academy press, washington, d.c. http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/screen/national research council (1998). developing a digital national library for undergraduatescience, mathematics, engineering, and technology education: report of a workshop, center for science, mathematics, and engineering education national academy press,washington, d.c. http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/dlibrarynewcomb, s. r., n. a. kipp, and v. t. newcomb (1991). the hytime hypermedia/timebaseddocument structuring language, communications of the acm 34(11), 6783.perritt, h. h. (1996). law and the information superhighway. john wiley & sons, somerset, n.j:rhind, d. w. (1999). national and international geospatial data policies, in geographical informationsystems: principles, techniques, applications and management, p. a. longley, m. f.goodchild, d. j. maguire, and d. w. rhind, eds., wiley, new york, pp. 767787.star, s. l., and k. ruhleder (1996). steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: design and access forlarge information spaces, information systems research 7(1), 111134.tosta, n., and m. domaratz (1997). the u.s. national spatial data infrastructure. in geographicinformation research: bridging the atlantic, m. craglia and h. couclelis, editors, taylorand francis, london, pp. 1927.references95distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tsou, m., and b. p. buttenfield (1998). client/server components and metadata objects for distributedgeographic information services, proceedings, gis/lis '98, fort worth, tx, november.white, d., a. j. kimerling, and w. s. overton (1992). cartographic and geometric components of aglobal sampling design for environmental monitoring, cartography and geographicinformation systems 19(1), 522.worboys, m. f. (1995). gis: a computing perspective, taylor & francis, london.references96distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesappendixes97distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixes98distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix aworkshop participantsprudence s. adler, assistant executive director, association of researchlibrariestimothy m. alexander, consultant, washington, d.c.william y. arms, vice president, corporation for national researchinitiativesjames barrett, space imaging corporationgerald s. barton, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationfrancis p. bretherton, director, space science and engineering center,university of wisconsindon buhler, bureau of land managementbarbara p. buttenfield, department of geography, university of. coloradonicholas chrisman, department of geography, university of washingtondavid j. coleman, chairman, department of geodesy and geomaticsengineering, university of new brunswick, canadadonald f. cooke, president, geographic data technology, inc.frederic w. corle ii, partner, potomac research groupmax j. egenhofer, department of spatial information, science andengineering, university of mainejohn d. evans, department of urban studies and planning, massachusettsinstitute of technologychristos faloutsos, computer science department, carnegie mellonuniversitygary fitzpatrick, library of congressmichael j. folk, national center for supercomputing applications,university of illinoiskenneth e. foote, department of geography, university of texasappendix a99distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.alan m. gaines, earth sciences division, national science foundationkenn gardels, director, research program in environmental planning andgeographic information systems, university of california, berkeleyhenry l. garie, department of environmental protection, state of newjersey (president, national states geographic information council)barry j. glick, president, geosystems global corporation (mapquest)michael f. goodchild, national center for geographic information andanalysis, university of california, santa barbarastephen griffin, digital libraries initiative, national science foundationwayne a. hallada, defense intelligence agencylinda l. hill, alexandria digital library, university of california, santabarbarathomas m. holm, eros data center, u.s. geological surveysally howe, associate director, national coordination office forcomputing, information, and communicationsrobert e. kahn, president, corporation for national research initiativesthomas a. kalil, senior director, national economic council, executiveoffice of the presidentkaren kemp, national center for geographic information and analysis,university of california, santa barbaraannette j. krygiel, institute for national strategic studies, nationaldefense universitynand lal, digital libraries initiative, nasa goddard space flight centernina sn. lam, department of geography, louisiana state universityroberta e. lenczowski, deputy director for operations, national imageryand mapping agencymichael e. lesk, director, division of information and intelligentsystems, national science foundationclifford a. lynch, executive director, coalition for networkedinformationdavid m. mark, department of geography, state university of new york,buffalopatrick mcglamery, map and geographic information center, universityof connecticuteric miller, online computer library center, inc.john moeller, executive director, federal geographic data committee,u.s. geological surveyjoel morrison, geography division, bureau of the censusappendix a100distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.douglas d. nebert, federal geographic data committee, u.s. geologicalsurveyrobert neches, information sciences institute, university of southerncaliforniaharlan j. onsrud, department of spatial information science andengineering university of mainehedy c. rossmeissl, national mapping division, u.s. geological surveywalter senus, chief scientist, national imagery and mapping agencyben a. shneiderman, department of computer science, university ofmarylandkaren c. siderelis, director, north carolina center for geographicinformation and analysisterence smith, alexandria digital library, university of california, santabarbaragale teselle, information technology division, natural resourcesconservation servicerex w. tracy, vice president, gde systems, inc.robert tufts, tasca. keith turner, department of geology and geological engineering,colorado school of minesferris webster, college of marine studies, university of delaware (chair,icsu panel on world data centers)frederick weingarten, computing research associationjames f. williams ii, dean of libraries, university of coloradomaria zemankova, division of information and intelligent systems,national science foundationnrc staffthomas m. usselman, study director, mapping science committee,national research counciljennifer t. estep, administrative assistant, mapping science committee,national research councilmolly vogt, workshop assistant, national geographic societyappendix a101distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a102distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix bcontributed white papersthe following white papers were prepared and distributed to the workshopparticipants as provocative authored articles; they were designed to stimulatethought and were not peer reviewed. authors did not have the opportunity tomake revisions after the workshop. the papers (generally two to three pageslong) are available on the world wide web at http://www4.nas.edu/cger/besr.nsffollowing hyperlinks to mapping science committee, reports, distributedgeolibraries, white papers. this web site will be maintained at least through theend of 2000.what is a geolibrary? michael f. goodchild, university of california,santa barbarawhat is a geolibrary? clifford a. kottman, open gis consortiummaking the case for distributed geolibraries barbara p. buttenfield,university of colorado, boulderconfidence in distributed digital geolibraries roberta e. lenczowski,national imagery and mapping agencydata quality in distributed geolibraries rex w. tracy, gde systems,inc.national satellite land remote sensing data archive: "a nationalasset" thomas m. holm, u.s. geological survey eros data centerappendix b103distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.possible research topics related to geolibraries michael f. goodchild,university of california, santa barbaradistributed geolibraries: challenges and opportunities from acomputing and scientific data management perspective mike folk, nationalcenter for supercomputer applications, university of illinoisgeolibrary and statewide electronic atlas, nina lam, louisiana stateuniversityputting the user first: implications for the geolibrary a. keith turner,colorado school of minesgeolibraries walter senus, national imagery and mapping agencyproducer rights and public rights in spatial data sets in geolibraries harlan j. onsrud, university of mainedistributed geolibraries patrick mcglamery, university of connecticutgeolibrary access of historical climate data publications in the noaalibrary gerald s. barton, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationgeolibraries: integration into to the life cycle of information creationand use linda l. hill, alexandria digital library project, university ofcalifornia, santa barbarathe geodata network kenn gardels, university of california, berkeleywhat is a geolibrary? christos faloutsos, carnegie mellon universityappendix b104distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cworkshop agenda workshop ondistributed geolibraries: spatialinformation resourcesmapping science committeenational research council  national academy of sciencesroom green 130, 2001 wisconsin avenue, nwwashington, d.c.the workshop is intended to address the following: of a vision for geospatial data dissemination and access in2010.comparison of current efforts in digital library research, clearinghousedevelopment, and other data distribution and search activities. suggestion of shortterm and longterm research and development needed to achieve the vision. identification of the policy and institutional issues, particularly forconvergence of efforts to realize the vision.appendix c105monday, june 15, 19988:00registration, coffee, continental breakfastplenary8:30 introduction and purposemike goodchild, workshop chair,university of california, santa barbaradistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1069:00frame of referencešdigital libraries, internet, information sciencesrobert kahn, president, corporation for national research initiativesmichael lesk, division director, information and intelligent systems, nationalscience foundation10:20break10:40policyinstitutionaleducationaleric miller, online computer library center, inc.harlan j. onsrud, department of spatial information science and engineering,university of maine12:00lunch1:00breakout sessionseach group will discuss the following questions:1. what is a suitable vision for geospatial data dissemination and accessin 2010 (code named geolibraries)? what is a geolibrary?what types of information might a geolibrary contain?what services might it offer?what types of users would there be?what kinds of access restrictions might be needed?should a geolibrary be integrated with other information services?2. policy and institutional issueswhat are the legal, ethical, and political issues involved in creating geolibraries? forexample, what problems could geolibraries raise related to intellectual property rights?how might such issues affect the technical development of geolibraries?who should pay for the creation and maintenance of geolibraries? what componentsmight be "free" (funded by the public sector or by the private sector as loss leaders)?what institutional structures would be needed for geolibraries? what organizationsmight take a lead in their development?distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c107 what are the cognitive problems associated with using geolibraries? is itpossible to construct a geolibrary that is useful to a child in grade 3, forexample? what protocols would users need to master, and whatproblems would occur in using geolibraries across cultural or linguisticbarriers? what are the implications of a nationallevel distributedgeolibrary on education? what are the prospects for internationalgeolibraries?4:00plenaryrapporteurs will present results of eachbreakout group.5:00 adjourn5:30 reception; followed by dinner at 6:30tuesday, june 16, 19988:00 coffee, continental breakfastplenary8:30current activities andtechnical issuesben shneiderman, department of computer science, university ofmarylandthomas kalil, senior director, national economic council, the whitehouseterence smith, director, alexandria project, university of california,santa barbara10:20break10:30breakoutseach group will discuss the following questions:3. ongoing activities what components of existing efforts in digital library research,clearinghouse development, and other data distributiondistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c108and search activities might form a part of a distributed geolibrarysystem? kdi? digital earth?the necessary data sets to support geolibraries exist? what initiativesare needed to develop or compile them? how could the geolibraries concept be expanded beyond the nationallevel to take advantage of international and global informationresources?4. technical issues and r&d needs of geospatial data across themes and scales.generation of search engines interoperability interface metaphorsmetadata which of the r&d needs can be attained in the next few years, andwhich ones may take 5 to 10 years?12:00lunch1:30plenaryresults of the research needs and current activities to realize a "geolibrary" vision overall workshop results4:30adjourndistributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix dexample prototypesdetailed in this section is a sample of world wide web sites chosen toillustrate existing elements of the distributed geolibrary vision. each is largelyisolated from one another and falls short of the full vision. taken together, the setillustrates both what is already possible and how far we still are from a distributedgeolibrary.microsoft's terraserver (www.terraserver.com)terraserver offers digital imagery (figure d.1) from the russian spin2satellites and digital orthorectified photographs (orthophotos) from the u.s.geological survey. the archive contains over 1 terabyte of information and canbe queried by pointing, zooming, and panning on a basemap or by specifyingplacenames. no services are provided for finding or integrating other data basedon place.figure d.1.u.s. coverage in the terraserver database in october 1998.appendix d109distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mapquest (www.mapquest.com)the mapquest site offers a range of services based on its database (seefigure d.2). the map illustrates the ability to provide services based on specificcollections, in addition to serving unmodified information.figure d.2. result of a request to the mapquest site fora map centered on an address in st. louis, missouri.appendix d110distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.environmental protection agency zip code search(www.epa.gov/enviro/zipcodejs.html)the u.s. environmental protection agency's (epa) web site offers severalforms of placebased search through the agency's archives, including maps ondemand and zip code search. from the web site:the epa envirofacts warehouse is a database that includes information onsuperfund sites, drinking water, air pollution, toxic releases, hazardous waste,and water discharge permits. through envirofacts, you can get lists of whichfacilities in your neighborhood are releasing pollutants or are legally handlinghazardous materials, where any superfund sites are located and what theircleanup status is, and more. in many cases, you can link to more informationabout the chemicals involved at the listed sites, and find out whether they arepotentially harmful.through envirofacts' enviromapper feature, you can customize a computergenerated map of your neighborhood to view the location of epa regulatedsites, schools, churches, streams, streets, and other geographic features.appendix d111distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. bureau of the census tiger map server(tiger.census.gov)the bureau of the census web site supports placebased search for censusdata. in figure d.3 the tiger map server has generated a map of part ofgoleta, california, showing features selected by the user. the main purpose ofthe tiger map service project is to provide a goodquality, national scale,streetlevel map to users of the world wide web. this service is freely accessibleto the public, and based on an open architecture that allows other web developersand publishers to use public domain maps generated by this service in their ownapplications and documents. we planned to provide highquality street maps,with simple gis capabilities such as point display and statistical choroplethmapping.figure d.3. the u.s. bureau of the census tiger map server willcreate maps to user specifications, based on placebased search.appendix d112distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. geological survey national atlas (www.usgs.gov/atlas)the national atlas web site creates and delivers maps on demand from thenational atlas database. figure d.4 shows the initial stage of specification.figure d.4.the u.s. geological survey's national atlas web site, which allows users to specify and create customized maps from the national atlas database.appendix d113distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mit's digital orthophoto server (ortho.mit.edu)this massachusetts institute of technology web site serves digitalorthophotos (doqs) for the area around boston. figure d.5 shows the indexpage; by clicking on a tile it is possible to retrieve the associated data at a userdefined level of resolution.figure d.5.index page for mit's digital orthophoto server, which provides downloadable orthophotography for the boston area.appendix d114distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.alexandria digital library (alexandria.ucsb.edu)the alexandria digital library (adl) is the product of a research project atthe university of california, santa barbara, funded through the digital libraryinitiative of the national science foundation, the national aeronautics and spaceadministration, and the defense advanced research projects agency. figure d.6shows the first screen in adl's process of defining a placebased search.additional properties can be specified to narrow the search, which is then appliedto the order 106 data sets in the current adl collection.figure d.6.opening screen of the alexandria digital library's javabased engine for searching its collection based on location.appendix d115distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.microsoft's homeadvisor (www.homeadvisor.com)this microsoft web site is designed to help people searching for homes. itincludes the ability to access demographic and other information aboutneighborhoods (see chapter 1), search listings, and estimate payments.figure d.7 shows the opening screen.figure d.7.microsoft's homeadvisor web site.appendix d116distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix ebiographical sketches of panel membersmichael f. goodchild (chair) is professor and chair of the department ofgeography at the university of california, santa barbara; director of thenational center for geographic information and analysis; and associate directorof the alexandria digital library. he received his b.a. in physics fromcambridge university and ph.d. in geography from mcmaster university. dr.goodchild taught at the university of western ontario for 19 years beforemoving to his present position in 1988. his research interests focus on the genericissues of geographic information, including accuracy and the modeling ofuncertainty, design of spatial decision support systems, development of methodsof spatial analysis, and data structures for global geographic information systems.his publications include the two volume text entitled geographical informationsystems. principles, techniques, applications and management (1999, wiley).he is also chair of the mapping science committee.prudence s. adler is assistant executive director of the association ofresearch libraries (washington, d.c.), where she is primarily responsible forfederal relations and information policy activities. much of her recent emphasishas been on intellectual property rights in an electronic environment.barbara p. buttenfield is associate professor of geography at theuniversity of colorado in boulder. she holds a ph.d. in geography from theuniversity of washington. she has served on the faculty at the state universityof new york, buffalo; the university of california, santa barbara; and theuniversity of wisconsin, madison. dr. buttenfield's research interests focus oncartographic knowledge construction, spatial data delivery on the internet, andvisualization tools for geographic modeling. a current project to evaluate userappendix e117distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interface tools for the alexandria digital library is funded jointly by nsf,arpa, and nasa. she is past president of the american cartographicassociation, and serves on the editorial boards of computers environment andurban systems, transactions on gis, and cartographic perspectives. she is alsoa member of the mapping science committee.robert e. kahn is chairman, ceo, and president of the corporation fornational research initiatives (cnri), which he founded in 1986 after a 13 yearsat the u.s. defense advanced research projects agency (darpa). cnriprovides leadership and funding for research and development of the nationalinformation infrastructure. dr. kahn earned a ph.d. degree from princeton in1964. he worked at bell laboratories and as an assistant professor of electricalengineering at mit. he took a leave of absence from mit to join bolt beranekand newman, where he was responsible for the system design of the arpanet. in1972 he moved to darpa and subsequently became director of darpa'sinformation processing techniques office (ipto). while director of ipto heinitiated the united states government's billiondollar strategic computingprogram, the largest computer research and development program everundertaken. dr. kahn conceived the idea of openarchitecture networking. he is acoinventor of the tcp/ip protocols and was responsible for originating darpa'sinternet program. dr. kahn also coined the term national informationinfrastructure (nii) in the mid1980s, which later became more widely known asthe information superhighway. his recent work has been developing the conceptof a digital object infrastructure to provide a framework for interoperability ofheterogeneous information systems, particularly as applied to digital libraries.dr. kahn is a member of the national academy of engineering and a 1997recipient of the national medal of technology.annette j. krygiel is with the institute for national strategic studies,national defense university, ft. lesley j. mcnair, in washington, d.c. dr.krygiel has a b.s. in mathematics from st. louis university, and a m.s. andph.d. in computer science fromappendix e118distributed geolibraries: spatial information resources, summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.washington university, st. louis. in her doctoral research she developedmodeling techniques for parallel computing architectures. she began hergovernment career in 1963, serving with the defense mapping agency (dma)until july 1994. while at dma her areas of endeavor included softwaredevelopment, software engineering, management of research initiatives incomputer science and telecommunications, and program management of largescale systems. dr. krygiel rejoined dma's special program office to manage theprogram integration, test and delivery phases of dma's digital productionsystem, one of the u.s. department of defense's (dod) largest softwaredevelopments. subsequently, dr. krygiel served as dma's chief scientist untilher formal appointment by the secretary of defense as the director of the centralimagery office (cio), a dod combat support agency. she remained as directorfor twentyseven months until that agency merged into the national imagery andmapping agency in october 1996. she was awarded the national intelligencedistinguished service medal while cio director. dr. krygiel was subsequentlyappointed to the institute for national strategic studies at the national defenseuniversity, where she is investigating the problem of largescale systemintegration.harlan j. onsrud is associate professor in the department of spatialinformation science and engineering at the university of maine and chair of thescientific policy committee of the national center for geographic informationand analysis. he received b.s. and m.s. degrees in civil engineering from theuniversity of wisconsin and a juris doctorate from the university of wisconsinlaw school. his research focuses on (1) analysis of legal and institutional issuesaffecting the creation and use of digital databases and the sharing of geographicinformation, (2) assessing utilization of gis and the social impacts of thetechnology, and (3) developing and assessing strategies for supporting thediffusion of geographic information innovations. he is also a member of themapping science committee.appendix e119