detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9692a question of balance: private rights and the publicinterest in scientific and technical databases158 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309068253 | doi 10.17226/9692committee for a study on promoting access to scientific and technical data forthe public interest, national research councila question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee for a study on promoting access toscientific and technical data for the public interestcommission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.private rights and the public interestin scientific and technical databasesauestionofbalancea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation (under grant no. oce9729508), the national institutes of health (under purchase order no. 467mz801699), the nationalinstitute of standards and technology (under contract no. 43nanb909028), the national aeronautics and space administration, the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, and the unitedstates geological survey (through the aforementioned national science foundation grant no. oce9729508), and the department of energy (under contract no. defg0296er30277).international standard book number 0309068258library of congress catalog card number 9968421additional copies of this report are available from national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in thewashington metropolitan area); internet <http://www.nap.edu>.copyright 1999 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy ofengineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under theresponsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter tobe an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute ofmedicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by bothacademies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulfare chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councila question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee for a study on promoting access toscientific and technical data for the public interestrobert j. serafin, national center for atmospheric research, chairi. trotter hardy, college of william and mary, school of lawmaureen c. kelly, biosispeter r. leavitt, consultantlee e. limbird, vanderbilt university medical centerphilip loftus, glaxo wellcomeharlan j. onsrud, university of maineharvey s. perlman, university of nebraska, college of lawroberta p. saxon, skjerven, morrill, macpherson, franklin & friel, llpsuzanne scotchmer, university of california at berkeleymark stefik, xerox palo alto research centermartha e. williams, university of illinois at urbanachampaignnational research council staffpaul f. uhlir, study directorjulie m. esanu, program/research associatepamela gamble, administrative assistantbarbara wright, administrative assistanta question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicommission on physical sciences, mathematics,and applicationspeter m. banks, veridian erim international, inc., cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairwilliam f. ballhaus, jr., lockheed martin corporationshirley chiang, university of california at davismarshall h. cohen, california institute of technologyronald g. douglas, texas a&m universitysamuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc.jerry p. gollub, haverford collegemichael f. goodchild, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universitywesley t. huntress, jr., carnegie institutioncarol m. jantzen, savannah river technology centerpaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotajohn r. kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin company (retired)marsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniadusa m. mcduff, state university of new york at stony brookjanet norwood, u.s. commissioner of labor statistics (retired)m. elisabeth pat”cornell, stanford universitynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryrobert j. spinrad, xerox parc (retired)norman metzger, executive director (through july 1999)myron f. uman, acting executive director (as of august 1999)a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefaceviiin response to a request from several federal science agencies, the committee for a study on promoting access to scientific and technical data for thepublic interest (see appendix a) undertook a study to identify and evaluate thevarious existing and proposed policy approaches (including related legal, economic, and technical considerations) for protecting the proprietary rights of privatesector database rights holders while promoting and enhancing access toscientific and technical (s&t) data for publicinterest uses. specifically, thesponsors asked the study committee to address the following issues:1.describe the salient characteristics and importance of scientific and technical databases in research, both in general categories and using specificexamples.2.describe the practices of the production, dissemination, and use of s&tdata in the federal, nonprofit, and commercial contexts.3.identify the major incentives and disincentives in the production, dissemination, and use of s&t data in the federal, notforprofit, and commercial contexts.4.review the key elements of existing and proposed intellectual propertyrights regimes for noncopyrightable databases and other òcollections of information,ó including technical protection measures, with specific emphasis on s&tdatabases. also review the federal government policies regarding scientific dataproduction, protection, dissemination, and use, particularly for data produced ordisseminated by nongovernment entities under an agreement with government,including with government funding.5.consider the pros and cons of legal, policy, and technical options identia question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacefied in response to item 4 above, with particular attention to balancing the interests of s&t database providers and disseminators in protecting their investmentswith the interests of promoting access to and use of s&t data for research andother publicinterest uses.6.identify issues that require further analysis and resolution, and how toaddress them.7.provide conclusions and recommendations where possible, or otherwiseprovide an assessment of options.in discussing the charge and the scope of the project with the committee, thesponsors asked the committee to focus in particular on the legislative proposalson database protection then pending in congress as examples of the kinds ofstatutory options that might be adopted. both the sponsors and the committeewere well aware of the fact that those pending proposals would change furtherand therefore presented òmoving targetsó for the study. it is for this reason thatthe committeeõs recommendations regarding any potential legislation in this areaare offered as guiding principles rather than as specific language for a specificbill.the focus of the study was further constrained to domestic, rather thaninternational, issues. the committee was cognizant of the fact that any new u.s.legislation would ultimately have substantial significance internationally, both inthe economic and legal domains and in the s&t research community, but itlimited its investigation and analysis of foreign laws and international legal issues, concentrating only on their direct influence on the u.s. domestic legal andpolicy situation. in addition, although the subject matter included all s&t databases, the committee was able to choose only representative examples for discussion and analysis in the report. for instance, the committee did not includespecific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among otherdisciplines. nevertheless, the committee believes that the relatively broad spectrum of s&t databases that it did use captured the most significant issues in thecontext of database protection and publicinterest uses.in responding to its charge, the committee made significant efforts to obtainbroad input from representatives of the main identified interest groups, primarilythrough a workshop that was held on january 1415, 1999, at the main department of commerce building in washington, d.c. (appendix b gives the agendaand lists the participants). the workshop proceedingsñtaped, transcribed, edited, and published only in electronic form on the national academiesõ web siteat <www.nap.edu>ñwere a major source of information for this report (appendix c lists the contents of the published proceedings).1 the committee also met1 the views expressed in the committeeõs workshop proceedings are solely those of the individualauthors and workshop participants. the separate proceedings report does not provide conclusionsand recommendations.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixon two other occasions to gather information and to work on this report. inaddition, the underlying technical factors and developments associated withdigital networked information, and their impact on intellectual property rightsprotection, are examined in detail in a concurrent study, the digital dilemma:intellectual property in the information age (national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000, in press), by the national research councilõs computer scienceand telecommunications board.the report that follows reflects the deliberative consensus of the study committee. it is our hope that the committeeõs conclusions and recommendations willhelp the sponsors of the study, the legislators examining database protectionproposals, and the broader s&t community to understand better the issues instriking a proper balance between protecting rights in and promoting publicinterest uses of scientific and technical databases.robert j. serafin, chairpaul f. uhlir, study directora question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xithe study committee wishes to express its sincere thanks to the many individuals who played significant roles in the completion of this study. the committee sponsored the workshop on promoting access to scientific and technicaldata for the public interest: an assessment of policy options on january 1415,1999, at the department of commerce in washington, d.c., and it extends itsthanks to the following individuals who made presentations during the january14,1999, plenary session: q. todd dickinson, acting commissioner of patents andtrademarks, department of commerce, gave the keynote address; barbara ryanof the u.s. geological survey and barry glick, formerly with geosystems globalcorporation, participated in the geographic data panel; g. christian overton ofthe university of pennsylvaniaõs center for bioinformatics, james ostell of thenational library of medicineõs national center for biotechnology information,and myra williams of the molecular applications group participated in thegenomic data panel; richard kayser of the national institute of standards andtechnology, james lohr of the american chemical societyõs chemical abstractsservice, and leslie singer of the institute for scientific information, inc. participated in the panel that discussed chemical and chemical engineering data; kennethhadeen of the national oceanic and atmospheric administrationõs nationalclimatic data center (retired), david fulker of the university corporation foratmospheric researchõs unidata program, and robert brammer of tasc participated in the meteorological data panel; richard gilbert of the university ofcalifornia at berkeley discussed economic factors in the production, dissemination, and use of scientific and technical (s&t) databases in the public and privatesectors; stephen maurer, attorney, submitted a commissioned paper for the studyacknowledgmentsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiacknowledgments(reproduced as appendix c of the online workshop proceedings); teresa lunt ofthe xerox palo alto research center provided an overview of the current situation and future prospects with respect to technologies for protecting and also formisappropriating digital intellectual property rights; marybeth peters, register ofcopyrights in the library of congress, provided a summary overview of theexisting and proposed intellectual property rights regimes for databases; andjustin hughes, of the department of commerceõs patent and trademark office,summarized the relevant federal government information law and data policies.the aforementioned data panelists also participated in the january 14, 1999,discussion sessions on notforprofitsector data, governmentsector data, andcommercialsector data.the committee would also like to thank those who participated as panelistsin the january 15, 1999, discussion sessions on the potential impacts of legislation and assessments of policy options during the workshop. jon baumgarten ofproskauer rose, llp, peter jaszi of the american university school of law,james neal of the john hopkins university library, and ferris webster of theuniversity of delaware joined kenneth hadeen, david fulker, and robertbrammer in discussing what would happen should congress decide to enact astrong property rights model for protecting databases. dennis benson of thenational center for biotechnology information, jonathan band of morrison &foerster, llp, and thomas rindfleisch of stanford universityõs lane medicallibrary discussed, with chris overton and myra williams, the possible scenariosshould congress enact an unfair competition model for protecting databases.prue adler of the association of research libraries, eric massant of reedelsevier, inc., tim foresman of the university of maryland, and kenneth frazierof the university of wisconsin libraries joined barry glick in a discussionassessing legal and policy options in promoting access to and use of governments&t data for the public interest. finally, jerome reichman of the vanderbiltuniversity school of law and r. stephen berry of the university of chicagodiscussed possible legal and policy options associated with promoting access toand use of notforprofitsector s&t data for the public interest with richardkayser, james lohr, and leslie singer. the committee is also very appreciativeof the contributions of more than 100 individuals who attended the workshop. inaddition, it extends its gratitude to jean schirozavela of the national oceanicand atmospheric administration and to justin hughes of the patent and trademark office for helping to make arrangements for the workshop.the committee would also like to express its gratitude to the following exofficio members, who provided liaison with other relevant activities: goetzoertel of the association of universities for research in astronomy and chair ofthe u.s. national committee for codata; shelton alexander, of pennsylvaniastate university, who is a member of the national research councilõs computerscience and telecommunications boardõs committee studying intellectual property rights in the networked environment; and francis bretherton of the univera question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsxiiisity of wisconsin, chair of the national research councilõs committee on geophysical and environmental data.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical and legal expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report review committee.the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound aspossible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments anddraft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberativeprocess. the study committee would like to thank the following individuals fortheir participation in the review of this report: george annas of boston university, lois blaine of the american type culture collection, kenneth dam of theuniversity of chicago school of law, john estes of the university of californiaat santa barbara, richard hallgren of the american meteorological society,michael keller of stanford university library and highwire press inc., garyking of harvard university, charles mcclure of syracuse university, rogernoll of stanford university, pamela samuelson of the university of california atberkeley, william sprigg of the university of arizona, hal varian of the university of california at berkeley, and ronald wigington of the american chemicalsociety (retired).in addition, the following individuals reviewed the workshop proceedings:bonnie carroll of information international associates, inc., david lide, jr.,publishing consultant, and goetz oertel of the association of universities forresearch in astronomy.finally, the committee would like to recognize the contributions of the national research council staff without whom this report could not have beencompleted: paul uhlir, director of international scientific and technical information programs of the office of international affairs, who served as studydirector and organized the workshop and other study committee meetings; julieesanu, who provided research and program assistance to the committee, as wellas editorial work on the workshop proceedings; barbara wright and pamelagamble for the staff support to the committee; and susan maurizi and janetoverton, who edited the final committee report and the proceedings.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvsummary11importance and use of scientific and technicaldatabases14scientific and technical data and the creation of new knowledge, 17scientific and technical databases as a resourceñthe currentcontext, 18collection of original data and production of new databases, 19dissemination of scientific and technical data and the issue ofaccess, 30use of scientific and technical databases, 32the challenge of effectively balancing private rights and the publicinterest in scientific and technical databases, 382incentives and disincentives affecting theavailability and use of scientific and technicaldatabases40divergent objectives of organizations that produce and distributescientific and technical databases, 40scientific and technical database costs, pricing, and access, 43production and distribution costs, 44pricing and access, 45stronger statutory protection and the incentives for investment, 46contentsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontentsmounting pressures on government producers and distributors ofscientific and technical databases for cost recovery, 473access to and protections for databases: existingpolicies and approaches51access to u.s. governmentfunded scientific and technical data, 52existing protections for databases in the united states, 58legal protections, 59technological protections, 64marketbased database protection through updating andcustomizing, 68tipping the balance: the european unionõs database directive, 694assessment and recommendations73assessment of legislative options, with recommendations onguiding principles, 74the standard of harm, 78scope of protection, 83term of protection, 84exemptions for notforprofit research and education, 87periodic assessments of effects under any new statute, 93exemptions for government databases, 96assessment of policy options, with recommendations for governmentaction, 100promoting availability of government scientific andtechnical data, 100maintaining nonexclusive rights by notforprofits ingovernmentfunded databases, 102organizing discussions of licensing terms for notforprofituses of commercial scientific and technical databases, 105improving the understanding of complex economic aspects ofscientific and technical database activities, 107promoting international access to scientific and technical data, 108recommended approach for the notforprofit scientific andtechnical community, 109appendixesabiographical sketches of committee members, 113bworkshop agenda and participants, 118cworkshop proceedingsñlisting of contents, 128deuropean union directive on the legal protection of databases, 130a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.auestionofbalancea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary1legislative efforts are currently under way in the united states, the european union, and the world intellectual property organization (wipo) to greatlyenhance the legal protection of proprietary databases. one of these efforts, theeuropean unionõs 1996 directive on the legal protection of databases,1 alreadyhas been finalized and is now being implemented by the european unionõs member states, while other legislative initiatives in the u.s. congress and wipo arestill pending action. as discussed in detail in the 1997 report bits of power:issues in global access to scientific data2 and in subsequent publications,3these new legal approaches threaten to compromise traditional and customaryaccess to and use of scientific and technical (s&t) data for publicinterest endeavors, including notforprofit research, education, and general library uses.at the same time, there are legitimate concerns by the rights holders in databasesregarding unauthorized and uncompensated uses of their data products, includingat times the wholesale commercial misappropriation of proprietary databases.1 the e.u. database directiveñdirective 96/9/ec of the european parliament and of the councilof 11 march 1996 on the legal protection of databases, 1996 o.j. (l77) 20. the e.u. databasedirective is reprinted as appendix d of this report.2 national research council (1997), bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data,national academy press, washington, d.c.3 see, e.g., j.h. reichman and paul f. uhlir (1999), òdatabase protection at the crossroads:recent developments and their impact on science and technology,ó berkeley technology lawjournal, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 793, and stephen m. maurer and suzanne scotchmer, òdatabase protection: is it broken and should we fix it?ó science, vol. 284, p. 1129.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2a question of balancefactual data are both an essential resource for and a valuable output fromscientific research. it is through the formation, communication, and use of factsand ideas that scientists conduct research and educate students. our nation has avibrant and demonstrably productive sector of s&t database producers, disseminators, and users that has led the world. advances in computing and communications technologies make s&t databases and the facts they contain increasinglyvaluable for producing new discoveries and for accelerating the growth of knowledge and the pace of innovation. the same technologies that facilitate the effective production, dissemination, and use of digital databases, however, can alsoexpedite their unauthorized dissemination and use, undermining incentives tocreate new databases, enabling unfair competition and wholesale misappropriation, and in the most extreme cases, exposing the original database rights holderto market failure.the institutions, organizations, and individuals involved form a highly complex web of interrelationshipsñsome competing and some complementary, somecreating or using original data collections or derivative productions, and spanningactivities in both public and private, national and international, and scientific andnonscientific contexts (see table s.1 for some representative examples of different types of s&t database activities). although these diverse actors all have theirown goals and motivations, they nonetheless may be broadly characterized inthree fairly distinct groups. the first is the government sector, which producess&t databases as a public good and has a mandate under omb circular a1304to disseminate the fruits of those activities as broadly and openly as possible, andto provide efficient access. the second is the commercial sector, which producesdatabases as a private good and typically maintains those data on a proprietaryand restricted basis, either for internal purposes or for commercial vending, withthe goal of full cost recovery plus profit. the third is the notforprofit sector,which includes universities, research institutes, and various publicinterest organizations that produce databases in support of their institutional mission andtypically disseminate data on a costrecovery basis, which can cause them to takea middle ground in terms of treating their databases as a public or a private good.as users of databases, all three sectors support the publicgood approach ofthe federal government to data distribution, and all seek to minimize the coststhey may need to pay for access to and use of data from privatesector sources. aprincipal concern of the committee is that the development of any new database protection measures directed toward protecting privatesector investments take into account the need to promote access to and subsequent use ofs&t data and databases not only by the notforprofit sector, but by forprofit creators of derivative databases as well.4 office of management and budget (1993), circular a130, òmanagement of federal information resources,ó u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary3numerous legal, technical, and marketbased approaches already exist toprotect proprietary rights in databases. existing legal measures include (1) copyright law, recently updated and strengthened for the online digital environment;(2) licensing, a subset of contract law, which is increasingly the method of choicefor online vendors of proprietary databases and other information products;(3)trade secret law, used in conjunction with contract law and various newtechnological protections; and (4) unfair competition law in state common law,which is of limited value for database protection at this time but is viewed as apotential model for a new federal database protection statute. these legal measures are being supported with increasing efficiency online by technologicalprotections such as digital encryption, watermarks, download limitations, accesscontrols, and both hardware and softwarebased trusted systems. finally, thereare important marketbased approaches to protecting databases, such as frequentupdating or customizing of database content, that can help prevent stolen databases from undermining the rights holderõs market for very long or very broadly.for publicsector databases, including s&t databases, there are wellestablished laws and policies in place5 that generally prohibit proprietary protectionsof databases by the government and that treat those data as public goods andpromote their full and open availability to the public. while many notforprofits&t database producers and vendorsñespecially those that receive governmentfunding for their activitiesñadhere to the policy of full and open data availabilityfor publicsector databases, other notforprofits seek the full protection of thelaw for their proprietary databases. this division of interests has been furtherexacerbated by the enactment of the 1996 e.u. database directive, which provides strong and unprecedented property rights in public and privatesector databases and the substantial components of such databases.the current efforts to enact statutory federal database protection in the unitedstates appear to be stimulated by three principal factors: (1) the possibility forrapid and complete database copying with the potential for instantaneous broaddissemination; (2) a gap in u.s. law created by the feist6 decision, which servedas the final blow to invalidating copyright protection on the basis of òsweatofthebrowó investments alone; and (3) the e.u. database directive, which requires none.u. nations to pass a similar law in order for their citizens to enjoythe directiveõs protections in europe, thereby providing a potentially unfair advantage to european competitors of the u.s. private sector.the committee believes, however, that the need for additional statutory pro5 see, e.g., 44 u.s.c., section 3506(d)(1)(a) (supp. 1995), and office of management and budget(1993), circular a130, note 4.6 feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co., 499 u.s. 340 (1991). it is important tonote, however, that feist did not òoverturnó the òsweatofthebrowó doctrine under copyright, whichcongress had actually done already under the copyright act of 1976. moreover, the sweatofthebrow doctrine under state law was never a prevailing legal approach.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4a question of balancetable s.1examples of different types of s&t database activitiesdiscussed in the january 1999 workshoporganizationinformation and(sector)tools provideddata sourcesgeographic and environmentalu.s. geologicalgeographic data: maps andusgs, other federal agencies,survey (usgs)map productsstate and local governments,(government)data from other programs:notforprofit researchers,biologic, geologic, hydrologicpartnerships with private sectorlongtermsite description database,ecological researchers atecologicalintegrated climate database,distributed sites belonging to theresearch (lter)remotely sensed ecological datalter networknetwork office(notforprofit)geosystemsdigital maps, mapquest webfrom the public domain:global corp.site, mapping servicesgovernmentproduced maps(commercial)(federal, state, local), digitalgeographic data, remotelysensed imageryother sources: commercial andother countriesõ maps, digitaldata, remotely sensed imagery,other published sourcesgenomicnational center forgenbank: dna and proteindirect contributions frombiotechnologysequence data; other genomicscientists; access to otherinformationmapping databases; 3d proteindatabases from government,(government)structure database;notforprofit, other countrybibliographic databases;sourcessoftware toolscenter forspecialized biologicalproprietary and publicdomainbioinformaticsdatabases; softwareexperimental data fromuniversity oftools for integrationacademic researchers; manualpennsylvaniaof distributedprocessing and encoding of(notforprofit)heterogeneous databasesdata from published literature;online molecular and cellularbiology and genomic databasesmolecularsoftware for storing,>150 online database sites,applications groupmining, and visualizingpublic and proprietary(commercial)genomic data; databasesderived from public andprivate data andproprietary softwarea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary5continueddisseminationusersmodesusgs, other government agencies,maps: hard copy (paper, plastic, film) and digital form;commercial database providers anddistributed by agency directly and through partnershipsvalue adders, researchers, and thewith private sector, notforprofit sectorgeneral publicresearchersinternet, some tape and cdrom for portabilitycommercial clients:maps: hard copy and digital formlarge companies and consumerssoftware products distributed via retail channels(cdrom) and directly to corporate customersmapping services distributed via internetresearch scientists in academic,internet access via web servers and file transfergovernment, commercialprotocol (ftp)organizationsresearch scientists in academic,internet accessgovernment, commercialsource code distributed directlyorganizations (u.s. and abroad)research scientists in academic,some software products downloaded from the web;government, commercialothers require onsite expert installationorganizations (u.s. and abroad)a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6a question of balancechemical and chemical engineeringnational institute ofspecialized chemistry andexperimental results fromstandards andchemical engineering databasespublished literature; experimentstechnology (nist)(extensively evaluated anddone specifically for dataphysical anddocumented)acquisition; published datachemical propertiesevaluations; supplementary datadivisiondeposits(government)chemical abstractschemical abstracts:journals, patents, books,servicebibliographic databaseproceedings, dissertationsamerican chemicalregistry: registry of chemicalsocietysubstances(notforprofit)software access toolsinstitute forbibliographic databases:journals, books, proceedingsscientificcitation indexes, tables of(print and electronic format)informationcontents(commercial)information serviceslinkages to publishersõfulltext databasesmeteorologicalnational climaticclimatological summaries fromnational weather service, worlddata centernational weather servicemeteorological organization,(government)stations; historical longtermnasa, bilateral agreementsclimatic databaseswith other countriesunidata program,quasirealtime atmosphericpublic: national weather service,universityand related datanational environmental datacorporation forcase study data setsserviceatmosphericsoftware toolsprivate: network of lightningresearchsensors, sensors in commercial(notforprofit)aircrafttascrealtime weather informationpublic: national weather serviceñ(commercial)downlink directly from u.s. andinternational weather satellites,other observational sourcesnote: although the subject matter of this study included all s&t databases, the committee wasable to choose only representative examples for discussion and analysis in the report. for instance,specific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among other disciplines, were notincluded.table s.1continuedorganizationinformation and(sector)tools provideddata sourcesa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary7researchers in academic,variety of forms: hardcopy publication, cdrom orgovernment, commercialfloppy disk, internet access; nist distributes directlyorganizations (some databases usedor via agreements with secondary distributorsprimarily by industrial users)researchers in academic,electronic access, hard copy, cdromgovernment, commercialorganizations; patent examiners;studentsacademic, government lab, anddiskette, cdrom, ftp files, internet access,corporate libraries; researchershard copyin academic, government,commercial organizationsindividuals, commercial clients,hardcopy, microfiche, magnetic tape, disks,government agencies, engineeringcdrom, ftp, internetusesacademic departmentsinternetnews media (broadcast and cablepublic and private data communication networks:tv), aviation, energy and power,satellite broadcasting services and internetagribusinessdisseminationusersmodesa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8a question of balancetection has not been sufficiently substantiated. the high level of activity in theproduction and use of digital s&t (and other) databases in the united statesserves as prima facie evidence that the threats of misappropriation do not constitute a crisis. nor do the existing legal, technical, and marketbased measuresprovide a chronic state of underprotection for proprietary databases. the almostuniversal use of licensing, rather than sale, of online databases and other digitalinformation, coupled with technological enforcement measures, on balance potentially provides much stronger protections to the vendors vis‹vis their customers than they enjoyed prior to feist and under the print media copyrightregime. while some of the current law providing protection to database rightsholders remains uncertain in terms of scope of applicability, the trend in recentyears has been to broaden, rather than narrow, applicable intellectual propertyprotections. moreover, for the many reasons discussed in this report, strongstatutory protection of databases would have significant negative impacts onaccess to and use of s&t databases for notforprofit research and other publicinterest uses (see table s.2). nevertheless, although the committee opposes thecreation of any strong new rights in compilations of factual information, it recognizes that limited new federal legal protection against wholesale misappropriation of databases may be appropriate. in particular, a balanced alternative to thee.u. database directive might be achieved in a properly scoped and focused newu.s. law, one that could then serve as a model for an international treaty in thisarea.recommendationsbecause of the complex, interdependent relationships among publicsectorand privatesector database producers, disseminators, and users, any action toincrease the rights of persons in one category likely will compromise the rights ofthe persons in the other categories, with farreaching and potentially negativeconsequences.7 of course, it is in the common interest of both database rightsholders and usersñand of society generallyñto achieve a workable balanceamong the respective interests so that all legitimate rights remain reasonably7 the potential for unintended consequences from new sui generis intellectual property legislationand the need for caution were emphasized by the former chairman of the house committee on thejudiciary, robert w. kastenmeier, in kastenmeier and remington (1985), òthe semiconductor chipprotection act of 1984: a swamp or firm ground?ó minn. l. rev., vol. 70, pp. 417, 440442, wherethe authors suggested that any proposal for such legislation should meet a fourpoint test: (1)that theprotection would fit harmoniously with other intellectual property regimes; (2) that the new protection can be defined in a reasonably clear and satisfactory manner; (3) that the new proposal is basedon an honest analysis of all the costs and benefits; and (4) that the legislation should show clearlythat it would enrich and enhance the òaggregate public domain.óa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary9table s.2summary comparison of notforprofit research user rightsunder traditional copyright and under online licensing when combinedwith sui generis database protection legislationtraditionallicensing plus sui generis protection such ascopyright lawprovided by the e.u. database directive1. user can immediately use all disparate1. even after paying for access to factual datafactual data and information disclosed inand information, which are not copyrightable bya database; copyright law does not protectdefinition, user faces limitations on use in anyideas or facts. fairuse exception availableways prohibited by the license and as reinforcedfor certain additional research orby the legislation; user cannot distribute anothereducational uses, even of protecteddatabase, using the same factual data orexpression.information, without either seeking permissionand perhaps paying anotherfee or regeneratingthose protected data independently.2. user can independently create another2. user can independently create anotherversion of a database and sell it; copyrightversion of the database. if this is not possible,law allows independent creation, and alluser needs a license or permission to combinefactual data are in the public domain.legitimately accessed factual data or informationinto a derivative data product; the licensor canclaim that the user is violating redistributionand other rights, and the user must guess whatcourts will consider to be aquantitatively orqualitatively insubstantial part of the database;the licensor is under no duty to grant such alicense; and if a sole source, the licensor may notwant any competition from followon products.3. user can combine noncopyrightable3. user cannot lend, give, or sell data to othersfactual data with other data andeven after paying for access (unless permittedinformation into a multiplesource orby the license) because there is no first sale,interdisciplinary database for research oronly a license; user would have to obtaineducational purposes without permissionexpress permission and perhaps pay additionalor additional payment to the originators.afees to avoid the risk of harming the market(e.g., possibly causing one lost sale).4. user can make limited or òfair useó4. because there are no limits on licensing,of even protected expression for notforuser is subject to database vendor overridingprofit research or classroom purposes;even those exceptions contained in thesuch uses often deemed fair or privilegedlegislation, including exceptions for research,uses under statutory law or precedents.education, or other publicinterest uses.5. following the first purchase of a5. during the period of protection, user rightscopyrightable database in hard copy, userdepend on the terms of the license supported bycan lend, give, or resell it to anyone elsethe new property right; database would notunder the firstsale doctrine, borrow itenter the public domain for at least 15 yearsfrom a library, use it at any time for(and in europe possibly never if the rightsvirtually any [lawful] purpose, and makeholder continues to invest in maintenance ora copy of it for personal or scholarlyupdates of a dynamic database).purposes.note: this summary table was compiled from a more detailed comparative discussion presented inan article by j.h. reichman and paul f. uhlir (1999), òdatabase protection at the crossroads:recent developments and their impact on science and technology,ó berkeley technology lawjournal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 799821.a acknowledgment of sources is an appropriate academic norm, but their express permission is notrequired.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10a question of balanceprotected. therefore, as a general guiding principle, the committee recommends that any new federal protection of databases should balance the costsand benefits of the proposed changes for both database rights holders andusers. in addition to this general principle, the committee makes a number ofrecommendationsñbased on its assessment of legislative options8 and relatedpolicy optionsñto the government, and it makes one recommendation to the notforprofit s&t community.recommended legislative principlesthe committee recommends that any new federal statutory protection ofdatabases incorporate the following principles:1.limit any additional protection to prohibition of acts of unauthorizedtaking that cause substantial competitive injury to the database rights holderin the rights holderõs actual market. the standard of harm should be sufficiently clear to permit goodfaith users to know when they are infringing on adatabase rights holderõs rights and should not undermine the nationõs capabilitiesfor innovation or competition in the marketplace.2.constrain the subjectmatter scope to databases comprising a collection of discrete facts and items of information, and expressly exclude collections of copyrightable material, which is already protected. protection underany new statute should extend only to a database that is the product of a substantial investment and not to any idea, fact, procedure, system, method of operation,concept, principle, or discovery disclosed by the database.3.limit the term of protection to a period of time sufficient to provideincentives found necessary for the creation of new databases. if legislationwith a fixed term of protection is adopted, an appropriate term of protection mostlikely should be substantially shorter than the proposed 15year term. it alsoshould be based on an analysis of the economics of the database industry, ratherthan set arbitrarily.8 in response to its charge, the committee selected the three major legislative models that wereintroduced into the congressional record by senator orrin hatch shortly after the committeeõsjanuary 1999 workshop. see cong. rec., vol. 106, s. 316 (jan. 19, 1999). the committee evaluatedand compared the major provisions of these three models in arriving at the consensus principles andrecommendations presented here. the rationale for each recommended principle or action is contained in chapter 4. in evaluating the three legislative proposals, the committee was well aware ofthe fact that they would change further and therefore presented òmoving targetsó for the study. it isfor this reason that the committeeõs recommendations regarding any potential legislation in this areaare offered as guiding principles, rather than as specific language for a specific bill.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary114.in any new legislation with a fixed term of protection, require database rights holders to provide notice of expiration of the term of protection.specifically, any such legislation should:a.require database rights holders to identify the date on which a databasewas created so that the user will know when it no longer enjoys statutory protection (of course, those databases that remain commercially valuable longer thanthe statutory period of protection can continue to be protected by other means,such as copyright, trade secret, contract, and technical and other measures); andb.require rights holders of databases that are updated continuously, or atperiodic intervals, to identify with reasonable precision those substantial portionsof the database that are and are not subject to protection. failure to identify thedate of creation for each new substantial portion of a database should serve as abasis for a defense against infringement after the expiration of the term of protection for the original portion of the database.5.apply protection only to databases created after the effective date ofany new legislation, in recognition that a major purpose of enacting enhancedprotection is to provide additional incentives for the development of new databases.6.expressly continue to provide legal rights of access to and uses ofproprietary databases equivalent to those that notforprofit researchers,educators, and other publicinterest users enjoyed under traditional or customary practice prior to enactment of any new legislation. courts should beallowed to invalidate any nonbargained9 licensing terms that are shown to interfere unduly with otherwise legislatively permitted customary uses by notforprofit entities.7.provide either for a sunset provision with the possibility to renew, orfor periodic assessments of the effects of new statutory database protectionon competition in the database market and on consumers of databases, as well ason access to and use of datañincluding s&t datañby notforprofit, publicinterest users, in order to enable timely and appropriate revision of legislation asneeded.8.although privatesector databases derived from government datashould be eligible for protection, protection should not be extended to databases collected or maintained by the government. any new legislation should9 by ònonbargained termó the committee means any term, usually contained in a standard formcontract, over which, as a practical matter, no actual bargaining by the parties to the contract takesplace.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12a question of balanceexpressly affirm the need for continuation of existing legal norms for wide distribution of government data and of data created pursuant to a government mandateor funding.recommended policy actions for governmentalthough the committee believes that its recommended actions in these areasought to be undertaken whether or not any new statutory database protection isenacted by congress, all of these actions will take on an increased urgency andimportance if relatively strong proprietary rights are established by federal statute.1. scientific and technical data owned or controlled by the governmentshould be made available for use by notforprofit and commercial entitiesalike on a nonexclusive basis and should be disseminated to all users at nomore than the marginal cost of reproduction and distribution, wheneverpossible. while the private sectorõs creation of derivative databases fromgovernment data should be encouraged, the source of the original government data must ensure that those data remain openly available. any information product derived from a government database also should be required to carry an identifier stating the government source(s) used.2. federal funding agencies should require university and other notforprofit researchers or their employing institutions that use federal funds,wholly or in substantial part, in creating databases not to grant exclusiverights to such databases when submitting them for publication or for incorporation into other databases.3. the copyright office should sponsor discussions between the representatives of privatesector producers of databases and user stakeholderrepresentatives from government agencies and notforprofit groups to helpdevelop a common understanding and optimal terms for the licensing ofs&t databases and data products.4. federal government agencies, including federal science agencies asappropriate, should undertake and fund external research that investigatesthe changing and complex economic aspects of s&t database activities, particularly in the context of any new legislative database protection measures thatmay be enacted and in support of legislative principle number 7 recommendedabove.5. all departments and agencies of the federal government should continue to adopt international s&t agreements that include provisions tofacilitate access to s&t data across national boundaries and should conducta question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary13periodic reviews of international policies and agreements to promote conformity to the above principles.6. the u.s. government should negotiate with the commission of theeuropean communities to revise its highly protectionist e.u. databasedirective.recommended approach for the notforprofit s&t communitythe notforprofit s&t community should continue to promote andadhere to the policy of full and open exchange of data at both the nationaland international levels.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.141importance and use of scientific andtechnical databases14modern technology has propelled us into the information age, making itpossible to generate and record vast quantities of new data.1 advances in computing and communications technologies and the development of digital networks have revolutionized the manner in which data are stored, communicated,and manipulated. databases, and uses to which they can be put, have becomeincreasingly valuable commodities.the nowcommon practice of downloading material from online databaseshas made it easy for researchers and other users to acquire data, which frequentlyhave been produced with considerable investments of time, money, and otherresources. government agencies and most government contractors or grantees inthe united states (though not in many other countries) usually make their data,produced at taxpayer expense, available at no cost or for the cost of reproductionand dissemination. forprofit and notforprofit database producers (other thanmost government contractors and grantees) typically charge for access to and useof their data through subscriptions, licensing agreements, and individual sales.currently many forprofit and notforprofit database producers are concerned about the possibility that significant portions of their databases will becopied or used in substantial part by others to create ònewó derivative databases.if an identical or substantially similar database is then either redisseminatedbroadly or sold and used in direct competition with the original rights holderõsdatabase, the rights holderõs revenues will be undermined, or in extreme cases,1 box 1.1 provides definitions of data and of several other key terms used in this report.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases15box 1.1definitions of key terms used in this reportdata are facts, numbers, letters, and symbols that describe an object, idea,condition, situation, or other factors. a data element is the smallest unit of information to which reference is made. this report is concerned primarily with digitaldata, although a large portion of raw data is recorded as analog data, which alsocan be digitized. for purposes of this report the terms data and facts are treatedinterchangeably, as is the case in legal contexts.data in a database may be characterized as predominantly word oriented (e.g.,as in a text, bibliography, directory, dictionary), numeric (e.g., properties, statistics,experimental values), image (e.g., fixed or moving video, such as a film of microbes under magnification or timelapse photography of a flower opening), orsound (e.g., a sound recording of a tornado or a fire). wordoriented, numeric,image, and sound databases are processed by different types of software (text orword processing, data processing, image processing, and sound processing).data can also be referred to as raw, processed, or verified. raw data consistof original observations, such as those collected by satellite and beamed back toearth, or initial experimental results, such as laboratory test data. after they arecollected, raw data can be processed or refined in many different ways. processing usually makes data more usable, ordered, or simplified, thus increasing theirintelligibility. verified data are data whose quality and accuracy have been assured. for experimental results, verification signifies that the data have beenshown to be reproducible in a test or experiment that repeats the original. forobservational data, verification means that the data have been compared withother data whose quality is known or that the instrument with which they wereobtained has been properly calibrated and tested.digital data may be processed or stored on various types of media, includingmagnetic (ram, hard drive, diskettes, tapes) and optical (cdrom, dvd) media.data can be made accessible either through portable media or, increasingly, online.a database is a collection of related data and informationñgenerally numeric,word oriented, sound, and/or imageñorganized to permit search and retrieval orprocessing and reorganizing. a data set is a collection of similar and related datarecords or data points. many databases are a resource from which specific datapoints, facts, or textual information are extracted for use in building a derivativedatabase or data product. a derivative database, also called a valueadded ortransformative database, is built from one or more preexisting database(s) andfrequently includes extractions from multiple databases, as well as original data.a database producer acquires data in raw, reduced, or otherwise processedformñeither directly, through experimentation or observation, or indirectly, fromone or more organizations or preexisting databasesñfor inclusion in a databasethat the database producer is generating. such database creatorsñsometimesknown as database publishers or originators but for the purpose of this reportreferred to as database producersñtraditionally are the rights holders of the intellectual property rights in the databases.continueda question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16a question of balancein general, database production covers all aspects of preparation, processing,and maintenance; development of software for search, retrieval, and manipulation;and documentation of the software and database features and functions prior todistribution of the database by a vendor. among the wide variety of functionsencompassed by database production, in addition to data acquisition, are datareduction (where needed), formatting, enhancing, expanding, merging with otherdata or data records, categorizing, classifying, indexing, abstracting, tagging, flagging, coding, sorting/rearranging, putting into tabular form, creating visual representations, updating, and putting into searchable and retrievable form for and useand manipulation by users.a database vendor (variously known as a distributor, online host (mostly ineurope and the united kingdom), disseminator, or provider) sells, leases, or licenses digitized versions of a database on optical disks (e.g., cdrom, dvd),floppy disks, tapes, or downloadable complete databases. many databases, particularly textual ones, are also based on or provided as hardcopy paper publications. a database producer organization may also serve as a database vendor if itboth produces a database and provides online access directly to users or sells,leases, or licenses the database.for the sake of simplicity, the term database dissemination or distribution asused in this report includes the concept of making databases available online.the modifier scientific and technical designates the subject matter of the database content in the general areas covered in this report.box 1.1 continuedthe rights holder will be put out of business. besides being unfair to the rightsholder, this actual or potential loss of revenue may create a disincentive to produce and then maintain databases, thus reducing the number of databases available to others. however, preventing database uses by others, or making accessand subsequent use more expensive or difficult, may discourage socially usefulapplications of databases. the question is how to protect rights in databaseswhile ensuring that factual data remain accessible for publicinterest and otheruses.this report explores issues in the conundrum posed by the need to properlybalance the rights of original database producers or rights holders and the rightsof all the downstream users and competitorsñwith the principal focus on thebalance of rights between the database rights holders and publicinterest userssuch as researchers, educators, and librarians. in particular, the committee for astudy on promoting access to scientific and technical data for the public interest focuses on scientific and technical (s&t) data (with examples drawn primarily from the physical and biological sciences) as an essential consideration inreasoned attempts to balance competing interests in databases.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases17to broaden the perspective of and enhance cooperation among the variouscompeting interests, and to help ensure an efficient and effective outcome for all,the committee examines the following basic elements in the larger issue at hand:¥salient characteristics and the importance of s&t databases producedand used in research;¥impacts of computer technology on the production, distribution, and useof s&t databases;¥motivations of the various sectors involved in s&t research and thedissemination and use of research results;¥economic issues and incentives that influence the production, distribution, and use of s&t databases, and how these activities are interrelated;¥mechanisms currently in place for protecting these economic incentives; and¥new legislation currently under consideration that would affect the production, dissemination, and use of s&t databases in a variety of ways.to ensure the most successful outcome in the current debate over rights indatabases, any new action must take account of and balance the legitimate interests of the various stakeholders, and must reflect awareness of how the broadpublic interest can best be served.scientific and technical data and thecreation of new knowledgefactual data are both an essential resource for and a valuable output fromscientific research. it is through the formation, communication, and use of factsand ideas that scientists conduct research. throughout the history of science,new findings and ideas have been recorded and used as the basis for furtherscientific advances and for educating students.now, as a result of the nearcomplete digitization of data collection, manipulation, and dissemination over the past 30 years, almost every aspect of thenatural world, human activity, and indeed every life form can be observed andcaptured in an electronic database.2 there is barely a sector of the economy thatis not significantly engaged in the creation and exploitation of digital databases,and there are manyñsuch as insurance, banking, or direct marketingñthat arecompletely database dependent.certainly scientific and engineering research is no exception in its growingreliance on the creation and exploitation of electronic databases. the geneticsequence of each living organism is a natural database, transforming biological2 see paul f. uhlir (1995), òfrom spacecraft to statecraft: the role of earth observationsatellites in the development and verification of international environmental protection agreements,ó gis law, vol. 2, p. 1.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18a question of balanceresearch and applications over the past decade into a datadependent enterpriseand giving rise to the rapidly growing field of bioinformatics. myriad data collection platforms, recording and storing information about our physical universe atan everincreasing rate, are now integral to the study and understanding of thenatural environment, from small ecological subsystems to planetscale geophysical processes and beyond. similarly, the engineering disciplines continuallycreate databases about our constructed environment and new technical processes,which are endlessly updated and refined to fuel our technological progress andinnovation system.basic scientific research drives most of the worldõs progress in the naturaland social sciences. basic, or fundamental, research may be defined as researchthat leads to new understanding of how nature works and how its many facets areinterconnected.3 society uses the fruits of such research to expand the worldõsbase of knowledge and applies that knowledge in myriad ways to create wealthand to enhance the public welfare.new scientific understanding and its applications are yielding benefits suchas the following:¥improved diagnosis, pharmaceuticals, and treatments in medicine;¥better and higheryield food production in agriculture;¥new and improved materials for fabrication of manufactured objects,building materials, packaging, and special applications such as microelectronics;¥faster, cheaper, and safer transportation and communication;¥better means for energy production;¥improved ability to forecast environmental conditions and to managenatural resources; and¥more powerful ways to explore all aspects of our universe, ranging fromthe finest subnuclear scale to the boundaries of the universe, and encompassingliving organisms in all their variety.4scientific and technical databases as a resourceñthe current contextthe committeeõs january 1999 workshop on promoting access to scientificand technical data for the public interest: an assessment of policy options,53 see john a. armstrong (1993), òis basic research a luxury our society can no longerafford?ó karl taylor compton lecture, massachusetts institute of technology, october 13.4 national research council (1997), bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data,national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 18.5 see online, national research council (1999), proceedings of the workshop on promotingaccess to scientific and technical data for the public interest: an assessment of policy options,national academy press, washington, d.c., <http://www.nap.edu>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases19included presentations on and discussions of data activities in twelve selectedorganizations representing three broad sectors (government, notforprofit, andcommercial). the sample activities illustrated some of the depth and range ofuses for s&t databases today (table 1.1 provides a summary) and indicated alsothe complexity of the often overlapping relationships and interests of databaseusers and producers.the discussion below outlines basic aspects of current data activities, including collection and production of s&t data and databases, dissemination, and use,and it describes the roles that the three sectors play in the overall process. incontrasting past and current practices, it indicates how ongoing technologicaladvances have contributed to increased capabilities for obtaining and using s&tdata. this description, which provides essential background for the remainder ofthis report, draws on examples from the four general discipline areasñgeographic and environmental, genomic, chemical and chemical engineering, andmeteorological research and applicationsñfocused on in the workshop.collection of original data and production of new databasessources of primary data and usesthe process of scientific inquiry typically has begun with the formulation ofa working hypothesis, based usually on limited observation and data, followed byexperimentation designed to test the hypothesis. the experimentation results inthe accumulation of new data used to confirm or refute the original hypothesis.understanding of the natural and physical world has been advanced by researchers building on a growing base of knowledge that is continually being refined,tested, and augmented in the longestablished approach to scientific inquiryknown as the scientific method.with the advent of digital technologies has come a dramatic increase in thepace and volume of data acquisition. ongoing rapid advances in electronictechnologies for computing and communications, experimentation, and observation ranging from highfrequency direct sampling to multispectral remote sensinghave enabled dramatic increases in the quantities of data generated about thenatural world at scales from the microcosm to the macrocosm. for instance, thevolume of data on weather and climate stored in the national climatic datacenter has increased 750fold in the past two decades (box 1.2). a pharmaceutical company that 5 years ago could characterize 100,000 compounds per yearcan now handle a million compounds in a week.although some of these data represent actual measurements, large quantitiesof data also are being generated through numerical simulations performed onsupercomputers. collection of new data is becoming increasingly automated asrecording devices and instrumentation become more sophisticated and rapid.moreover, many older paperbased data sets, such as historical u.s. weathera question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20a question of balancetable 1.1examples of different types of s&t database activitiesdiscussed in the january 1999 workshoporganizationinformation and(sector)tools provideddata sourcesgeographic and environmentalu.s. geologicalgeographic data: maps andusgs, other federal agencies,survey (usgs)map productsstate and local governments,(government)data from other programs:notforprofit researchers,biologic, geologic, hydrologicpartnerships with private sectorlongtermsite description database,ecological researchers atecologicalintegrated climate database,distributed sites belonging to theresearch (lter)remotely sensed ecological datalter networknetwork office(notforprofit)geosystemsdigital maps, mapquest webfrom the public domain:global corp.site, mapping servicesgovernmentproduced maps(commercial)(federal, state, local), digitalgeographic data, remotelysensed imageryother sources: commercial andother countriesõ maps, digitaldata, remotely sensed imagery,other published sourcesgenomicnational center forgenbank: dna and proteindirect contributions frombiotechnologysequence data; other genomicscientists; access to otherinformationmapping databases; 3d proteindatabases from government,(government)structure database;notforprofit, other countrybibliographic databases;sourcessoftware toolscenter forspecialized biologicalproprietary and publicdomainbioinformaticsdatabases; softwareexperimental data fromuniversity oftools for integrationacademic researchers; manualpennsylvaniaof distributedprocessing and encoding of(notforprofit)heterogeneous databasesdata from published literature;online molecular and cellularbiology and genomic databasesmolecularsoftware for storing,>150 online database sites,applications groupmining, and visualizingpublic and proprietary(commercial)genomic data; databasesderived from public andprivate data andproprietary softwarea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases21continueddisseminationusersmodesusgs, other government agencies,maps: hard copy (paper, plastic, film) and digital form;commercial database providers anddistributed by agency directly and through partnershipsvalue adders, researchers, and thewith private sector, notforprofit sectorgeneral publicresearchersinternet, some tape and cdrom for portabilitycommercial clients:maps: hard copy and digital formlarge companies and consumerssoftware products distributed via retail channels(cdrom) and directly to corporate customersmapping services distributed via internetresearch scientists in academic,internet access via web servers and file transfergovernment, commercialprotocol (ftp)organizationsresearch scientists in academic,internet accessgovernment, commercialsource code distributed directlyorganizations (u.s. and abroad)research scientists in academic,some software products downloaded from the web;government, commercialothers require onsite expert installationorganizations (u.s. and abroad)a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22a question of balancechemical and chemical engineeringnational institute ofspecialized chemistry andexperimental results fromstandards andchemical engineering databasespublished literature; experimentstechnology (nist)(extensively evaluated anddone specifically for dataphysical anddocumented)acquisition; published datachemical propertiesevaluations; supplementary datadivisiondeposits(government)chemical abstractschemical abstracts:journals, patents, books,servicebibliographic databaseproceedings, dissertationsamerican chemicalregistry: registry of chemicalsocietysubstances(notforprofit)software access toolsinstitute forbibliographic databases:journals, books, proceedingsscientificcitation indexes, tables of(print and electronic format)informationcontents(commercial)information serviceslinkages to publishersõfulltext databasesmeteorologicalnational climaticclimatological summaries fromnational weather service, worlddata centernational weather servicemeteorological organization,(government)stations; historical longtermnasa, bilateral agreementsclimatic databaseswith other countriesunidata program,quasirealtime atmosphericpublic: national weather service,universityand related datanational environmental datacorporation forcase study data setsserviceatmosphericsoftware toolsprivate: network of lightningresearchsensors, sensors in commercial(notforprofit)aircrafttascrealtime weather informationpublic: national weather serviceñ(commercial)downlink directly from u.s. andinternational weather satellites,other observational sourcesnote: although the subject matter of this study included all s&t databases, the committee wasable to choose only representative examples for discussion and analysis in the report. for instance,specific examples from the social sciences or the space sciences, among other disciplines, were notincluded.table 1.1continuedorganizationinformation and(sector)tools provideddata sourcesa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases23researchers in academic,variety of forms: hardcopy publication, cdrom orgovernment, commercialfloppy disk, internet access; nist distributes directlyorganizations (some databases usedor via agreements with secondary distributorsprimarily by industrial users)researchers in academic,electronic access, hard copy, cdromgovernment, commercialorganizations; patent examiners;studentsacademic, government lab, anddiskette, cdrom, ftp files, internet access,corporate libraries; researchershard copyin academic, government,commercial organizationsindividuals, commercial clients,hardcopy, microfiche, magnetic tape, disks,government agencies, engineeringcdrom, ftp, internetusesacademic departmentsinternetnews media (broadcast and cablepublic and private data communication networks:tv), aviation, energy and power,satellite broadcasting services and internetagribusinessdisseminationusersmodesa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24a question of balancebureau observational records or u.s. census data, are being digitized and organized into electronically accessible databases. this shift from a datapoor to adatarich research and education environment is occurring through the activitiesof a host of government agencies, universities, and other research establishments,both public and private, nationally and internationally, in diverse research disciplines.in many cases data are being collected not to answer specific scientificquestions, but rather to describe various physical and biological phenomena ineverincreasing detail. this broadbased acquisition of data, coupled with datamining and knowledge discovery6 and the broad review and analysis of information stored in large databases, is anticipated to reveal trends or patterns or to leadbox 1.2example of largescale data collection activityby the federal governmentstatistics from just one discipline in the natural sciencesñatmospheric physicsñillustrate the explosive growth in the size of some digital scientific and technical databases. the national climatic data center (ncdc) is responsible for storing national, as well as some global, weather and climatic information. once, mostof these data came from human observations of the current state of the weather,using simple and straightforward instrumentation, including such commonplacedevices as thermometers, barometers, wind vanes, and rain gauges. the comparatively recent deployment of satellites, sophisticated doppler radars, lightning detection networks, automatic surfaceobserving platforms, and heavily instrumented buoys in the marine environment, all linked together through broadband,highspeed communication systems, has increased the types and volumes of datacollected. the ncdcõs storage requirements for these data have increased concomitantly by many orders of magnitude. in the period between 1980, when someof the highresolution data were just beginning to be recorded, and 1994, whenmuch of the doppler radar and lightning data had yet to be generated, the volumeof data stored at the ncdc increased from approximately 1 terabyte to 230 terabytes. by 1999, the ncdcõs data holdings had grown to 750 terabytes and areprojected to expand to more than 20 petabytes by 2014. these data are archivedindefinitely and made available to the public.source: information provided by gerald barton, national oceanic and atmospheric administration, washington, d.c.6 data mining and knowledge discovery are related, frequently confused terms, as are data, information, and knowledge. in the context of electronic databases, the data stored therein remain as datauntil they are extracted (mined) and recompiled (put in a context), at which point they becomeinformation. after òinformation is developed into a collection of related inferences, the data, nowa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases25to discoveries that will serve as a source of new hypotheses. the increasing useof databases as a research tool, whether in pursuit of new information or clues tounexpected relationships as starting points for conducting fundamental research,or for developing new commercial applications,7 relies on the production andavailability of such databases as an initial step in the process.in recent decades, and in most disciplines today, the federal government andfederally funded research have played the major role in generating primary s&tdata. substantial amounts and varieties of data are created by thousands offederal government grantees doing basic research, either individually or in teams,and most often at universities and other notforprofit research institutions. thenational science foundation and the national institutes of health, which in fy1999 funded over $2.6 billion8 and $11.8 billion9 in extramural grants, respectively, provide the bulk of support for these efforts. however, other federaldepartments and independent agencies also have significant research grant programs that involve the collection of research data and the production of associated databases outside the direct control of the government.in fy 1998, the federal government spent approximately $19.5 billion onintramural and extramural basic research and almost $50 billion on applied research.10 a substantial fraction of that funding was devoted to the creation ofprimary data used for fundamental research, education, and other publicinterestpurposes. among the current major observational data research programs arenasaõs earth observing system and numerous space science missions.11 thehuman genome project of the national institutes of health is another largescale, dataintensive research effort.12 large experimental facilities dedicated toinformation, become knowledge.ó the automated process of evaluating data and finding relationships is data mining, and that of extracting information, especially predicted relationships, or discovering previously unknown patterns among data is knowledge discovery. numeric databases aremore amenable to data mining than textual databases. see walter j. trybula (1997), òdata miningand knowledge discovery,ó pp. 197229, annual review of information science and technology,vol. 32, martha e. williams, ed., published for the american society for information sciences byinformation today, inc., medford, n.j.7 for a discussion of different types of scientific data and their distinguishing characteristics, seenational research council (1997), bits of power, note 4, pp. 4957.8 office of management and budget (1999), òbudget of the united states government, fiscalyear 2000ñappendix,ó u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., p. 1062.9 office of management and budget (1999), note 8, p. 441.10 intersociety working group (1999), òtable i11. total u.s. r&d 19961998,ó in researchand development fy 2000, american association for the advancement of science, washington,d.c., p. 71.11 see the nasa web site at <www.nasa.gov> for a description of these major projects under theearth sciences mission home page at <http://www.earth.nasa.gov/missions/index.html> and the spacescience missions home page at <http://spacescience.nasa.gov/missions/index.html>, respectively.12 see the nih web site at <www.nih.gov> and the national human genome research institutehome page at <http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/hgp>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26a question of balanceenabling advances in fundamental physics are operated by the department ofenergy13 or by universities or notforprofit organizations under contract to oneor more federal government agencies.the government also collects large amounts of data for operational, nonresearch applications, such as daily weather forecasting, public health and safety,and other publicinterest government functions. many of the resulting databasesñsuch as those developed from observations made by meteorological satellites and groundbased nexrad radars operated by the national oceanic andatmospheric administration, or the geological, hydrological, and ecological datacollected by the u.s. geological survey in response to department of the interiormandates14ñhave multiple uses, as well as value for both immediate and longterm research.additional extensive data are collected continuously at the state and localgovernment levels, principally in support of public government functions, suchas the provision of local health, education, and welfare services, or the regulationof various economic activities. these databases also provide a wealth of factualand statistical information for social science researchers, as well as for historians.while original data collection activities in the united states, especially forresearch and educational purposes, are carried out largely under governmentauspices, a significant amount of basic research is also funded outside government by both notforprofit and commercial institutions. in 1998, nongovernmental sources spent approximately $15 billion on basic research,15 some ofwhich was used to produce and analyze new s&t databases. in addition, mostlarge federal government research projects and programs involve one or moreforeign government agencies, often with significant international participation ofresearchers.16 largescale research in areas such as climate trends, marine biology, and space science requires international cooperation in the collection, production, and dissemination of observational data. the effectiveness of suchcooperation is dependent on, among other things, agreement on laws and policiesfor sharing and using those data in different countries.significant aspects of database productionthe rate of scientific progress depends not only on the collection of newdata, but also on the quality of the data collected, their ease of use, and thedissemination of information about the database. considerable attention must be13 see the doe web site at <www.doe.gov> and the office of high energy and nuclear physicshome page at <http://www.er.doe.gov/production/henp/henp.html>.14 see table 1.1 and the committeeõs online proceedings, note 5, at chapter 3, òcharacteristics ofscientific and technical databases.ó15 intersociety working group (1999), note 10, p. 71.16 see national research council (1997), bits of power, note 4, pp. 5861.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases27given to all those activities necessary to organize raw or disparate data intodatabases for broader use. these functions and methods typically include digitally processing the data into successively more highly refined and usable products; organizing the data into a database with appropriate structure, format, presentation, and documentation; creating the necessary accompanying analyticalsupport software; providing adequate quality assurance and quality control; announcing the availability of the database; and arranging for secure neartermstorage and eventual deposit in an archive that preserves the database and enablescontinued access.17 as databases become ever larger and more complex, effective database production methods become increasingly important and constitute asignificant component of the overall cost of the database.the production of s&t databases requires at least some involvement bythose responsible for collecting the original data. typically, those closest to thecollection of the data have the greatest expertise and interest in organizing theminto a database whose contents are both available to and readily usable by others.furthermore, the highly technical and frequently esoteric nature of s&t databases is likely to require that the original data collectors (or project scientists)participate in at least the initial stages of organizing, documenting, and reviewingthe quality of data in the database. involvement by the original data collectors inmanaging that part of the database production process decreases the probabilitythat unusable or inaccurate databases will result, reduces the need for subsequentattempts to rescue or complete such data sets, and saves time and expense overall.the level of processing and related database production activities is a significant factor in defining the ultimate utility (and legal protection) of a digital datacollection. it is the original unprocessed, or minimally processed, data that areusually the most difficult to understand or use by anyone other than the originatorof those data, or an expert in that particular area. with every successive level ofprocessing, organization, and documentation, the data tend to become more comprehensible and easier to use by the nonexpert. as a database is prepared formore widespread use with the addition of more creative elements, it also tends tobecome more copyrightable as well as more generally marketable. in the case ofobservational sciences, it is the raw, noncopyrightable data that are typically ofgreatest longterm value to basic research (see òthe uniqueness of many s&tdatabases,ó below). increased or new protection for noncopyrightable databasespreviously in the public domain could therefore have a disproportionate impacton the heretofore unrestricted access to and use of raw data sets for basic researchand education.although the production of many s&t databases is performed by, or with17 see generally, national research council (1995), preserving scientific data on our physicaluniverse: a new strategy for archiving our nationõs scientific resources, national academy press,washington, d.c.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28a question of balancethe active participation of, the originating researchers, it also is common for thirdparties to be involved in an aspect of database production referred to as òvalueadding.ó because the comprehensive production of very large or complex databases can be quite expensive, organizations that collect data, especially in government, are increasingly òoutsourcingó database production and subsequent distribution to third parties in an effort to contain costs. in such instances, the raw,or minimally processed, data are provided to a privatesector vendor expresslycontracted with by government to add value to the data and produce a database ina commercially marketable format to meet broad user requirements. however,since most federal government databases are openly available and in the publicdomain, adding value to them may be undertaken as an initiative by entrepreneursthat see a business opportunity in such activities, without any formal contractualarrangement with the government data source. (for examples of such thirdpartyproviders, see the summary in table 1.1 and the committeeõs online workshopproceedings.)in the context of this report, the most significant aspect of these thirdparty,valueadding arrangements is that they almost always involve the transfer ofpublic or publicly funded data and databases to privatesector proprietary database producers and vendors. to the extent that these transfers are done on anexclusive basis and the original government databases are not maintained orotherwise made publicly available, the result is a concomitant decrease in thepublic availability of s&t data.perspective on number of databases producedñsome statisticsaccording to one set of recently compiled statistics,18 over the period from1975 through 1998 the number of all databases grew by a factor of 38 (from 30118 the statistics provided in this section were all compiled by martha e. williams (1998), òstateof databases today: 1999,ó in gale directory of databases, l. kumar, ed., gale research,farmington hills, mi. dr. williams notes the following caveats:there are undoubtedly large numbers of government and private databases that are notincluded in these numbers. the government seems not to have a systematic way ofmaking the existence of numeric databases known so that they could be identified anddescribed in database directories where the public could learn about them. the compilerof these statistics estimates that there are tens of thousands of such numeric databases andthat the numbers of records contained therein is in the petabyte range. many such databases are in the hands of individual researchers, some of whom would be reluctant to fillout questionnaires or who consider the data to be of interest only to a small number ofknown colleagues. the statistics reported herein relate to publicly available databaseswhere the producer wants to make the data publicly known versus databases that areavailable to the public in theory only. databases that would require a freedom of information act request or needtoknow are not included in these statistics.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases29to 11,339), the number of database producers increased by a factor of 18 (from200 to 3,686), and the number of vendors grew by a factor of 23 (from 105 to2,459). in 1975 the 301 identified databases contained about 52 million records,whereas in 1998 the 11,339 tallied databases held nearly 12.05 billion records, a231fold increase in the number of records.although in todayõs digitized information world databases are produced onall continents, the percentage of all types of databases produced in the unitedstates continues to represent the lionõs share of the global output. in 1998, of the11,339 databases that were identified, 63% were produced in the united states.in 1975, of the 301 publicly available, computerreadable databases worldwide,59% were u.s. databases. from 1985 to 1993, the ratio of u.s. to nonu.s.databases remained at about 2:1. from 1994 on, production of nonu.s. databases has accelerated somewhat, so that in 1998 the ratio of the number of u.s. tononu.s. databases was about 3:2. the average size of u.s. databases in terms ofthe number of records they contained was larger than that of the nonu.s. databases. as noted above, however, most u.s. government and academic databasesare not represented in these figures.in the source quoted here, database statistics were compiled in eight majorsubject categoriesñbusiness, health/life/medical sciences, humanities, law, multidisciplinary, news/general, science/technology/engineering, and social sciences.if the health/life/medical sciences category is combined with science/technology/engineering, that general scientific and technical category had the largest numberof databases (28%) in 1998, followed by business (26%), news/general (15%),and law (11%), with the remaining three categories accounting for the other20%.19the uniqueness of many s&t databasesa key characteristic of original s&t databases is that many of them are theonly one of their particular kind, available only from a single source, which hassignificant economic and legal implications, as discussed in subsequent chaptersof this report. for example, many s&t databases describe physical phenomenaor transitory events that have been rendered unique by the passage of time.measurements of a snowstorm obtained with a single radar observation, or astatistical compilation of some key socioeconomic characteristics such as incomelevels collected by a state agency, cannot be recaptured after the original event.the vast majority of observational data sets of the natural world, as well as allunique historical records, can never again be recreated independently and arethus available only as originally obtained, frequently from a single source. others&t databases are de facto unique because the cost of obtaining the data was19 williams (1998), òstate of databases today,ó note 18, p. xxvi.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30a question of balanceextremely high. this is the case with very large facilities for physical experiments or spacebased observatories.even when data similar but not identical to original research results or observations are available for use in nontechnical applications, scientists and engineers will likely not find an inexact replica of a database a suitable substitute if itdoes not meet certain specifications for a particular experiment or analysis. forexample, two infrared sensors with similar spatial and spectral characteristics ondifferent satellites collecting observations of earth may provide relatively interchangeable data products for the nonexpert consumer, but for a researcher, theabsence of one spectral band can make all the difference in whether a certain typeof research can be performed. thus a database generally deemed adequate as asubstitute in the mass consumer market very likely will not be usable for manyresearch or education purposes.dissemination of scientific and technical data and the issue of accesss&t data traditionally were disseminated in paper form in journal articles,textbooks, reference books, and abstracting and indexing publications. as datahave become available in electronic form, they have been distributed via magnetic tape and, more recently, optical media such as cdrom or dvd. thegrowing use of the internet has revolutionized dissemination by allowing mostdatabases to be made available globally in electronic form. digitization and thepotential for instant, lowcost global communication have opened tremendousnew opportunities for the dissemination and utilization of s&t databases andother forms of information, but also have led to a blurring of the traditional rolesand relationships of database producers, vendors, and users of those databases inthe government, notforprofit, and commercial sectors. in fact, virtually anyonewho obtains access to a digital database can instantly become a worldwide disseminator, whether legally or illegally.20two of the most important mechanisms for the dissemination of public andpublicly funded databases have been government data centers and public libraries. government, or governmentfunded, data centers have been created in recentdecades for dissemination of data obtained in certain programs or research disciplines. examples of such data centers include the national center for biotech20 of course, this same development is occurring with other forms of online information andproprietary publications outside the s&t database context, such as with copyrighted digital musicand videos. for an extensive discussion of the impact of the internet on various types of informationand related intellectual property rights management, see computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council (2000), the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c., in press.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases31nology information and the national climatic data center (table 1.1), but manyothers have been established for almost every field of research.21public libraries, whether part of the federal depository library program, university research libraries, or other public libraries or foundations specializing invarious s&t or other academic subjects, not only preserve and publicly disseminate government data, but provide general public access for many proprietarys&t databases as well. with everincreasing costs, however, the librariesõ ability to provide this public òsafety netó for all published products is diminishing.22historically, most federal government s&t data and governmentfundedresearch data in the united states have been fully and openly available to thepublic.23 this has meant that such data are available free or at low cost foracademic and commercial researchñand indeed any other useñwithout restrictions and can be incorporated into derivative databases, which can, themselves,be redistributed and incorporated into additional databases. in some instances inwhich the government contracts for the dissemination of data, however, the rightsassigned to the database vendor may place restrictions on the ability of the research and education communities to fully utilize the data. increasingly, bothgovernment and notforprofit organizations are exploring means to recover database production and distribution costs, or to generate revenue streams in order tosupport their expensive data activities, thereby making them function in a mannersimilar to commercial organizations.the ability to access existing data and to extract and recombine selectedportions of them for research or for incorporation into new databases for furtherdistribution and use has become a key part of the scientific process by which newinsights are gained and knowledge is advanced. when the ability to access ordistribute data on an international basis is required, various intergovernmentalagreements are depended on to facilitate such exchanges in the public sector. incontrast, to achieve a suitable return on their investment, privatesector vendorsof proprietary databases typically seek to control unauthorized access to and useof their databases. it is at the intersection of public and private interests in data21 see national research council (1995), preserving scientific data, note 17, and the accompanying study on the longterm retention of selected scientific and technical records of the federalgovernment: working papers, national academy press, washington, d.c., and national researchcouncil (1997) bits of power, note 4, for a description of many of these government s&t datacenters.22 as the prices of many serial journal subscriptions substantially outpace the rate of inflation, forexample, research libraries increasingly need to rely on interlibrary loans to obtain access for theirstudents and professors. see association of research libraries (1999), arl statistics: 199798,martha kyrillidou et al., eds., association of research libraries, washington, d.c.23 as defined in national research council (1997), bits of power, note 4, p. 15, òfull and openóavailability of data means that òdata and information derived from publicly funded research are madeavailable with as few restrictions as possible, on a nondiscriminatory basis, for no more than the costof reproduction and distribution.óa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32a question of balancewhere the greatest challenges emerge. as an example, box 1.3 sketches some ofthe issues and approaches currently being tried.use of scientific and technical databasesprior to its public dissemination, the use of a database is limited to thoseinvolved in the collection of data or production, and therefore does not providethe opportunity to contribute broadly to the advancement of scientific knowledge,technical progress, economic growth, or other applications beyond those of theimmediate group. it is only upon the distribution of a database that its farreaching research, educational, and other socioeconomic values are realized. oneor more researchers applying varying hypotheses, manipulating the data in different ways, or combining elements from disparate databases may produce a diversity of data and information products. the contribution of any of these productsto scientific and technical knowledge might well assume a value far greater thanthe costs of database production and dissemination. the results of a thoroughbox 1.3database production in competitive research and thequestion of accessgenomic sequence databases exemplify the tension over rights in data andtheir uses associated with the development of original databases that have bothimportant fundamental research uses and great potential for applied commercialproducts. advances in molecular biology and automated dna sequencing technology have made possible the rapid sequencing of genomes from a variety of lifeforms, including human beings. these databases are being produced simultaneously by researchers at government, notforprofit, and commercial laboratories.although the government and notforprofit genomic database producers maybe slower than the commercial sector in compiling gene sequence data on thesame organisms, they are striving to create analogous databases in order to provide the results on an open basis as a public good for broad research and otheruses. government and notforprofit sequence data are collected and integratedinto major sequence databases in a cooperative international effort that includes thenational center for biotechnology information in the united states,1 the europeanmolecular biology laboratory in the united kingdom on behalf of the europeanunion,2 and the dna database of japan.3 these centers not only collect andshare the data on a daily basis, but also provide some quality control, documentation, and organization of the data before making the information freely available tothe scientific and technical community, typically over the internet. the humancontinueda question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases33genome project aims to provide full sequence data for the human genome and toserve as the future reference standard.because of the high intrinsic commercial value of human genomic informationfor the identification of disease markers and therapeutic agents, commercial entities simultaneously seek to be first in generating primary genomic data, which theycan license to pharmaceutical or biotechnology companies, or patent, if possible,to gain market advantage.while the human genome provides the basic blueprint for human life, it is smalldifferences in individual genes that are likely to provide insight into important questions such as variations in disease susceptibility in different populations (for example, why certain groups of people are predisposed to high blood pressure, diabetes, or alzheimerõs disease). these can be studied by comparing the genesequences of different populations, such as those individuals susceptible to a disease compared to those individuals who are not. hence, over time, gene sequence databases of a wide variety of discrete populations will be developed supported by a mix of public and private funding.recently, for instance, the icelandic government formed a controversial partnership with a private u.s. firm to develop a database that will contain geneticinformation on the entire icelandic population. icelanders belong to a highly homogeneous gene pool, which will simplify the detection of diseaserelated genes. thegovernment gave the firm, by statute, an exclusive license to create and operatethat database.4another recently begun effort involves a consortium of ten u.s. and foreignpharmaceutical companies, together with government and notforprofit organizations, formed to generate a map of human singlenucleotide polymorphisms,5which can be thought of as a lowresolution indicator highlighting areas of variability in the genetic code associated with genetic differences between individuals.although the research is funded in large part by the commercial sector, the resultswill be made publicly available. in addition to the costsharing benefits of thisconsortium, a major reason for its establishment is the fear that an individual company, or group of companies, could generate scientifically valuable databases andinformation on a proprietary basis, preventing broad access and capturing a highproportion of the associated intellectual property rights.61see the national center for biotechnology information web site at<www.ncbi.gov>.2see the european molecular biology laboratory web site at <www.embl.uk>.3see the dna database of japan web site at <www.ddbj.nig.ad.ip>.4see j. gulcher and k. stefansson (1999), òan icelandic saga on a centralized healthcare database and democratic decision making,ó national biotechnology, vol. 17, july, p. 620, and martin enserink (1998), òphysicians wary ofscheme to pool icelandersõ genetic data,ó science, vol. 281, august 14, pp.890891.5see eliot marshall (1999), òdrug firms to create public database of geneticmutations,ó science, vol. 284, april 16, pp. 406407.6see marshall (1999), note 5.box 1.3 continueda question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34a question of balancedatabase analysis may reveal a value of the data not apparent in even a detailedexamination of the individual elements of the database itself. with the widespread availability of information on the internet have come abundant opportunities to search for scientific and technical gold in this ore of factual elements. thepossibilities for discovery of new insights about the natural worldñwith bothcommercial and publicinterest valueñare extraordinary.in considering how databases are used, it is important to distinguish betweenend use and derivative use. end useñaccessing a database to verify some fact orperform some jobrelated or personal task, such as obtaining an example for awork memoñis most typical of public consumer uses. end use does not involvethe physical integration of one or more portions of the database into anotherdatabase in order to create a new information product. a derivative (valueadding or transformative) use (see box 1.1) builds on a preexisting database andincludes at least one, and frequently many more, extractions from one or moredatabases to create a new database, which can be used for the same, a similar, oran entirely different purpose than the original component database(s).integration of distributed data to broaden accessand potential for discoveryin seeking new knowledge, researchers may gather data from widely disparate sources. a significant advantage arising from the abundance of digitized datanow accessible through both private and public networks is the potential forlinking data in multiple (even thousands of) databases. the ability to link sites onthe world wide web is one type of integration that could result in more databeing available overall to users. another is the merging of databases of the sameor complementary content. it is now possible to maintain a site with continuouslyverified links to related information sites for use by subscribers or members of aspecific group; an example is the engineering village of engineering information, inc.24 yet another type of integration occurs in the connection of distributed databases such that different parts of a single large database may reside ondifferent computers in geographically dispersed locations throughout the countryor the world. with a common structure, data can be located in a physicallydistributed network and accessed as if they were in one database in one computerin one location. the cost can thus be distributed and the value of each contributory database increased. still other databases are automatically created from otherdatabases. for example, data are routinely mined and collected by òknowbotsóand òweb crawlersó (software employing artificial intelligence and rulebasedselection techniques) on the internet throughout the world and retrieved for pro24 see, for example, the engineering village of engineering information web site at <www.ei.org/aivillage/village.servepage?p=4011>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases35cessing and further use. one such datamining activity in the area of biotechnology was described and discussed at the committeeõs january 1999 workshop (seethe molecular applications groupõs activities summarized in table 1.1).with a capability to integrate information in multiple databases comes thepotential for exploiting relationships identified in the information and developingnew knowledge. in many scientific fields, the initial investment by the databaserights holder may not produce the greatest value until it is integrated with theinvestments of others. for example, while protein sequence data are valuable intheir own right, their value is greatly enhanced if associated xray crystallographic data are also concurrently available. it is possible to use the combineddata to understand the way in which protein chains are folded and, in the case ofan enzyme, the way in which various nonsequential residues, or even residues onseparate protein chains, combine to form an active site.derivative databases and new datadrivenresearch and capabilitiesthe ethos in research is that science builds on science. the creation ofderivative databases not only enables incremental advances in the knowledgebase, but also can contribute to major new findings, particularly when existingdata are combined with new or entirely different data. the importance for research and related educational activities of producing new derivative databasescannot be overemphasized.25 the vast increase in the creation of digital databases in recent decades, together with the ability to make them broadly andinstantaneously available, has resulted in entire new fields of datadriven research.for example, the study of biological systems has been transformed radicallyin the past 20 years from an experimental research endeavor conducted in laboratories to one that relies heavily on computing and on access to and further refine25 as noted by vinton cerf, senior vice president at mci worldcom, inc. (òacm awardskeynote,ó association for computing machinery, new york city, may 15, 1999):scientific databases are proving to be nonlinear accelerators of research in specific fieldssuch as biology, astronomy, meteorology, space physics, chemistry, economics, epidemiology, environmental studies and a wealth of other fields. the nonlinearity comes aboutbecause as each research adds more material to the database, the information is placed injuxtaposition with all other items in the system, exhibiting the same kind of nonlinearimpact that placing computers in a common network has had, in accordance with metcalfeõs law (which says that the value of the network grows as the square number of devicesin the net). cerfõs law says that shared databases grow in value in accordance with thenumber of combinations of data items in the database. when the hundreds of thousandsof databases on the internet and other networks are accessible remotely and can be reachedin parallel, and when the partial results can be combined and searched anew, the value ofthese data can grow dramatically.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36a question of balancement of globally linked databases.26 indeed, one of the fastest growing disciplines is bioinformatics, a computerbased approach to biological research. newtechnologies, such as dna microarrays and highthroughput sequencing machines, are producing a deluge of data. a challenge to biology in the comingdecades will be to convert these data into knowledge.27the availability of global remotesensing satellite observations, coupled withother airborne and in situ observational capabilities, has given rise to a new fieldof environmental research, earth system science, which integrates the study ofthe physical and biological processes of our planet at various scales. the largemeteorological databases obtained from government satellites, groundbased radar, and other datacollection systems pose a challenge similar to that mentionedabove for biology, but also already have yielded a remarkable range of commercial and noncommercial value. dissemination of the atmospheric observationsin real time or nearreal time for ònowcastsó and daily weather forecasts has veryhigh commercial value, which is captured by thirdparty distributors. use ofthese atmospheric observations to develop numerical models that predict theweather accurately, hours or days in advance, adds value in terms of safety andeconomic benefits to society that are not readily quantifiable. while the economic value of these data can be gauged by the profits of privatesector distributors, how does one measure the value of the lives and property saved by timelyand accurate hurricane forecasts and tornado warnings? once the immediate andmost lucrative commercial value is exploited, the resulting data continue to havesignificant commercial and publicinterest uses indefinitely. for instance, thesedata enable basic research on severe weather and longterm climate trends andprovide various retrospective applications for industry. the original databasesare archived and made available by the national climatic data center (see box1.2). derivative databases and data products are distributed under various arrangements by both commercial and notforprofit entities like the unidata program of the university corporation for atmospheric research (see table 1.1 andthe online workshop proceedings).geographic information systems that integrate myriad sources of data provide an opportunity for new insights about the natural and constructed environment, greatly enhancing our knowledge of where we live and how we affect ourphysical environment. important applications include environmental management, urban planning, route planning and navigation, emergency preparedness26 see generally, working group on biomedical computing (1999), òthe biomedical information science initiative,ó national institutes of health, june 3, available online at <www.nih.gov/welcome/director/060399.htm>.27 see sylvia spengler and manfred d. zorn (1999), òhandling data sets in biology,ó lawrenceberkeley national laboratory colloquium, washington, d.c.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases37and response, landuse regulation, and enhancement of agricultural productivity,among many others.28finally, databases used by researchers and educators also frequently areproduced and disseminated primarily for other purposes. for example, a physicalscientist studying the complex relationships among geology, hydrology, and biology as they relate to the preservation of species diversity likely would draw onnumerous digital and hardcopy databases originally gathered for other purposes.a social scientist studying the characteristics and patterns of urban crime or thespread of communicable diseases likely would do the same. for many scientists,the ability to supplement existing databases with further data collection in aseamless web of old and new data is basic to meeting the needs of their specificinvestigations.text databases and online publicationanother type of s&t database not yet discussed, but that is used extensivelyby the research community, consists primarily of text with data summarized oradded as examples. these databases may consist of primary literature (as in thecase of fulltext databases of journal articles) or secondary literature (as in thecase of bibliographic reference databases). traditionally, this text has been available in print form, with publishers providing peer review, professional editing,indexing and formatting, and other services, including marketing and distribution. increasingly this information is being provided as text databases with thepublishers also providing the systems that allow access to these databases. thesevalueadding or information repackaging functions are performed by both notforprofit and forprofit organizations. for example, the notforprofit americanassociation for the advancement of science, a scientific society, produces adatabase containing the full text of articles from science magazine, includingenhancements to the content that do not appear in the print version.29 similarly,the forprofit publisher elsevier science produces sciencedirect, a database containing the full text of its journal articles. bibliographic reference databases arealso produced by government, notforprofit, and forprofit organizations, suchas the national library of medicine, chemical abstracts service, and the institute for scientific information, respectively (see table 1.1 and the online workshop proceedings30). where fulltext databases include associated data collec28 national academy of public administration (1998), geographic information for the 21st century: building a strategy for the nation, national academy of public administration, washington,d.c.29 see science online at <http://www.sciencemag.org/>.30 see the committeeõs online proceedings, note 5, at chapter 3, òcharacteristics of scientific andtechnical databases.óa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38a question of balancetions, physical and legal possession of the data collections may be retained by theoriginator or may pass to the publisher.as s&t data and results are increasingly digitized and made available online,publishers are seeking access to and inclusion of the underlying data collectionson which published articles are based. the intent is not only to provide greatervalidity and support for published research articles, but also to make their onlinepublications more interesting and useful to the s&t customer base. the ability tolink to the underlying databases instantaneously and at different levels of detailadds an entirely new and exciting dimension to scientific publishing and to thepotential for new research, but also raises the question of who will have the rightsto exploiting those data.the challenge of effectively balancing privaterights and the public interest in scientific andtechnical databasesthe general advancement of knowledge independent of its eventual societalbenefits is a goal of basic research. nevertheless, an endless array of examplesdemonstrates how the creation of new knowledge, building on the existing baseof understanding and information developed by researchers, has enabled broadand important socioeconomic benefits for the nation as a whole. our societyappreciates that knowledge itself is intrinsically valuable and important, and oursuccess in the world market for advanced technology products and services attests to the direct economic benefits of the resulting applications. it is for thesereasons that government funds basic research and related data activities as apublic good.31,32 yet it is precisely these activities that are at risk of beinghindered, if not in some instances stopped, by proposed major changes to thelegal protections of factual databases.31 as lester thurow points out: òa successful knowledgebased economy requires large publicinvestments in education, infrastructure, and research and development.ó he goes on to say thatprivate returns are apt to be more certain if one is looking for an extension of existingknowledge rather than for a major breakthrough; thus private firms tend to concentratetheir money on the development end of the r&d process. time lags are shorter, and inthe business world speed is everything. because of this proclivity in the private sector,government should focus its spending on the longtailed projects for advancing basicknowledge. this is where the private firms wonõt invest, but it is precisely where thebreakthroughs that generate business opportunities are made.(lester c. thurow (1999), òbuilding wealth: the new rules for individuals, companies, andnations,ó atlantic monthly, june, p. 64.)32 for a discussion of public goods in the context of basic scientific research and related dataactivities, see national research council (1997), bits of power, note 4, pp. 111114. this issue isdiscussed in greater detail in chapters 3 and 4.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.importance and use of scientific and technical databases39legislative efforts are currently under way in the united states, the european union, and the world intellectual property organization to greatly enhancethe legal protection of proprietary databases. these new legal approaches threatento compromise traditional and customary access to and use of s&t data forpublicinterest endeavors, including notforprofit research, education, and general library uses. at the same time, there are legitimate concerns by the rightsholders in databases regarding unauthorized and uncompensated uses of theirdata products, including at times the wholesale commercial misappropriation ofproprietary databases.because of the complex web of interdependent relationships among publicsector and privatesector database producers, disseminators, and users, any actionto increase the rights of persons in one category likely will compromise the rightsof the persons in the other categories, with farreaching and potentially negativeconsequences. of course, it is in the common interest of both database rightsholders and usersñand of society in generalñto achieve a workable balanceamong the respective interests so that all legitimate rights remain reasonablyprotected.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.402incentives and disincentives affectingthe availability and use ofscientific and technical databases40as noted in chapter 1, scientific and technical (s&t) databases are not justa byproduct of research, but also an essential foundation on which progress inscience builds. increasingly, too, databases are a research tool that can be sold orlicensed and used as the input for new products, the creation of customizedderivative databases, and innovations to broaden the scope and increase the paceof discovery. the incentives and disincentives to provide databases reflect allthese uses, as well as financial motives. this chapter points out the divergentobjectives of organizations that produce and distribute s&t databases, and itoutlines some of the economic factors affecting access to such data. in addition,it elaborates on the committeeõs conclusion that any new legislation that wouldchange the status quo must take into account how it would alter the incentives toproduce both original and derivative databases, how it would affect the dissemination and use of databases (especially regarding whether access would be exclusive or unrestricted, particularly for the scientific community), and what theunintended consequences might be for scientific inquiry and other publicinterestuses.divergent objectives of organizations that produceand distribute scientific and technical databasesoriginal and derivative s&t databases are produced by government, notforprofit/academic, and forprofit organizations (see table 1.1 in chapter 1 forselected examples). whereas individual researchers typically are motivated bycuriosity, a desire to contribute to the knowledge base, and an opportunity toa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentives and disincentives affecting availability and use41influence the thinking of others, their employers also have in mind a combinationof organizational mission and funding considerations. table 2.1 summarizestypical objectives of government, notforprofit/academic, and forprofit organizations in producing and disseminating s&t databases and the different weighteach places on mission versus financial considerations.in government and notforprofit research organizations, including universities, basic research institutes, and national laboratories, the advancement ofknowledge as an intrinsic good and in the service of national goals motivates theproduction and distribution of s&t databases; exploiting data for financial gainis subordinate to fulfilling publicinterest objectives. the data products of notforprofit and government organizations are judged primarily by criteria that arenot directly profit related, such as their value to end users, their potential value inadvancing a field, their ability to enhance the status of an institution and itsresearch or educational capabilities, and similar objectives typically associatedwith publicinterest or publicgood activities related, for example, to improvingknowledge of disease factors or interdependencies within ecosystems.of course, not all notforprofit institutions behave in this generalized way.at one end of the spectrum are organizations that, especially if they are fullysubsidized, distribute their data freely on the internet without any effort at costrecovery. many individual researchers or academics certainly operate this way.at the other end are notforprofit institutions that seek to maximize the revenuesfrom their s&t databases, subject to the constraints of their taxexempt status, tofinance future r&d and database development in order to remain at the forefrontof their respective fields. most notforprofits, however, fall somewhere in themiddle in trying to reconcile their publicinterest mission, on the one hand, withthe need to generate sufficient operating revenues, on the other. universitiespresent a good example of this dichotomy, with the trend in recent years towardgreater cost recovery1 and greater attention to the protection and exploitation oftheir intellectual property.2in contrast, the forprofit sector seeks mainly to generate profit for management and shareholders. of course, market success also depends on creating valuefor usersñotherwise, the data products would not be successful. high value cantranslate to high prices, and such pricing inevitably restricts access. nevertheless, there are exceptions to the rule here as well, since not all forprofit entitiesattempt to charge as much as they could for their proprietary databases, perhaps1 for a discussion of the trend in academic institutions to protect their research results as intellectual property, see kenneth w. dam (1998), òintellectual property and the academic enterprise,ójohn m. olin law & economics working paper no. 68 (2d series), university of chicago lawschool.2 intellectual property task force (1999), òintellectual property and new media technologies: aframework for policy development and aau institutions,ó association of american universities,may 13, washington, d.c., 31 pp., available online at <www.tulane.edu/~aau/aaupolicy.html>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42a question of balancetable 2.1 typical objectives of organizations that produce anddisseminate s&t databasesfederal governmentprimary motivationsserve national goals, including promoting societalwellbeing and supporting basic research and otherpublicgood interestsgoals of s&t data collectionsupport agency mission; undertake basic researchand database developmentas a basis for economic growth and productivityand for public wellbeinggoals of s&t database distributionmaximize the downstream benefits of basic research;promote availability and use of research results inboth public and private sectorsaccess to dataopen exchange of information encouraged byfederal policyinterest in protecting the databasesvery low; any restrictions generally seen as aproducedproblem, with few benefitsnote: this table provides broad generalizations regarding the organizations of the three sectors.the committee recognizes that many exceptions and nuances exist, as discussed in this chapter.instead using such databases as a marketing tool for other products or services, orchoosing revenuegenerating methods such as advertising as an alternative tocharging users for access to data. such exceptions, however, usually are seen innonscientific database markets that have large user clienteles.33 see generally computer science and telecommunications board, national research council(2000), the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age, national academypress, washington, d.c., in press.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentives and disincentives affecting availability and use43notforprofit/academicforprofitfulfill mission, including furthering research,achieve corporate objectives, includingeducation, creation of knowledge, andprofit making and growth, and ensurediscovery; remain economically viableshareholder and customer satisfactionadvance knowledge by conducting newsupport development of new or improvedresearch and by validating and building onproducts or services; develop databases forthe research of others; educate futuredirect sale or lease as products or as servicesresearchers; contribute to basis for producingin support of other products or servicessocial benefits; build reputation and statusof researchers and their institutionsencourage open sharing of ideas; enabledisseminate data to protect competitiveexisting data to be reused for discovery ofadvantage when databases are used fornew knowledge; invite review and validationdevelopment of other products or areof research results; facilitate use of researchthemselves products or services; disseminateresults for product development by s&tvia sale or license to generate revenue,community and commercial concerns;enhance customer base and market position,recover costs or generate revenue in supportgain competitive advantage, achieve profits,of missionor recover costsopen, with data and ideas shared afterinternal and confidential, or available/results have been publishedmarketed externally at a cost set by theorganizationmoderate; ranges from very low (for fullyvery high; databases regarded assubsidized databases) to moderate (wheninvestments to be protected whether they arecost recovery is necessary) to high (whenused in product development or aredata are a source of revenue required tothemselves products or services to be soldsupport mission)scientific and technical database costs,pricing, and accessdespite their differences in mission and motivation, organizations in all threesectors are constrained by financial responsibilities: federal government agencies must justify their expenditures to congress; notforprofit entities must maketheir organizations at least viable (with any excess of income over expensesreinvested in the organization); and commercial firms must answer to shareholders. all organizations therefore give careful consideration both to the costsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44a question of balanceassociated with database production and distribution and to the potential forgenerating revenue.production and distribution coststhe costs of databases can be categorized as production costs and distribution costs. database production includes both data collection and database preparation. the cost of data collection can be very high and varies with the size,complexity, and difficulty of obtaining the data. it includes the costs of theobservational or experimental instrumentation, deployment and maintenance ofthat instrumentation for the lifetime of the data collection project, and relatedinfrastructure costs such as initial data storage. data acquisition costs typicallyrepresent the bulk of the costs of a database. in major data collection projectssuch as those involving remote sensing satellites (e.g., national oceanic andatmospheric administration geostationary or polarorbiting spacecraft), or inlarge physics experiments requiring specialized facilities (e.g., highenergy particle accelerators), the costs can easily be in the hundreds of millions, or evenbillions, of dollars. database preparation costs are those associated with preparing a database for dissemination, including ensuring data quality and accuracy,and enhancing the utility of the data for users. the cost of these efforts can varyfrom modest to large, depending on the nature of the database and its intendeduse. for example, the cost of the labor for abstracting or indexing databases canmake their production expensive.distribution costs include the cost of making, sending, and billing for physical copies; any additional transaction costs such as those for licensing and relatedadministrative activities; and userspecific costs such as those for database maintenance and specialized handling. distribution costs tend to be much lower thandatabase production costs, particularly if the internet is the medium of dissemination and little effort is devoted to marketing or user assistance. in some cases, thedistribution costs are simply the costs of copying.producing databases for online distribution is more a matter of potentialmarket opportunity and incentives, rather than of potential cost savings. customers have come to expect online distribution, particularly in the s&t data marketin which nearly all users are now connected to networks and are technicallysophisticated. for such users, online access can improve a databaseõs accessibility, functionality, and utility. from the producerõs perspective, it opens newmarket opportunities or broadens existing ones, but it is more likely to shift coststhan to reduce them. the concern over adequate protection of a rights holderõsdatabase products is exacerbated in the online milieu by factors such as thepossibility of unauthorized access, duplication of content, and mass redistribution. as discussed in chapter 3, however, making the information available onlinealso can reduce the opportunities for misappropriation of a database by preventing the user from accessing all the underlying data.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentives and disincentives affecting availability and use45pricing and accessbecause for most s&t databases the production costs are high relative to thesubsequent distribution costs, there is a tradeoff between efficient access andcost recovery. an economist would define an efficientaccess price for a database as one that is equal to the cost of making the database accessible to oneadditional (the marginal) user. a higher price inefficiently excludes potentialusers, whether the data activity is in the public or the private sector. the usersõwelfare could be enhanced without increasing the burden on taxpayers if userswere allowed to buy access to the data at the marginal cost of dissemination.4an efficientaccess price will almost never generate revenue that matchesthe database production costs.5 instead, the database must be subsidized in someway. cost recovery has an equity justification, namely that the database is paidfor by the users instead of being subsidized out of general revenue. it alsosubjects the database to a (weak) market test of whether the value to users exceeds the cost. if not, then revenue cannot exceed costs.efficientaccess pricing is only feasible in conjunction with some othersource of revenue or subsidy, such as taxpayer support (in the case of federalagencies) or endowments or industry or government contract support (in the caseof notforprofits). federal agencies are required by law to provide efficientaccess, limiting charges to no more than the incremental cost of data dissemination, and not including the average cost of producing the database.6 frequently,the federal agency simply charges for the cost of reproduction and distribution,which can be zero if the database is distributed online.74 such a price is efficient whether the database is sold or licensed to end users or those using thedata in derivative products. competition among vendors in the derivative market will keep the pricelow, thus transferring much of the benefit of the underlying data to the consumer. in both cases,efficient access could be preserved with higher revenue if the provider could distinguish users with ahigh willingness to pay for access and use from those with a low willingness to pay.5 for example, in remote sensing systems the development and maintenance costs of the systemare very high per user, but the cost of dissemination is trivial in comparison, especially when doneonline. information goods such as databases share the essential feature of public goods, namely thatuse of the good is nonrivalrous. this means that after the first user is served, the marginal cost ofallowing access by each additional user is minimal, and the average cost per user is declining (thereare economies of scale). competitive theory does not extend to pure public goods, and the marketplace will not deliver them efficiently, if at all. in order to cover costs, the price must exceed the costof supplying the marginal user.6 see office of management and budget (1993), circular a130, òmanagement of federal information resources,ó u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., regarding federal government information dissemination practices and policies, which were codified in the paperwork reduction act of 1995, p.l. 10413, which amended 44 united states code chapter 35, effective october1, 1995.7 for a discussion of pricing publicly funded s&t data, see national research council (1997),bits of power: issues in global access to scientific data, national academy press, washington,d.c., pp. 124126. on the other hand, providing access can be more costly than it seems, and usersa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46a question of balancein contrast to government agencies and some notforprofit entities, profitmotivated firms must, at a minimum, recover their costs. of course, forprofitentities seek to generate additional income, sometimes using sophisticated pricing strategies, such as segmenting the market with differentiated products andvarying the price according to volume, convenience of delivery, customer support services, documentation, scope of subject matter, geographic coverage, andso on.8 (see box 2.1 for examples of marketing models for privatesector s&tdata products and services.) unless commercial providers are much more efficient than government providers, the profit motive leads to higher prices foraccess than a government agency would ideally charge under its mandate toprovide wide access.whether a commercial database will be made available to public users (suchas university laboratories) on better terms than to commercial firms depends onwhether there is competition between those two sectors. if the database containsinformation whose value to commercial buyers is reduced by academic use, thenthe vendor will not sell it at preferential rates to academics.stronger statutory protection and the incentives for investmentthere is a natural link between cost recovery and protection of databases.9 ifdatabases can be copied without any legal constraints or otherwise freely acquired by users or competitors, then the rights holders will not recover their costsand hence will have no incentive to produce databases.10 stronger statutoryprotection might help prevent unauthorized copying, particularly in unprotecteddigital formats, and thus promote cost recovery and improve profit margins. inthis way it could provide incentives for the creation of new databases in theprivate sector, especially by commercial entities. however, although this motivation sounds compelling, it should be tempered by the realization, elaborated inmust sometimes invoke the freedom of information act to obtain data from the federal government.one interpretation is that the cost of providing the information includes techniciansõ time, whichcannot be disentangled from other activities and is hard to pass on to the user as a cost of dissemination.8 see national research council (1997), bits of power, note 7, p. 125.9 the tradeoff between access and cost recovery is expressed by richard gilbert in chapter 4 ofthe committeeõs online workshop proceedings as a tradeoff between access by users and protectionof rights holders or vendors, where protection refers to market exclusivity that comes from intellectualproperty rights. see national research council (1999), proceedings of the workshop on promotingaccess to scientific and technical data for the public interest: an assessment of policy options,national academy press, washington, d.c., <http://www.nap.edu>.10 some databases, such as consumeroriented catalogs, are a way to sell products. these databases are not the committeeõs concern, however, because firms already have every incentive toprovide them and they do not require statutory protection. the committeeõs concern here is withdatabases for which the pricing for access is the only source of revenue, e.g., most s&t databases.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentives and disincentives affecting availability and use47chapter 3, that databases already benefit from many forms of protection thatpermit rights holders to recover their costs. and even when balanced, newlegislation could have unintended, negative consequences that need to be avoided,as discussed in chapter 4.moreover, the participants in the committeeõs january 1999 workshop didnot report any instances in which the current lack of statutory protection haddissuaded them from investing in promising new projects. while most of the notforprofit and commercialsector participants noted that their organizationsõ datahad been copied on occasion, such copying was written off as an unavoidable lossand part of doing business (similar to shoplifting in retail stores). commercialsector participants noted that in repeated instances of suspected infringement, thepractice of issuing òcease and desistó letters normally was effective, but whennot, they felt appropriately obliged to terminate the infringerõs further access (i.e.,to their passwordprotected online databases).11 in no case, however, had copying of their data prevented the companies represented at the workshop fromearning a reasonable profit, over and above full cost recovery.12mounting pressures on government producers and distributors ofscientific and technical databases for cost recoveryhistorically, the generation of primary s&t data, in such diverse fields asmeteorology, astronomy, and highenergy physics and in the public census, hasbeen funded by governments either directly through specific contracts or indirectly through the sponsorship of academic research. in the united states, theresulting databases of the federal government have been placed in the publicdomain and have provided the basis for subsequent research.in many cases in which the government produces databases, it distributes theraw or partially processed data as a public good and lets notforprofit organizations and commercial firms customize the data for special market segments orindividual users. this achieves a better balance between requirements for costrecovery and the advantages to the public of efficientaccess pricing. under thisapproach, taxpayers subsidize the collection and preservation of the raw or partially processed data, but users pay the entire additional cost of customizing the11 several participants reported that pirated editions of their databases were being sold in developing countries. this kind of wholesale copying is illegal under domestic and international copyrightand unfair competition laws. the ongoing failure of other nations to respect and enforce existingintellectual property law is largely a concern of new world trade organization rules known as thetrips agreement (see note 5 in chapter 3). increased worldwide protection of databases wouldrequire a new treaty, and its effectiveness could depend on its integration into the trips agreement.12 an extensive background report prepared in advance of the workshop also failed to uncoverany negative consequences for companies. see stephen m. maurer, appendix c, in the committeeõsonline proceedings, note 9.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48a question of balancebox 2.1marketing models for privatesector s&t dataproducts and servicestraditional marketing methodsmany of the business plans for creating and distributing databases are similarto those used in the software industry. referred to here as òtraditionaló methods,they are usually tailored to the perceived marketõs size and wealth:¥massmarket products. the typical commercial database directory liststhousands of lowcost, massmarket databases with prices ranging from a fewhundred to tens of thousands of dollars each. this approach extends to scientificand engineering products. examples include poisindex (a medical databasethat links many thousands of poisons to treatment protocols and is aimed at emergency room personnel), science and technology network (stn) international (online databases of the physical and mechanical properties of thousands of materials), and the institute for scientific information, inc. (see table 1.1 in chapter 1)¥ specialtymarket products. many database producers concentrate ondeveloping products aimed at relatively small, highvalue markets. examples fromtable 1.1 include molecular applications group (software for storing, mining, andvisualizing genomic data) and tasc (custom weather data for aviation, agribusiness, and power companies). not surprisingly, such products tend to be costlyñindeed, large pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms may pay millions and eventens of millions of dollars per year in licensing fees for access. sales contractsnormally include detailed confidentiality provisions.¥custom products. large pharmaceutical houses sometimes ask bioinformatic companies to provide exclusive access to a particular database. for example, in 1994 smithkline beecham agreed to pay $125 million to human genomesciences, inc. for exclusive rights to one such proprietary database containingest (gene fragment) information.11 jon cohen (1997), òthe genomics gamble,ó science, vol. 275, february 7,pp. 767772.databases, which are prepared and sold mostly by commercial firms. there areproblems with both systems of finance, however. as mentioned above, subsidiesavoid the market test of whether the willingness to pay for the data exceeds theircost. commercial provision at higher prices must face this market test, but thehigher prices inefficiently restrict access. in the evidence collected by the committee, there was no suggestion that federal agencies were collecting too muchraw data, so it is reasonable to price the raw data for efficient access, relying ona question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.incentives and disincentives affecting availability and use49new marketing methodsin addition to taking a traditional approach to marketing databases, vendorshave also devised effective alternatives for selling their products. the followingsampling of new methods is provided by way of illustration:¥bundling. productlinked databases are frequently sold as part of a package that includes other products. for example, medical and scientific instrumentmakers may bundle their products with relevant nuclear physics data. databasesare also included in the price of some proprietary search tools.¥use of market makers. many companies create elaborate databases tohelp users find and use their products. for example, semiconductor chip manufacturers commonly prepare elaborate òcookbooks,ó òlibraries,ó and design tools tohelp engineers use their products. similarly, some online bibliographic servicesare made available to consumers at little or no cost. when a userõs research issuccessful, such services offer to sell reprints at costs ranging from $10 to $20 perarticle.¥migration of old products to new media. some publishers have beenable to create new digitized versions of databases as an outgrowth of existing printproducts. electronic versions of journals and other printbased resources are probably the classic example. current vendors include elsevier science (sciencedirect), john wiley & sons, springerverlag, and academic press. extensions ofthe concept, which would link traditional articles to online data sets, are alreadybeing developed and implemented.source: commissioned paper by stephen m. maurer, òraw knowledge: protecting technical databases for science and industry,ó appendix c in nationalresearch council (1999), proceedings of the workshop on promoting access toscientific and technical data for the public interest: an assessment of policyoptions, national academy press, washington, d.c., <http://www.nap.edu>.taxpayer subsidies to the extent possible. of course, taxing for general revenuealso involves some inefficiency.1313 charging an access price higher than the efficientaccess price can be thought of as funding thedatabase through an excise tax. however, basic principles of optimal taxation suggest that incometaxes are less distorting than isolated excise taxes. see, for example, richard tresch (1981), publicfinance: a normative theory, irwindorsey limited (georgetown, ontario), p. 320, who says:a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50a question of balancehowever, because of mounting budgetary pressures generally, and increasing costs of public information management specifically, government databaseproviders worldwide have recently been coming under pressure to recover allcosts, rather than only the cost of distribution. this pressure toward full costrecovery results both from the rising costs associated with the rapidly expandingrate of data collection and from foreign pressures. european governments, forexample, are turning increasingly to a fullcostrecovery approach for their s&tdatabase production and dissemination activities. the e.u. database directiveputs considerable pressure on none.u. countries, including the united states, todo the same.14 although existing law in the united states precludes adoption ofsuch restrictions for government data, the enactment of a strong new databaseprotection statute for privatesector databases could stimulate further interest inprivatizing u.s. government database dissemination activities. by making databases more profitable, new protectionist legislation could shift responsibility fortheir creation from the public sector to the private sector. the social harm of sucha shift would be an increase in the price for access, especially for highly specialized databasesñsuch as some s&t databasesñwith a comparatively small market. a possible social benefit would be that the private sector would be subjectedto a weak market test of whether the value of the databases exceeded their cost.as noted above, however, most data collected by public agencies are raw datawhose full potential value has not yet been realized, and in many cases, useroriented transformations of the data are already in the hands of the private andnonprofit organizations that might have a better sense of the user market.pressures for cost recovery also arise because the benefits that accrue toconsumers and the broader society under the efficientaccess pricing model areharder for legislators and administration policy makers to see (and measure) thanthose that accrue as reduced tax burdens under the costrecovery model, or thosethat accrue as increased profits under the commercial model. thus, scienceagencies in the united states are increasingly turning to the private sector, to bothnotforprofit and commercial entities, in outsourcing government s&t databasedissemination activities, or even to purchase data from commercial suppliers.for example, in order to promote privatesector investment and development ofspace technologies and applications, the commercial space act of 1998 encourages nasañan agency engaged to a substantial degree in basic research activitiesñto purchase space and earth science data products and services from theprivate sector, and to treat data as a commercial commodity under federal procurement regulations. the potential negative effects of this trend are discussed insome detail in chapter 4.òincome taxes are held in high regard by many public sector economists. . . . (they are) seen asbeing reasonably efficient, based on large empirical literature which indicates that the supply of laborand capital are both extremely price inelastic.ó14 see stephen m. maurer (1999), òraw knowledge: protecting technical databases for scienceand industry,ó appendix c in the online workshop proceedings, note 9.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.513access to and protections for databases:existing policies and approaches51the escalating drive to enhance legal protection for databases arises primarily from three developments. the first is the evolution of a digital world inwhich information is an increasingly important commercial commodity whoseunauthorized appropriation can be accomplished cheaply and accurately, and theinformation broadly disseminated. the second is the 1991 u.s. supreme courtdecision in feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co.,1 limitingcopyright protection to creative works and denying protection to a òsweatofthebrowó database whose composition, even though it may require the investment ofeffort and resources, is not sufficiently creative in selection and arrangement toqualify for copyright protection. the third is the european parliamentõs adoptionin 1996 of the directive on the legal protection of databases (hereinafter, thee.u. database directive; the e.u. directive)2 that requires countries of the european union to adopt strong property protection for databases (see appendix d forthe full text of the e.u. directive). the e.u. directive also stipulates that suigeneris protection for databases in europe will be extended to foreign databaserights holders only if their home countries have adopted substantially similar1 499 u.s. 340 (1991). it is important to note, however, that feist did not òoverturnó the òsweatofthebrowó doctrine under copyright, which congress had actually done already under the copyright act of 1976. moreover, the sweatofthebrow doctrine under state law was never a prevailinglegal approach.2 directive 96/9/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 11 march 1996 on the legalprotection of databases, 1996 o.j. (l77) 20. the e.u. database directive is reprinted as appendixd of this report.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52a question of balanceprotection.3 these three developments have resulted in a perceived increasedvulnerability of databases to misappropriation and to a new european legal regime that has been alleged to place u.s. database rights holders at a competitivedisadvantage in europe.4 it is the last factor that appears to concern privatesector scientific and technical (s&t) database producers and vendors the most,based on input received at the committeeõs january 1999 workshop. nevertheless, it is important to note that all other laws protecting foreign rights holders inthe european union remain independently applicable to them under the nationaltreatment clause of the agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights (trips agreement)5 and related conventions.this chapter briefly describes the law and policy governing u.s. governmentdatabases; the existing legal, technical, and marketbased measures that are available to protect privatesector databases in the united states; and the new e.u.database directive.access to u.s. governmentfundedscientific and technical datathe u.s. government is the worldõs largest creator, user, and disseminator ofdata and information, including the federal records and s&t databases that areconsidered highly valuable national assets. a basic principle underlying mostu.s. information law is that democracy thrives and the economic and socialbenefits of information are maximized in society by fostering wide diversity inthe creation, dissemination, and use of information.6 by extension, to gain thegreatest economic and social benefits from government information assets, suchinformation should be made available to all in the most efficient, timely, andequitable ways possible. u.s. laws and policies generally implement this proposition. in direct contrast to those laws that encourage protection of the proprietary rights of privatesector entities, u.s. domestic information policy at thefederal level may be summarized as one comprising òa strong freedom of infor3 e.u. database directive (1996), note 2, recital 56.4 see testimony of henry horbaczewski, reed elsevier, inc., on behalf of the coalition againstdatabase piracy in june 15, 1999, hearing on h.r. 1858, the consumer and investor access toinformation act of 1999, before the house commerce subcommittee on telecommunications, trade,and consumer protection, u.s. house of representatives, u.s. congress, washington, d.c.5 see final act embodying the results for the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations, done at marrakesh, morocco, april 15, 1994, reprinted in the results of the uruguay round ofmultilateral trade negotiations: the legal texts 23 (gatt secretariat ed., 1994); marrakeshagreement establishing the world trade organization, annex 1c: agreement on traderelatedaspects of intellectual property rights, apr. 15, 1994. the trips agreement holds all memberstates of the world trade organization to a common set of intellectual property norms.6 44 u.s.c., section 3506(d)(1)(a) (supp. 1995).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases53mation law, no government copyright, fees limited to recouping the cost of dissemination, and no restrictions on reuse.ó7u.s. law expressly forbids federal departments and agencies from claimingcopyright in their written works, thereby placing these information resources inthe public domain. the 1976 copyright act states that ò[c]opyright protectionunder this title is not available for any work of the united states government.ó8the reasons are several. one is the fundamental belief that government copyrightof public records is the antithesis of open access whereby an informed citizenrycan check official actions and possible abuses. however, other values also are atwork. taxpayers should not have to pay twice for the same informationñoncefor the cost of generating the work, and a second time to obtain it. also importantto avoid is the danger that government could exercise copyright in a manner thatwould burden free speech (e.g., so as to prevent critics from obtaining particularinformation at any price). finally, individuals ought to be able to derive benefitfrom public goods (such as public s&t data and information) and enjoy improved educational opportunities through increased access to data and information, opportunities that are inherently beneficial in their own right.9 thus, theposition of congress has been to support the development of secondary marketsfor government information by individuals and private businesses, and to otherwise encourage the distribution of government information in the public interest.the u.s. freedom of information act (foia)10 and the open records lawsof the individual states11 together balance the right of citizens to be informedabout government activities and the need to maintain the confidentiality of somegovernment records. both the national foia and state open records laws generally support a policy of broad disclosure by government. for instance, if adatabase held by a federal agency is determined to be an agency record, therecord must be disclosed to any person requesting it unless the record falls withinone of nine exceptions contained in the foia.12 exceptions are construed nar7 peter n. weiss and peter backlund (1997), òinternational information policy in conflict: openand unrestricted access versus government commercialization,ó in borders in cyberspace: information policy and the global information infrastructure, brian kahin and charles nesson, eds.,mit press, cambridge, ma.8 17 u.s.c., section 105.9 u.s. congress, office of technology assessment (1986), intellectual property rights in an ageof electronics and information, u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.10 5 u.s.c., section 552.11 r. daugherty, g. leslie, and l. reis, eds. (1997), òtapping officialõs secrets: a state opengovernment compendium,ó reportersõ committee for freedom of the press, arlington, va, available online at <www.rcfp.org/tapping/index.cgi>.12 the nine exceptions as set forth in 5 u.s.c., section 552 (b) are as follows:(b) this section does not apply to matters that areñ(1) (a) specifically authorizedunder criteria established by an executive order to be kept secret in the interest of nationaldefense or foreign policy and (b) are in fact properly classified pursuant to such execua question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54a question of balancerowly by the courts so that disclosure is typically favored over nondisclosure. inresponding to citizen requests for records, government agencies at most levels areauthorized to recover the costs of responding to those requests.federal departments and agencies also have affirmative obligations to actively disseminate their information as defined by the provisions of omb circular a130.13 they are particularly encouraged to disseminate raw content onwhich valueadded products can be based and to do so at cost of distribution andthrough diverse channels, with no imposition of restrictions on the use of thedata. the core provisions of omb circular a130 were incorporated into thepaperwork reduction act of 1995,14 which additionally encourages agencies touse information technology to provide public access, rather than relying on cumbersome foia processes. given federal agenciesõ expanding use of world wideweb servers to meet their internal objectives, as well as to better implement thegovernmentõs datasharing policies, the additional cost of disseminating information to the public has become so negligible that many government databases arenow made freely available to anyone with the ability to access them over theinternet.15tive order; (2) related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency;(3)specifically exempted from disclosure by statute (other than section 552b of this title),provided that such statute (a) requires that the matters be withheld from the public insuch a manner as to leave no discretion on the issue, or (b) establishes particular criteriafor withholding or refers to particular types of matters to be withheld; (4) trade secretsand commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confidential; (5) interagency or intraagency memorandums or letters which would not beavailable by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the agency; (6) personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearlyunwarranted invasion of personal privacy; (7) records or information compiled for lawenforcement purposes . . . ; (8) contained in or related to examination, operating, orcondition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of an agency responsible for theregulation or supervision of financial institutions; or (9) geological and geophysical information and data, including maps, concerning wells. any reasonably segregable portionof a record shall be provided to any person requesting such record after deletion of theportions which are exempt under this subsection. the amount of information deletedshall be indicated on the released portion of the record, unless including that indicationwould harm an interest protected by the exemption in this subsection under which thedeletion is made. if technically feasible, the amount of the information deleted shall beindicated at the place in the record where such deletion is made.13 office of management and budget (1993), circular a130, òmanagement of federal information resources,ó u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.14 paperwork reduction act of 1995, p.l. no. 10413, 109 stat. 163 (may 22, 1995), 44 u.s.c.chapter 35.15 for example, federal legislation and court decisions generally may be accessed online at <http://thomas.loc.gov/>, while many federal geographic data sets may be accessed online at <http://fgdclearhs.er.usgs.gov/>. the databases being made available by federal agencies typically may betraced through their official web sites indexed online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/executive/fed.html>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases55open access policies specifically targeted at public and publicly funded s&tdata availability and exchange, on agency and interagency program levels as wellas internationally, have been adopted in recent years especially in the area ofenvironmental and earth science research.16 these policies all restate in similarterms the federal policy of full and open availability of data pointed to in chapter1.the federal acquisition regulation (far) applies generally to all federalagency contractual relationships with the private sector.17 in subpart 27.4,òrights in data and copyrights,ó the far delineates the respective rights andobligations of the government and the contractor regarding the use, duplication,and disclosure of data produced under contracts with the government.18 as ageneral proposition, the government acquires unlimited rights in most data firstproduced in the performance of a contract, while the contractor may receivelimited rights in some data.article 36(a) of omb circular a110, òuniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other notforprofit organizations,ó19 states that the recipient of a grantor agreement subject to this circular òmay copyright any work that is subject tocopyright and was developed, or for which rights holdership was purchased,under an award. the federal awarding agency(ies) reserve a royaltyfree, nonexclusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish or otherwise use the work forfederal purposes, and to authorize others to do so.ó article 24(h) states, òunlessfederal awarding agency regulations or the terms and conditions of the awardprovide otherwise, recipients shall have no obligation to the federal governmentwith respect to program income earned from license fees and royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, trademarks, and inventions produced under an award.ósimilarly, the grant policy manual of the national science foundation(nsf) specifies in section 732.1 that the following principles govern the treatment of copyrightable material produced under nsf grants:2016 for a comprehensive collection of such policies in the environmental data area, see interagencydata management working group of the u.s. global change research program (1999), data access policy actions of importance to global environmental change data users, u.s. global changeresearch program, washington, d.c. see also, the data policies portion of the u.s. global changeresearch programõs global change data and information system web site online at<www.gcdis.usgcrp.gov/policies>.17 48 cfr, chapter 1.18 48 cfr, at subpart 27.4 on òrights in data and copyrights.ó19 office of management and budget (1997), circular a110, òuniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other notforprofit organizations,ó revised november 19, 1993; as further amended august 29, 1997.20 national science foundation (1995), grant policy manual, nsf 9526, arlington, va, available online at <www.nsf.gov:80/bfa/cpo/gpm95/start.htm>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56a question of balancea.nsf normally will acquire only such rights in copyrightable material asare needed to achieve its purposes or to comply with the requirements of anyapplicable governmentwide policy or international agreement.b.to preserve incentives for private dissemination and development, nsfnormally will not restrict or take any part of income earned from copyrightablematerial except as necessary to comply with the requirements of any applicablegovernmentwide policy or international agreement.c.in exceptional circumstances, nsf may restrict or eliminate an awardeeõscontrol of nsfsupported copyrightable material and of income earned from it,if nsf determines that this would best serve the purposes of a particular program or grant.cooperative research and development agreements (cradas) provide yetanother legal mechanism by which databases or services can be created to meetparticular governmental needs.21 the crada legislation, however, creates anexception to the freedom of information act. databases created under a cradapotentially may be withheld from citizen requests under foia.22state and local governmental entities in the united states also create andmaintain records and databases that have substantial value for various segmentsof the research and educational community. state governments historically havebeen a primary source of detailed information in the areas of health, welfare,21 15 u.s.c., section 3710a:as used in this sectionñ(1) the term òcooperative research and development agreementó means any agreement between one or more federal laboratories and one or morenonfederal parties under which the government, through its laboratories, provides personnel, services, facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or other resources with orwithout reimbursement (but not funds to nonfederal parties) and the nonfederal partiesprovide funds, personnel, services, facilities, equipment, intellectual property, or otherresources toward the conduct of specified research or development efforts which areconsistent with the missions of the laboratory, . . . . see 15 u.s.c. 3710a(d)(1).22 see delorme publishing company, inc. v. national oceanic and atmospheric administration,917 f.supp. 867 (dc maine 1996) upholding 15 u.s.c. 3710a as a legislative exception to foia:15 usc 3710a provides two types of protection from disclosure of privileged or confidential information resulting from cooperative research and development activities. first,(n)o trade secrets or commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential. . . which is obtained in the conduct of research or as a result of activities under thischapter from a nonfederal party participating in a cooperative research and developmentagreement shall be disclosed. see 15 usc 3710a(c)(7)(a). second, (t)he director, or inthe case of a contractoroperated laboratory, the agency, for a period of up to 5 years afterdevelopment of information that results from research and development activities conducted under this chapter and that would be a trade secret or commercial or financialinformation that is privileged or confidential if the information had been obtained from anonfederal party participating in a cooperative research and development agreement,may provide appropriate protections against the dissemination of such information, including exemption from subchapter ii of chapter 5 of title 5.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases57education, labor markets, transportation, the environment, and criminal justice.23because communities have a great interest in knowing about themselves and theiractivities, local governments often produce detailed databases on the characteristics and attributes of physical, social, and human resources in the community thatare unavailable from other sources.the u.s. copyright act does not explicitly ban copyright claims in theworks of state and local governments, as it does for the works of the u.s. government.24 as such, most state and local governments believe they have the optionof asserting copyright in their public records if they choose to do so. some legalscholars argue that although allowed by law, generally it is unwise economic andsocial policy for state and local governments to allow government commercialization of public information.25 other legal scholars argue that claims of copyright by state and local governments in many of their works and databases areillegal.26 under the patents and copyright clause of the u.s. constitution, theargument is made that congress lacks the ability to extend copyright beyond thatwhich is necessary to provide òincentivesó to authors to make their works available.27 when state or local government agencies collect information in responseto a legislated obligation, it is the public need as defined by the legislative obligation that provides the incentive to gather information or to create a public record.if copyright failed to exist, the information would still be collected. this beingthe case, copyright provides no incentive for data collection and database production, and the works therefore may not be protected by copyright.28 yet otherlegal scholars claim that government commercialization of public informationraises significant first amendment free speech issues.29 one argument is thatcontractual provisions that ban the reuse or further dissemination of public infor23 weiss and backlund (1997), note 7, p. 304.24 17 u.s.c., section 105.25 in support of the general proposition for all levels of government, see l. ray patterson andcraig joyce (1989), òmonopolizing the law: the scope of copyright protection for law reportsand statutory compilations,ó ucla law review, vol. 36, p. 719; j.h. reichman and pamelasamuelson (1997), òintellectual property rights in data?ó vanderbilt law review, vol. 50, p. 51;and j. littman (1992), òafter feist,ó u. dayton law review, vol. 17, p. 607. for a statelevelstatement of policy in general accord see minnesota government information access council, digitaldemocracy: citizensõ guide for government policy in the information age, available online at<http://www.admin.state.mn.us/ipo/giac/report/index.html>.26 h. perritt (1996), law and the information superhighway, john wiley & sons, new york,p.484.27 united states constitution, article i, section 8, clause 8.28 see generally the discussion in perritt (1996), note 26, pp. 482487.29 see henry perritt, jr. (1996), section 11.10 first amendment role, law and the informationsuperhighway, wiley law publications, new york, pp. 489491; philip h. miller (1991), òlifeafter feist: facts, the first amendment, and copyright status of automated databases,ó fordhaml. rev., vol. 60, pp. 507, 509; and michael j. haungs (1990), òcopyright of factual compilations:public policy and the first amendment,ó colum. j. law & soc. probs., vol. 23, pp. 347, 364.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58a question of balancemation or that establish varying fee structures depending on purpose of use mightreadily be used by government officials for ulterior motives of censorship ormanipulation of public information for political purposes.regardless of the legal and economic arguments, many local and state agencies have pursued the imposition of copyright in at least some public records anddatabases, both hard copy and digital.30 these local government authoritiesperceive the possibility of paying for the creation and maintenance of local government information systems other than through general tax revenues. restricting access to public records is contrary to the plain letter language of most stateopen records laws in the united states, and therefore explicit legislation is typically required to allow the restrictions. those who seek to impose new accessrestrictions on citizens bear the burden of overcoming the underlying policyarguments on which the existing laws are based, foremost of which are that openaccess keeps government accountable and that open access to government information, subject to appropriate limitations based on privacy, confidentiality,national security, and other considerations, has far greater longterm economicbenefits for a community than does pursuing revenuegeneration approaches.it is noteworthy that the united states has become a world leader in researchand technology at a time when its domestic public information laws have been sodivergent from those of most other nations. in general, the u.s. legal systemallows greater access to and use of government information at the local, state, andnational government levels than is allowed in other nations. u.s. law also grantsindividuals greater leeway to use the work products of others without permissionthan is often granted by the laws of other nations. the role of the u.s. legal systemin supporting full and open access to scientific data for the academic and commercialsectors and the role of u.s. federal funding in defraying the costs of collectingand providing access to scientific data are factors that should not be overlookedwhen exploring the competitive success of u.s. scientists and businesses.existing protections for databasesin the united statescurrently available legal protections of databases in the united states include copyright, private contracts and licensing, trade secret law, and state unfair30 iver petersen (1997), òpublic information, business rates: state agencies turn data baserecords into cash cows,ó new york times, july 14, p. d1; for what itõs worth: a guide to valuingand pricing local government information (1996), public technology, inc. press, washington,d.c. (note: public technology, inc. is a notforprofit technology organization of the nationalleague of cities, the national association of counties, and the international city/county management association.) for a survey of local government policies relating to the distribution of digitalgeographic information, see h.j. onsrud, j.p. johnson, and j. winnecki (1996), ògis disseminationpolicy: two surveys and a suggested approach,ó journal of urban and regional informationsystems, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 823.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases59competition law. significant augmentation of the existing legal regime is provided for online databases by various technical means as well as by additionalmarketbased measures.legal protectionscopyright lawa database can be protected under the copyright act as a òcompilation,ódefined as a work that results from the collection and assembly of data that areòselected, coordinated, and arrangedó in an original way.31 as the supremecourt stated in the feist decision, if the selection or arrangement of the datadisplays a òmodicum of creativityó it is protectable by copyright.32 the term ofcopyright protection is longñthe life of the author plus 70 years, or in the case ofa work for hire, the shorter of 95 years from first publication or 120 years fromthe year of creation.33 an unauthorized reproduction, which is not otherwiseprivileged by the law, is illegal, and substantial civil and criminal remedies existto punish infringers.34since the fall of 1998, copyright law has prohibited the manufacture and saleof devices designed primarily to circumvent technologies such as signal scrambling and encryption that are used to protect copyrighted works. beginning in thefall of 2000, the law will also prohibit the attempt to circumvent such technological protections. the 1998 law, known as the digital millennium copyrightact,35 contains some exemptions for libraries, educational institutions, law enforcement, and research activities, and opens the possibility of additional futureexemptions to be made after further study of the statuteõs operation by the librarian of congress. the new statute also prohibits the removal or alteration ofòcopyright management informationó from copyrighted works. òcopyright management informationó essentially means any identifying mark, such as the nameand address of an author or copyright rights holder that is associated with awork.36the copyright law, however, permits some unauthorized uses that are deemedto be òfairó or that are specifically exempted from infringement in the statute.37section 107 of the 1976 copyright act states that:31 17 u.s.c., section 101.32 feist, note 1.33 17 u.s.c., section 302.34 17 u.s.c., sections 501512.35 digital millennium copyright act, p.l. 105304 (october 28, 1998), u.s. congress, washington, d.c.36 17 u.s.c., sections 1201 and 1202.37 17 u.s.c., section 107.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60a question of balance. . . the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section,for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (includingmultiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. in determining whether the use made of a work in anyparticular case is a fair use the factors to be considered shall includeñ(1)the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is ofa commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;(2)the nature of the copyrighted work;(3)the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to thecopyrighted work as a whole; and(4)the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of thecopyrighted work.38a more significant limitation on copyright protection, particularly for databases, is that copyright protects only the manner of expression and does notòextend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept,principle, or discoveryó incorporated into a copyrighted work.39 for some databases, the line between protected expression and unprotected facts can be difficult to identify. generally speaking, however, copyright would most likely protect the selection or arrangement of a database, but not the data as such. consider,for example, a scientific journal article reporting the results of an experiment,with the data from the experiment reproduced as an appendix in a databasequalifying as a compilation. copyright would protect the narrative description ofthe experiment, but subsequent researchers could use the findings of the experiment without permission. moreover, other researchers could extract the datafrom the appendix.unlike in europe and in many other countries, u.s. copyright law does notprotect works of authorship created by the federal government.40 this asymmetry is significant, since a similar asymmetry with the european union would existupon enactment of any new database protection legislation in the united states.because of the speculative nature of the outcome of basic scientific research,much science is conducted with the use of public funds by researchers in government and in academia who do not directly depend financially on the economicexploitation of their results. the realities of the scientific process and the limitedlegal protection for data under copyright law have contributed to the tradition andculture within the scientific community of open sharing of ideas and data discussed in chapters 1 and 2.38 17 u.s.c., section 107.39 17 u.s.c., section 102(b).40 17 u.s.c., section 105.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases61private contracts and licensingrights holders of trade secrets may protect the confidentiality of their information by disclosing the information only to those who agree, in a bindingcontract, to keep it confidential and to refrain from reproducing the information.where two individuals bargain face to face and one agrees to disclose in returnfor a promise of confidentiality, a court ordinarily will enforce the terms as itwould any other contractual provision. if the information is sold outright toanother partyñsuch as when a book is sold to a consumerñcontractual restraintson the buyerõs right to use or resell the copy usually are not enforced.41 increasingly, however, information products are not òsold,ó but rather are licensed withrestrictive terms as to use.42 for example, all the commercial database vendorswho participated in the committeeõs january 1999 workshop, as well as those notforprofits that disseminated their data for a fee, indicated that they relied primarily on site licensing arrangements for disseminating their databases to customers. because customers typically have the opportunity to read the license termsand conditions in advance, and even to make agreedupon changes, such termsare ordinarily enforceable.database rights holders can easily protect their interests with a confidentiality agreement when distribution of a database is limited to those who directlycontract with them. the fact that contract terms are only effective between thecontracting parties and not binding on third parties who may get access to thedatabase has been cited as a weakness,43 since many databases must be publiclydistributed in order to be commercially viable. in recent years, however, rightsholders of some digital databases have marketed their databases to the publicusing òshrinkwrapó license agreements. these are agreements that are enclosedwithin the package containing the database (usually a database on a cdrom oron other electronic media) and provide notice on the outside of the package that41 the òfirst saleó doctrine of copyright law, 17 u.s.c., section 109, specifically authorizes therights holder of a copy to òsell or otherwise dispose ofó the copy. see also bobbsmerrill v. straus,210 u.s. 339 (1908).42 for a discussion of the emerging legal issues pertaining to online database and informationlicensing, see the special issue on licensing of information and proposed changes to article 2b of theuniform commercial code (ucc) in berkeley technology law journal (1998), vol. 13, no. 3, andin california law review (1999), vol. 87, no. 1. both present the results of a symposium, òintellectual property and contract law for the information age,ó held at the university of california,berkeley, in april 1998. the symposium web site is at <www.sims.berkeley.edu/bclt/events/ucc2b/ucc2b.html>. in april 1999, however, the efforts to amend ucc article 2b were terminatedand the proposed revisions to state law in this area were proposed instead as the òuniform computerinformation and technology act.ó for comprehensive background information on the evolution ofthis issue, see generally òa guide to the proposed uniform computer information transactions actóonline at <www.2bguide.com>.43 see u.s. copyright office (1997), report on legal protection for databases, u.s. congress,washington, d.c., available online at <lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/reports>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62a question of balancebreaking the òshrinkwrap,ó or entering the electronic gateway if online, constitutes acceptance of the terms within. these terms often include restrictions ondistribution of the database to others. the enforceability of these provisionsremains uncertain, however. some legal scholars argue that the shrinkwraplicense constitutes a valid contract, while others believe that a contract cannotexist unless the parties have access to the terms prior to paying for the product.44similarly, some leading cases have upheld the shrinkwrap license and the termsthat restrict use;45 other cases have refused to enforce the terms of a shrinkwraplicense.46 most shrinkwrap licenses permit the licensee to return the product,unused, if the terms are unacceptable. the reality is that most consumers do notread these license terms.private transactions are an important method of distributing valuable information and are increasingly the method of choice for providing access to data andinformation on the internet. on the one hand, particularly with vulnerable digitalinformation, the right to distribute information with restrictions on use allowsoriginal rights holders of databases to capture the economic returns from theirinitial investment. moreover, private transactions are flexible in permitting thetwo parties to tailor their agreement to the mix of their particular interests, as longas they have the opportunity to negotiate the terms. on the other hand, enforcingòcontractualó terms imposed through shrinkwrap licenses (and now òclickonólicenses in the online medium), which effectively are imposed on the public atlarge, may interfere with the balance between private property rights and publicinterest access to information.47 a term in a shrinkwrap or clickon license thatprohibits what would otherwise be a privileged use of the data might effectivelylimit scientistsõ access to or use of the raw materials necessary for their research,contrary to publicinterest policies.trade secret lawstate trade secret law protects valuable commercial information that is keptsecret by its rights holder from unauthorized access or reproduction by impropermeans.48 trade secret doctrines do not require that the information be keptabsolutely secret, but the trade secret rights holder must take reasonable steps tomaintain the confidentiality of the information. trade secret law also might be44 see generally, mark lemley (1995), òintellectual property & shrinkwrap licenses,ó usc l.rev., vol. 68, p. 1269.45 pro cd v. zeidenberg, 86 f.3d. 1447 (7th cir. 1996).46 vault corp. v. quaid software ltd., 655 f. supp. 750 (1987).47 see j.h. reichman and jonathan franklin (1999), òprivately legislated intellectual propertyrights: reconciling freedom of contract with public good uses of information,ó u. penn. lawreview, vol. 147, p. 875.48 see generally, restatement (third) of unfair competition, sections 3945 (1995).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases63applicable in the absence of any contractual provisions for confidentiality if theparties understood that the disclosure was in fact in confidence. once information is made public it loses its secrecy and enters the public domain. it then canbe free for others to use, absent some form of protection, such as copyright.unfair competition law in state common lawwhen congress acts in areas in which it has authority (e.g., copyright, interstate commerce), federal law preempts state law when congress explicitly sostates in the legislation, or when state law would interfere with implementation ofthe federal law. the copyright system preempts state laws that duplicate ordisrupt the protection accorded works of authorship by copyright.49 thus, statesmay not grant a general right to database owners to prevent unauthorized reproduction or use of databases that qualify as an original work of authorship, and itis unlikely that they could grant a naked right against reproduction or use tounoriginal databases. however, in some states, a common law cause of action formisappropriation is understood to survive preemption and under limited circumstances may provide protection to some database owners from certain forms ofunfair competition.the doctrine of misappropriation derives from the early u.s. supreme courtdecision in international news service v. associated press.50 in that case, anews wire service appropriated the dispatches of a competing service from published newspapers on the east coast and published them simultaneously and indirect competition with the originating service on the west coast. the supremecourt, while denying that a statutory property right could exist in the news, foundthat the unauthorized appropriation in this case was prohibited because compilingthe data gave rise to a òquasiproperty rightó and also because the unauthorizedappropriation directly undermined the investment in news gathering of the originating service. courts have usually been reluctant to apply the decision beyondthe facts of the case, and the restatement (third) of unfair competition, section38 (1995) described the misappropriation doctrine as lacking a coherentapplication.51the most recent discussion of the misappropriation doctrine occurred innational basketball assõn v. motorola, inc.52 although the court recognized alimited scope for the doctrineñone confined to situations in which timesensitive49 restatement (third) of unfair competition, section 301 (1995). cf. sears, roebuck & co. v.stiffel co., 376 u.s. 225 (1964); compco corp. v. daybrite lighting, inc., 376 u.s. 234 (1964); andbonito boats inc. v. thunder craft boats, inc. 489 u.s. 141 (1989).50 248 u.s. 215 (1918).51 but see goldstein et al. v. california, 412 u.s. 546 (1973) allowing state misappropriationprotection of noncopyrightable sound recordings.52 105 f.3d 841 (2d cir. 1997).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64a question of balancedata were appropriated and used in direct competition with the originatorñitrefused the request of a professional basketball league to prohibit the unauthorized taking and distribution of the scores of its currently played games to paidsubscribers of a paging service.while database rights holders can and do assert protection under the misappropriation doctrine, the reluctance of the courts to apply this doctrine and thelikelihood that its broad application would be preempted by the copyright actmakes the misappropriation doctrine of questionable value in protecting databases beyond those with extremely timesensitive value, such as realtime stockprice quotations. however, nothing prevents congress from developing aminimalist form of statutory protection that builds on this foundation.technological protectionsthe danger of database misappropriation can be mitigated with increasingefficiency by technologies that help enforce the terms of licensing contracts, orthat enable the rights holder to keep the database as a trade secret while alsoproviding access to subsets of data at armõs length.53 a number of technologicalinnovations have been developed to provide various forms of security, privacyprotection, and intellectual property management. table 3.1 provides a summaryof some of these approaches. no form of computer protection is perfect, and nomethod will likely prevent copying of small amounts of data. moreover, it isalmost certain that every technological security method will eventually be able tobe countered through the use of other technological advances. the technological53 the committee did not focus extensively on the increasingly important area of technologicalprotections for digital information, because a concurrent nrc report is examining this issue in depth.see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council (2000), thedigital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c., in press. for additional information on these technologies, see mark stefik and teresalunt, òoverview of technologies for protecting and misappropriating digital intellectual propertyrights: the current situation and future prospects,ó chapter 5 in the committeeõs online proceedings. see national research council (1999), proceedings of the workshop on promoting access toscientific and technical data for the public interest: an assessment of policy options, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., <http://www.nap.edu>. also see berkeley technology lawjournal, vol. 13, no. 3, fall 1998 (issue dedicated to intellectual property and contract law); i.trotterhardy (1998), project looking forward: sketching the future of copyright in a networked world,report prepared for the u.s. copyright office; mark stefik and alexander silverman (1997), òthebit and the pendulum: balancing the interests of stakeholders in digital publishing,ó americanprogrammer, september, pp. 1835 (also published in the computer lawyer, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 115, january 1999); brian kahin and kate arms, eds. (1996), proceedings: electronic commerce forcontent, forum on technologybased intellectual property management, interactive multimediaassociation, annapolis, md; bruce schneier (1996), applied cryptography, second edition, johnwiley & sons, new york; and lars lyberg, ed. (1993), journal of official statistics, special issueon confidentiality and data access, vol. 9, no. 2, statistics sweden.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases65table 3.1 summary of technological approaches to protection of databasesapproachwhat it doesdomain of uselimitationsencryptioncodes information soany digital data;protection vanishesthat a secret key isprotects data duringwhen data decrypted forneeded in order tostorage anduse; strong securityread ittransmissionrequired forsafeguarding keyswatermarkingembeds covertdigital photos, music,can be easy to removetracing or identifyingtext, and databasesor tamper with; mayinformationconfound data mergingdownloadlimits amount ofcurrently deployed;presents only a weaklimitationsdata that can bediscourages wholesale,barrier to a determineddownloaded at oneautomatic downloadingadversarytime or from one siteof databases fromthe webdatabaseclassifies data in aintelligence andmore relevant to onlineaccess controldatabase into differentbusiness organizationsdatabases than to offlinelevels or groups forin which individuals orscientific databases, oraccess, and limits usedifferent groups havedatabases of morebased on agreedtoaccess to differentgeneral interestset of rulesportions of a databaseaccording to jobfunction or need toknowhardwarebasedenforces a digitalhighsecurity systemsnot widely deployed;trusted systemcontract that governsused mainly in militaryinexpensive hardwarefees for and uses ofand intelligenceaugmentation providesdigital worksapplicationsonly minimal support;outstanding legal issuesabout liability andenforceability of digitalcontractssoftwarebasedsupports samein trial use forvulnerable to beingtrusted systemfunctions asdistribution of video,disabled by simplehardwarebasedmusic, and documentsmeans; subject totrusted systems,widescale systemexcept that supportfailure triggered byis provided onlycomputer virusesby softwarea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66a question of balanceapproaches that currently are available, however, can hinder or prevent, to varying degrees of efficiency, the wholesale copying and redistribution of databaseswithout compensation to their rightful rights holders. these approaches arereviewed briefly in the discussion below.encryptiona powerful and frequently cited technology for computer security is encryption, the encoding of data to make them unreadable to those who do not have thekey for deciphering them. separating those who should have access from thosewho should not, encryption enables differences in level of security with increasesin key length. encryption is applicable to practically any kind of digital information. it is the technology of choice for protecting data in storage and duringtransmission over an insecure channel.but encrypted data are only as secure as the key, and there are differentapproaches to the problem of protecting the key. given the data and the key, aknowledgeable user can decrypt the data and then distribute them, or distributethe encrypted data together with the key. if the protections in the system areinsufficient, there are various ways in which an attacker could obtain the key orgain access to an unencrypted form of data (e.g., digital music or video while it isbeing played back, or text or data while they are being displayed). thus, although encryption is an important element of any modern computer securitysystem, it often must be combined with other elements in a security architectureto achieve the degree of protection desired for the digital data or informationproduct.watermarksthe term òwatermarkó initially signified a special mark made in paper duringits manufacture. the mark, which becomes visible when the paper bearing it isheld up to a light, is taken as indicating an original. the term now covers a widerange of technologies for embedding information in digital files and renderedworks, including text, pictures, and audio. as a technique for intellectual property protection, watermarks carry information that identifies a work or provides ameans of tracing its purchaser or user. watermarks can be visible or hidden.hidden watermarks are designed to avoid interfering with the use of the data. forexample, in digital music, watermarks can be encoded in such a way that they arenot detectable to the human ear when the music is played. a watermark could behidden in a database as extra (but unused) elements of data that would not interfere with information processing systems.watermarks do not prevent copying but could potentially provide a meansfor tracing the source of an unauthorized copy. this traceback capability provided by watermarks is not necessarily foolproof; those who would misappropria question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases67ate data or otherwise infringe on rights in a database might be able to writeprograms for tampering with or removing the watermarks. such tampering maywell be illegal under the recent digital millennium copyright act, however.online database access controlsseveral kinds of technology have been developed to control or limit access todatabases, particularly those available online. one of the simplest is an onlineregulator, which limits the quantity of information that can be downloaded by agiven individual or site.54 the technology provides an impediment to automaticdatamining programs that would acquire a databaseõs contents by merging theresults of a large set of individual queries. a second approach to online databaseaccess control marks the data according to different levels and categories andregulates the availability of the information to authorized parties. this technology is relevant in business and intelligence applications, where access to information is regulated according to òneed to knowó tiers or categories of access.trusted systemsòtrustedó systems are those that can be relied on to obey certain rules fordistributing information. in the context of intellectual property protection, therules take the form of a digital contract between the information provider anduser. the contract spells out fees and other terms and conditions of use, such asthe period of time over which the information can be used and whether the user isallowed to print out or make copies of the information for distribution or sale.trusted systems with secure hardware support have been used in militaryand intelligence organizations for several years and currently are in limited use indigital and networked publishing. for example, they support payperview andsubscription viewing of satellite television services. software and hardware fordistributing music via trusted systems are in early prototyping and testing stages,and systems supporting digital network document and software publishing are inlimited use on personal computers and in òelectronic books.ó although trustedsystems for database access could be developed, such currently available technologies possess minimal security and control measures. the systems seldomhave digital contract provisions specifying more than the duration of the subscription and perhaps the number of simultaneous users.54 for example, several of the commercial and notforprofit database vendors at the committeeõsjanuary 1999 workshop noted that this online protection strategy, in conjunction with other availabletechnical measures and wellstructured licensing terms, provided satisfactory protection for theirbusinesses, despite the possibility that a determined individual could access and download from adatabase under multiple identities, or collude with others to do so, in order to reconstruct illegally theentire database.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68a question of balanceseveral obstacles prevent effective, widespread deployment of trusted systems for databases. first, the legal standing of digital contracts enforced bymachines has many practical limits with respect to enforceability and liability.second, appropriate publickey infrastructure to support authentication and authorization is not yet widely used or available. third, the only commerciallyviable approach to trusted systems for databases depends exclusively on softwarefor implementing security, but softwareonly approaches are vulnerable to tampering and to widespread, catastrophic failure caused, for example, by computerviruses. fourth, it can be both very costly and time consuming to attain the levelsof confidence necessary to achieve a òtrusted system,ó which conflicts with therapid pace of the industry and timetomarket considerations.summary of technological protectionsseveral technological measures have been developed that can be deployedfor management of intellectual property rights in databases. the main goal ofprotection is to prevent widescale unauthorized redistribution of databases without compensation to database rights holders. although no totally effective technological solution has yet been developed to protect intellectual property comprehensively, several measures are already in use with increasingly satisfactoryresults. a potentially effective technological approach appears to be the use oftrusted systems, with digital contracts that specify appropriate terms and conditions. these systems would use encryption technology for protecting databasesduring storage or communication, watermark technologies to enable tracing thesource of pirated copies when such theft occurs, and database access controls andquery governors to flexibly control database access.current limitations affecting technology available for protection of ownership rights in databases include absence of a widespread publickey infrastructurefor encryption, legal uncertainties about the enforceability of digital contracts,and the relatively low level of security that is possible with softwareonly security systems. in addition, despite advances in technological measures for protecting digital databases, human fallibilityñor overt malicious actionñwill continueto result in system security breaches for the foreseeable future.marketbased database protection through updating and customizingthere are various business practices that database vendors can use to protecttheir investments.55 one type of protection for databases arises from their commercial perishability. many data become rapidly obsolete; consequently, data55 see computer science and telecommunications board (2000), the digital dilemma, note 53,in press.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases69bases are updated frequently. for example, meteorological data and stock marketprices are provided in real time on a continuous basis. some biotechnologydatabases are updated every night. most commercially viable databases areupdated at least annually. since copying intrinsically introduces a lag, updatingprovides some level of protection against piracy, because the copier, like thedatabase originator, must provide updates, thereby reducing the cost advantage ofcopying.56frequent updates can constrain the market price for a database because themost recent update competes with its previous version in the market, although theformer versions may nonetheless be almost as useful. database pricing willalmost certainly permit recovering the cost of updating, but the cost of the original database might not be recoverable. collaborations among the government,notforprofit, and commercial sectors, however, can overcome some of theseproblems. for example, as discussed at the january 1999 workshop, commercialmeteorological, geographic, and biotechnology database producers utilizing theoriginal data made available freely under the federal governmentõs full and openaccess mandate have successfully marketed and disseminated their valueaddeddatabases. the joint effort of the original publicdata collector and commercialdatabase valueadder and vendor accomplished the twin goals of enhanced dataquality and wide dissemination at a reasonable price. most important, in thecontext of this report, this broad distribution of data was achieved without statutory database protection.another marketbased approach used by database producers and vendors tolimit the potential for misappropriation, while meeting the needs of their customers, is production of customized or targeted versions of their databases. differentversions of the same database tailored to different market segments can appeal toa broader swath of the market while making it more difficult for an unfair competitor to steal all versions and undermine the customer base.57finally, database producers or vendors who have a wellestablished reputation in the market will have an advantage over most competitors who would copytheir products. customers are frequently willing to pay more to vendors who arereputed to sell quality databases and data products.tipping the balance:the european unions database directiveother nations have legal and other protective measures for databases similarto those already in place in the united states, but a discussion of foreign law is56 see stephen m. maurer in appendix c of the committeeõs online proceedings, note 53.57 see generally, carl shapiro and hal r. varian (1998), òversioning: the smart way to sellinformation,ó harvard business review, nov.dec., pp. 106114.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70a question of balancebeyond the scope of this study. there is, however, one important new legaldevelopmentñthe aforementioned e.u. database directiveñthat is particularlyrelevant to the present discussion, since it has been cited by commentators58 aswell as by congressional legislators59 as a major driver for the adoption of asimilar legal regime in the united states (see appendix d for the full text of thedirective).the e.u. database directive requires that each member country of the european union (and affiliated states) adopt legislation protecting databases.60 thee.u. directive imposes a uniform copyright provision that protects only theòselection or arrangementó of the contents of a database that is the òauthorõs ownintellectual creation.ó61 countries are permitted to provide for privileged unauthorized uses in accordance with the berne convention for the protection ofliterary and artistic works.62 the specific privilege recommended for notforprofit educational or scientific uses is very narrowly limited, however, òfor thesole purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research as long as thesource is indicated and to the extent justified by the noncommercial purpose tobe achieved.ó63the e.u. directive also provides for an independent right to protect databases that are not protectable by copyright. the right attaches to any databasethat is a product of substantial investment and prohibits any extraction orreutilization of a substantial part of a protected databaseñjudged qualitatively orquantitativelyñwithout permission of the rights holder.64 the e.u. directiveprovides that a noncopyrightable database is protected for 15 years from its dateof completion.65 òlawful usersó of databases that have been made available tothe public may extract or use insubstantial parts of the database for any purposeand may make other such use that does not conflict with the ònormal exploitationof the database or unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker ofthe database.ó66 member states may, but are not required to, incorporate somevery narrow and specific exceptions, including one for the purposes of illustra58 see reichman and samuelson (1997), note 25.59 see statement by senator orrin hatch on database antipiracy legislation, cong. rec., vol.106, s. 316 (jan. 19, 1999).60 e.u. database directive, note 2, article 16. the directive required all member states to complywith its requirements by january 1, 1998. only a few had done so by that date, and not all countrieshad complied as of september 1999.61 id., article 3(1).62 id., article 6.63 id., article 6(2)(b).64 id., article 7.65 id., article 10. although the nominal term of protection is limited to 15 years, article 10(3)has the effect of extending protection in perpetuity to databases that continue to be updated orrevised pursuant to a òsubstantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively.ó66 id., article 8(2).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.access to and protections for databases71tion for teaching or scientific research that is more limited than the one providedfor under copyright.67most significant, from the u.s. perspective, the e.u. directive provides thatmember states should make the protection applicable only to databases owned bynationals or habitual residents of a member state or to databases owned by nationals of a third country only if the third country offers comparable protection todatabases produced by nationals of a member state.68although preliminary drafts of the e.u. database directive were founded onan unfair competition law model of database protection, the final version wasbased on a strong property rights model. the initial right to exclude extraction oruse applies even when the unauthorized use is not a competitive threat to theprotected database. only express privileged uses can escape potential liability.the privilege for scientific research appears to apply only for noncommercialpurposes, and this is further qualified by an ambiguous limitation for the purposesof illustration. since most scientific research has at least the potential for commercial application, including commercial publication, and is not simply foròillustration,ó the privilege may turn out to be a very narrow one, indeed, even ifit is adopted by a member state. similarly, the òinsubstantial partó exception isundermined by the qualitative impact test. moreover, the term of the right is 15years, and potentially much longer, a very long period given the commercial halflife of many kinds of scientific data.69when combined with unrestricted online licensing rights, strong databaseprotection legislation such as the e.u. directive subjects a research user of, say,a chemical handbook, to a starkly different situation than that experienced undertraditional copyright law under the print paradigm. table 3.2 provides a summary comparison of research user rights under these two legal regimes.70 thenet result of unrestricted licensing coupled with strong statutory database protection is that the most borderline of all the objects of protection under intellectualproperty lawñraw or factual data, whether s&t or any otherñparadoxicallyreceives the strongest scope of protection available from any intellectual propertyregime except, perhaps, patent law.71 the committee believes that the adoptionof a law such as the e.u. directive, either in the united states or internationally,would retard the advancement of science, the growth of knowledge, and opportunities for innovation.67 id., article 9(b).68 id., recital 56 and article 11.69 see the discussion of the term of protection in chapter 4.70 see j.h. reichman and paul f. uhlir (1999), òdatabase protection at the crossroads: recentdevelopments and their impact on science and technology,ó berkeley technology law journal,vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 799821.71 reichman and samuelson (1997), note 25, p. 94.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72a question of balancetable 3.2summary comparison of notforprofit research user rightsunder traditional copyright and under online licensing when combinedwith sui generis database protection legislationtraditionallicensing plus sui generis protection such ascopyright lawprovided by the e.u. database directive1. user can immediately use all disparate1. even after paying for access to factual datafactual data and information disclosed inand information, which are not copyrightable bya database; copyright law does not protectdefinition, user faces limitations on use in anyideas or facts. fairuse exception availableways prohibited by the license and as reinforcedfor certain additional research orby the legislation; user cannot distribute anothereducational uses, even of protecteddatabase, using the same factual data orexpression.information, without either seeking permissionand perhaps paying anotherfee or regeneratingthose protected data independently.2. user can independently create another2. user can independently create anotherversion of a database and sell it; copyrightversion of the database. if this is not possible,law allows independent creation, and alluser needs a license or permission to combinefactual data are in the public domain.legitimately accessed factual data or informationinto a derivative data product; the licensor canclaim that the user is violating redistributionand other rights, and the user must guess whatcourts will consider to be aquantitatively orqualitatively insubstantial part of the database;the licensor is under no duty to grant such alicense; and if a sole source, the licensor may notwant any competition from followon products.3. user can combine noncopyrightable3. user cannot lend, give, or sell data to othersfactual data with other data andeven after paying for access (unless permittedinformation into a multiplesource orby the license) because there is no first sale,interdisciplinary database for research oronly a license; user would have to obtaineducational purposes without permissionexpress permission and perhaps pay additionalor additional payment to the originators.afees to avoid the risk of harming the market(e.g., possibly causing one lost sale).4. user can make limited or òfair useó4. because there are no limits on licensing,of even protected expression for notforuser is subject to database vendor overridingprofit research or classroom purposes;even those exceptions contained in thesuch uses often deemed fair or privilegedlegislation, including exceptions for research,uses under statutory law or precedents.education, or other publicinterest uses.5. following the first purchase of a5. during the period of protection, user rightscopyrightable database in hard copy, userdepend on the terms of the license supported bycan lend, give, or resell it to anyone elsethe new property right; database would notunder the firstsale doctrine, borrow itenter the public domain for at least 15 yearsfrom a library, use it at any time for(and in europe possibly never if the rightsvirtually any [lawful] purpose, and makeholder continues to invest in maintenance ora copy of it for personal or scholarlyupdates of a dynamic database).purposes.note: this summary table was compiled from a more detailed comparative discussion presented inan article by j.h. reichman and paul f. uhlir (1999), òdatabase protection at the crossroads:recent developments and their impact on science and technology,ó berkeley technology lawjournal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 799821.a acknowledgment of sources is an appropriate academic norm, but their express permission is notrequired.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.734assessment and recommendations73our nation has a vibrant and demonstrably productive community of scientific and technical (s&t) database creators, disseminators, and users that has ledthe world. advances in computing and communication technologies make s&tdatabases and the facts they contain increasingly valuable for producing newdiscoveries and for accelerating the growth of knowledge and the pace of innovation. the same technologies that facilitate the effective production, dissemination, and use of data, however, can also expedite their unauthorized dissemination and use, with the potential effect of undermining incentives to create newdatabases, facilitating unfair competition and wholesale piracy, and in the mostextreme cases, exposing the original database rights holder to market failure.as chapter 3 points out, the current efforts to enact statutory federal database protection in the united states appear to be stimulated by three principalfactors: (1) the possibility for rapid and complete database copying with thepotential for instantaneous broad dissemination; (2) the gap in u.s. law createdby the feist1 decision, which invalidated copyright protection on the basis ofinvestment and effort (i.e., òsweatofthebrowó) investments alone; and (3) thee.u. database directive, which requires other nations to pass a similar law inorder for their citizens to enjoy the e.u. directiveõs protections in europe, therebyproviding a potentially unfair advantage to european competitors of the u.s.private sector.21 feist publications, inc. v. rural telephone service co., 499 u.s. 340 (1991).2 although certain database vendors might be at some competitive disadvantage in the europeanunion, the committee believes that a less protectionist law in the united states that encourages thea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74a question of balancethe committee believes, however, that the need for additional statutory protection has not been sufficiently substantiated. the high level of activity in theproduction and use of digital s&t (and other) databases in the united statesserves as prima facie evidence that threats of misappropriation do not constitute acrisis. nor do the existing legal, technical, and marketbased measures provide achronic state of underprotection for proprietary databases. the almost universaluse of licensing, rather than sale, of online databases and other digital information, coupled with technological enforcement measures, on balance potentiallyprovides much stronger protections to the licensors vis‹vis their customers thanthey enjoyed prior to feist and under the print media copyright regime (see table3.2 in chapter 3). while some of the current law providing protection to databaserights holders remains uncertain in terms of scope of applicability, the trend inrecent years has been to broaden, rather than narrow, applicable intellectual property protections.moreover, strong statutory protection of databases would have significantnegative impacts on access to and use of s&t databases for notforprofit research and other publicinterest uses. nevertheless, although the committee opposes the creation of any strong new rights in compilations of factual information, it recognizes that limited new federal legal protection against wholesalemisappropriation of databases may be appropriate. in particular, a balancedalternative to the highly protectionistic e.u. database directive could be achievedin a properly scoped and focused new u.s. law, one that might serve as a modelfor an international treaty in this area.in this chapter, the committee examines several legislative options and related government activities, and recommends a number of legislative principlesand policy actions to help inform the current debate. the chapter concludes witha recommendation directed specifically to the notforprofit s&t community.assessment of legislative options, withrecommendations on guiding principlesthe committee assessed and compared three separate proposals for increaseddatabase protection of privatesector databases in the united states that wereplaced in the congressional record at the beginning of the 106th congress.3during the 105th congress, the house of representatives twice approved a measure establishing a specific statutory scheme for the protection of databasesñh.r. 26524 and title v of h.r. 2281,5 which was substantially the same as h.r.use of factual data for both public interest and commercial purposes will benefit the u.s. economyand society to a greater extent.3 cong. rec., vol. 106, s. 316 (jan. 19, 1999).4 h.r. 2652, the òcollections of information antipiracy act,ó 105th congress (1997).5 h.r. 2281, title v, the òcollections of information antipiracy act,ó 105th congress (1998).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations752652.6 both h.r. 2652 and 2281 were adopted on suspension calendar by thehouse despite significant opposition from an array of scientific, educational,library, and consumer publicinterest organizations and institutions, as well asfrom a number of commercial publishers and information technology servicescompanies.7 these house bills applied both to databases that qualified forcopyright protection and to noncopyrightable òsweatofthebrowó databases thatdid not.the proposed legislation drew the concerned attention of the notforprofitcommunities because expanding private property rights in factual databases couldinterfere with scientific progress and other publicinterest uses of data.8 at thesame time, some privatesector firms believe that their databases are vulnerableto misappropriation due to a gap in the law.9 other reactions from the privatesector included the perception that the proposal adopted by the house placed toomany impediments to transformative uses of existing databases for commercial6 the only significant change in title v of h.r. 2281 was to remove òpotential marketsó from theambit of liability for notforprofit uses in section 1403, permitted acts (a) educational, scientific,research, and additional reasonable uses, which was amended as follows:(1) certain notforprofit educational, scientific, or research uses.ñ . . . no personshall be restricted from extracting and using information for notforprofit educational,scientific, or research purposes in a manner that does not harm directly the actual [orpotential] market for the product or service referred to in section 1402.ó [words in bracketsdeleted].7 see the testimony of the notforprofit sector cited in note 8 below, and of the commercialopponents to the legislation in note 10 below. in addition, over 130 organizations and companiessigned a position statement critical of h.r. 354 that was placed in the public record by dr. jamesneal, director of the milton s. eisenhower library at johns hopkins university and president of theassociation of research libraries, during the march 18, 1999, hearing on h.r 354, the òcollectionsof information antipiracy act,ó held by the subcommittee on courts and intellectual property of thecommittee on the judiciary of the u.s. house of representatives [hereinafter march 18, 1999,hearing]. a copy of the position statement and the full list of signatories may be found online at<www.databasedata.org>.8 see testimony by wm. a. wulf, president of the national academy of engineering on behalf ofthe national academies, j.h. reichman, professor at the vanderbilt university school of law, andjames g. neal, director of the milton s. eisenhower library at johns hopkins university andpresident of the association of research libraries, at the october 23, 1997, hearing on h.r. 2652,the òcollections of information antipiracy act,ó held by the subcommittee on courts and intellectual property of the committee on the judiciary of the u.s. house of representatives [hereinafteroctober 23, 1997, hearing].9 id. see testimony by paul warren of warren publishing, inc., on behalf of the coalition againstdatabase piracy. see also testimony by robert e. aber, senior vice president and general counsel,the nasdaq stock market, inc., on behalf of the information industry association, at the february12, 1998, hearing on h.r. 2652, the òcollections of information antipiracy act,ó held by thesubcommittee on courts and intellectual property of the committee on the judiciary of the u.s.house of representatives [hereinafter february 12, 1998, hearing].a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76a question of balancepurposes.10 perhaps most significant, the administration presented its own consensus critique of the house bills on august 4, 1998,11 and the department ofjustice12 and the federal trade commission13 issued legal memoranda outliningtheir concerns about the legislationõs constitutionality and anticompetitive effects, respectively.soon after the approval of title v of h.r. 2281 by the house in july 1998,senator orrin hatch (rut), chairman of the senate committee on the judiciary,initiated negotiations among the various interests, which continued from earlyaugust until early october.14 while substantial progress was made in this process and the needs of the science, education, and library communities were directly acknowledged, a consensus was not achieved before the 105th congressadjourned in october 1998.15shortly after the 106th congress convened in january 1999, congressmanhoward coble (rnc), chairman of the subcommittee on courts and intellectualproperty of the house committee on the judiciary, reintroduced as h.r. 35416the proposal that had twice passed the house in the previous session. h.r. 354included two changes to respond to concerns of the scientific community andother critics of the original legislative proposal.17 thereafter, senator hatch10 id. see testimony by jonathan band, partner, morrison & foerster llp, on behalf of the online banking association, and by tim casey of mci, inc. on behalf of the information technologyassociation of america at the february 12, 1998, hearing.11 see letter from andrew j. pincus, general counsel of the department of commerce, to thehonorable orrin g. hatch, chairman, senate committee on the judiciary, august 4, 1998, summarizing òa number of concernsó of the administration with h.r. 2652.12 see memorandum for william p. marshall, associate white house counsel, from williammichael treanor, deputy assistant attorney general, office of legal counsel, department of justice,july 28, 1998, regarding òconstitutional concerns raised by the collections of informationantipiracy act, h.r. 2652.ó13 see letter from robert pitofsky, chairman, federal trade commission, to the honorable tombliley, chairman, committee on commerce, u.s. house of representatives, september 28, 1998,regarding potential anticompetitive effects of title v of h.r. 2281.14 these negotiations were conducted in closed sessions with representatives of the principalorganizations that had previously taken a public position on the house bills. the intellectual property counsel to senator hatch, edward damich, moderated the negotiation process.15 for a detailed discussion of the senate negotiations and the legislative process associated withthe database protection legislation in the u.s. congress through early april 1999, see generally j.h.reichman and paul f. uhlir (1999), òdatabase protection at the crossroads: recent developmentsand their impact on science and technology,ó berkeley technology law journal, vol. 14, pp. 793834.16 h.r. 354, the òcollections of information antipiracy act,ó 106th congress (1999).17 the two changes made in h.r. 354 by the house subcommittee on courts and intellectualproperty included an attempt to eliminate the potential for indefinitely prolonging the 15year duration of protection in section 1408 (c), and expanding the scope of the exemption for certain notforprofit educational, scientific, and research uses in section 1403 (a), both of which are discussed inmore detail later in this chapter.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations77inserted in the congressional record two other proposalsñthe first drafted by acoalition of commercial and notforprofit interests (hereinafter, the coalitionproposal)18 seeking much more limited protection than h.r. 354, and the seconda draft bill that had emerged at the end of the 1998 negotiations sponsored bysenator hatch (hereinafter, the senate discussion draft).19in the rest of this section the committee discusses several of the most important provisions of these three proposals and evaluates them in terms of theirpotential effects on access to and use of s&t data by publicinterest users. indoing so, the committee recognizes that these proposals have changed and willcontinue to change before any one of them is considered for final adoption.nonetheless, they serve as models for the types of issues that arise from theperspective of the research and education communities confronted with the prospect of legislative changes that would affect access to data.20as noted in chapter 1, because of the complex web of interdependent relationships among publicsector and privatesector database producers, disseminators, and users (see table 1.1 in chapter 1 for an indication), any action toincrease the rights of persons in one category is likely to compromise the rights ofthe persons in the other categories, with potentially farreaching negative consequences. a principal concern of the committee, therefore, is that the development of any new database protection measures aimed at protecting privatesectorinvestments take into account the need to promote access to and subsequent useof s&t data and databases not only by the notforprofit sector, but by commercial producers of derivative databases as well. of course, it is in the commoninterest of both database rights holders and usersñand of society generallyñtoachieve a workable balance among the respective interests so that all legitimaterights remain reasonably protected. therefore, as a general guiding principle,the committee recommends that any new federal protection of databasesshould balance the costs and benefits of the proposed changes for both database rights holders and users.18 see the òdatabase fair competition and research promotion act of 1999,ó cong. rec., vol.106, s. 316 (jan. 19, 1999).19 id., òchapter 14ñprotection of databases,ó s. 322326.20 at the time of this writing, the house committee on commerce has introduced and marked upa slightly modified version of the coalition proposal. see h.r. 1858, the consumer and investoraccess to information act of 1999, 106th congress, may 20, 1999. the house committee on thejudiciary also has marked up h.r. 354, which includes a number of significant revisions. becausethe study committee had already written its report, it was not able to consider these additionalchanges to the proposed legislation. nevertheless, the committee believes that its analysis andrecommendations remain relevant to the ongoing debate concerning this legislation, as well as to anyeventual implementation of a statutory database protection regime. any bill that is finally adopted, ifany, most likely will be substantially further modified. for this reason, the committee presents itslegislative recommendations as guiding principles, rather than as specific legislative language.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78a question of balancethe standard of harmthe key provision of the three legislative proposals defines the nature ofprotection accorded a database rights holder and establishes the standard of harmagainst which a defendantõs liability is to be judged. as introduced in january1999, h.r. 354 prohibited the òextraction or useó of a substantial part of adatabase if it results in òharm to the actual or potential marketó for any product orservice incorporating the database.21 a òpotential marketó includes any marketthe database rights holder òhas current and demonstrable plans to exploitó or amarket that is òcommonly exploited by persons offering similar products or services.ó the senate discussion draft narrowed the protection of actual markets tothose markets commonly exploited by persons offering similar products.22the coalition proposal took a different approach, prohibiting only the òduplication of anotherõs database [and inclusion of those records in] . . . a databasethat competes with the original.ó23 to compete with the original database, theduplicate must be substantially identical to the original, must be shown to displace substantial sales or licenses of the original, and must be offered for sale ordigitally distributed in such a manner as to òsignificantly diminish the incentiveto investó in developing the original database. the latter requirement may beinterpreted as threatening the opportunity to recover a reasonable return on theinvestment in collecting or organizing the original database.none of the three legislative proposals purported to create broad propertyrights in the original database, as the e.u. directive does. however, by expanding protection to òpotential markets,ó h.r. 354 would allow the rights holder toforeclose markets or uses beyond the rights holderõs actual use. this has theeffect of granting exclusive rights to the original database rights holder in usesunknown at the time of the databaseõs creation. the limitation of the h.r. 354language stating òcurrent demonstrable plans to exploitó is unclear because thetime at which òcurrent plansó is to be measured is not stated. does òcurrentómean at the time the extraction and use occur, at the time the user develops thenew market, or at the time the database rights holder brings suit? a scientificresearcher might discover an entirely new application for a database, only to beforeclosed from such use if the original database rights holder were subsequentlyto develop òcurrent and demonstrable plansó to exploit that application as anadditional market. for example, scientist a has a database consisting of humangene sequences potentially useful for locating genes controlling certain diseases,but does not know of any particular sequences that are valuable for this purpose.by extraction and use of aõs database, scientist b discovers a set of sequences21 h.r. 354, section 1402.22 section 1301(3).23 section 1401. the house committee on commerce bill, h.r. 1858, has extended that prohibition to include a òdiscrete sectionó of a database.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations79that seem particularly valuable for further experimentation and makes this subsetof sequences available to the scientific community. in doing so, scientist b couldviolate the protection provided by h.r. 354. although protection of original,noncopyrightable databases with a strong, copyrightlike property right may encourage additional investment in producing databases, it simultaneously discourages others from investing in discovery of new uses for existing databases andelevates the cost of using them. in principle, the public benefits most from theweakest legal incentives for encouraging such investments, and intellectual property theory has always promoted the open availability of facts. for the creation oflegal incentives greater than this, the former chairman of the house committeeon the judiciary, robert kastenmeier, required proponents of new intellectualproperty rights to meet a very heavy burden.24the senate discussion draft provided considerably narrower protection byrequiring a showing of òsubstantialó harm to the actual or neighboring market,25which was defined in the proposed conference report language as òharm [that]is such as to significantly diminish the incentive to invest in gathering, organizingor maintaining the database.ó26 the harm test in the coalition proposal wassimilarly circumscribed, requiring both a displacement of substantial sales and ashowing that the unauthorized use òsignificantly diminished the incentive toinvest in the collecting or organizing of the protected database.27 these lattertwo formulations expressly acknowledged that not all duplications are actionable, even if used for commercial purposes (e.g., in distant markets) or for procompetitive purposes by honest means. the intent was to recognize that competitors who add value and generate socioeconomic benefits should not incur liabilityif they do not directly harm the market of the original database rights holder, i.e.,if they do not compete unfairly.the committee believes that strong protection based on a broadly framedstandard of harm test, such as the one proposed by h.r. 354, poses a number ofpotential problems for research, education, and other publicinterest users, aswell as for legitimate privatesector, valueadding database producers. as ageneral rule, the stronger the statutory protection, the greater the encumbranceswill be on the reuse and transformation of data received by secondgenerationdatabase producers and users. one personõs derivative use can be characterizedas an infringement on the original database rights holderõs product; where the baris set will determine to what extent database producers and disseminators will be24 see robert w. kastenmeier and michael j. remington (1985), òthe semiconductor chipprotection act of 1984: a swamp or firm ground?,ó minn. l. rev., vol. 70, p. 417, establishing astringent fourpart test for assessing the merits of any proposed intellectual property protection fornew technologies.25 section 1302.26 proposed conference report language, section 1302, at 33.27 section 1405 (4).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80a question of balanceenriched at the expense of all socially and economically valuable downstreamuses.as noted in chapter 1 (and indicated in table 1.1), many organizations areusers as well as producers and vendors of s&t databases, as, for example, whenthey draw on one or more databases to search for crossdisciplinary associationsor to create a derivative or valueadded database targeted to a competing orentirely new market. privatesector creators of derivative databases have conflicting views of protection: protection of source databases might deprive themof access, but insufficient protection for their own creations might make themvulnerable to copying. protection entails contradictory consequences for creatorsof derivative databases. a concern of the committee, therefore, is that anynew protection judged to be necessary must take into account the need topromote access to and subsequent use of s&t data and databases not onlyby the notforprofit sector, but by commercial producers of derivative databases as well.28a major negative effect of a strong standard of harm test would be to raisethe resale prices for valueadded or derivative databases, as well as to inhibit theirproduction. valueadding database producers that use multiple data sources tocreate new products, as is common in both the private and the public sector, areparticularly penalized by a strong standard of harm test.29 although the consequences would be difficult to measure, strong new rights for database rightsholders would probably result in a broad loss of research opportunities.30 if, forexample, potential users opted to engage in other professional activities ratherthan deal with more expensive and onerous restrictions on database use, theprobability of subsequent discoveries, innovations, and advances in knowledgewould decrease, not only because of the reduced number of users, but also because the remaining database users would be constrained in their activities.downstream commercial providers who must pay license fees to the rights holders of solesource databases can recover such fees only if they themselves chargemore for access, costs that are passed down the chain of derivative products to allusers, including investigators in notforprofit institutions.by making entry into a market more expensive, greater statutory protectionalso could increase the likelihood that small or niche markets, which are com28 indeed, many commercial entities have expressed concerns about such effects of strong database protection. see, for example, the testimony and position statement cited in note 10.29 as noted by nobel laureate joshua lederberg in his testimony on behalf of the nationalacademies and the american association for the advancement of science at the march 18, 1999,hearing, note 7, the òrecent advent of digital technologies for collecting, processing, storing, andtransmitting data has led to an exponential increase in the number of databases created and used. ahallmark trait of modern research is to obtain and use dozens, or even hundreds of databases,extracting and merging portions of each to create new databases and new sources of knowledge andinnovation.ó30 see reichman and uhlir (1999), note 15, p. 820.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations81monplace for many s&t databases, would be served by solesource providers. ahigher cost of entry typically deters entrants and allows the first entrant to act asa monopolist.31 a sole source may then use its market power to inhibit thedevelopment of derivative databases if these are interpreted as undermining theinvestments in the original database, even if such derivative uses are in completely different markets or are protected as òpermitted actsó under a statute.monopoly power could be exercised over the data in many areas of research,because most observational databases cannot be independently recreated after thefact, and it is economically inefficient and undesirable to require independent,redundant collection of original data in activities that use very high cost systems.as the federal trade commission cautioned in its analysis of the predecessor billto h.r. 354, ò. . . policies that further entrench the market power of singlesourcedata providers could have an unintended, undesirable impact on competition andinnovation because of the significant potential for anticompetitive conduct insinglesource database markets.ó32 the law should encourage competition because competition leads to lower prices, resulting in broader use and, hence,further discovery and innovation.increased license fees or unreasonable restrictions on subsequent uses orredissemination of data would negatively affect both government and notforprofit database value adders or disseminators in other ways as well. for example,european government meteorological data providers, who are already benefitingfrom the stronger protections offered by the e.u. database directive, are placingvarious use and redistribution restrictions on the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa), asking noaa to enforce these restrictions inthe united states, contrary to existing u.s. law and policy. such encumbrancesfrom privatesector sources would be exacerbated by any database legislationthat, similar to the e.u. database directive, extended protection to elements notnow protected. government s&t managers, in particular, are concerned thatthey do not receive enough funding to pay license fees and enforce restrictiveprovisions, in addition to meeting the costs of data collection and database preparation, and anticipate that they might have to decline data contributed by privatesector sources (as well as publicsector european sources) that carry high royaltiesor restrictions on subsequent distribution that require enforcement by the user.31 see laura dõandrea tyson and edward f. sherry (1997), statutory protection for databases:economic & public policy issues, research paper prepared under contract to reedelsevier, inc. andthe thomson corporation, and presented as testimony on behalf of the information industry association at the october 23, 1997, hearing, note 8. tyson and sherry, however, generally argue thatthere are not many instances in the commercial database industry in which sole sources dominate themarket and can prevent or inhibit entry. although the committee did not analyze the entire databasemarket in this study, it did find that in many s&t areas, including practically all observationaldatabases, the data sources are unique.32 federal trade commission letter, note 13, p. 2.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82a question of balancewith increased statutory protection for databases and the accompanyinghigher transaction costs, scientists and educators in the notforprofit sector mightno longer be able to afford access to newly proprietary data sources or to enforcesubsequent access and use restrictions on the data obtained from those sources,contrary to existing norms and practice.33 notforprofit research institutionstend to be conservative, riskaverse organizations that err on the side of caution,and they would likely institute guidelines prohibiting any database research activity that might potentially expose them to liability under a new legislativeregime and to costly litigation. such a possibility is particularly problematicgiven the uncertainty about what portions of databases would be deemed òqualitatively substantialó by the rights holders in each case and about what they wouldview as a òreasonable useó by notforprofit entities. such defensive measureswould serve to further restrict, perhaps even beyond what might be allowed underthe law, what scientists and educators can do with databases that they lawfullyobtain.providing stronger property rights for databases that contain information ofhigh commercial value, such as in the area of genomic research, can have theopposite of the intended effect, because the price of access to these databases isinversely related to the number of users who will access them. hence, from ans&t perspective, the goal is to encourage the generation of publicly funded, andtherefore readily available, collections of data in key scientific areas, where theuse of this information is of potentially great commercial value, and to discouragethe tendency for private companies to capture this information and restrict accessto a limited audience. promoting broad access to publicly generated databaseshas the additional benefit of fostering active competition and valueadding activity since all commercial and academic organizations would have access to thisinformation.moreover, enhancing database protection would also serve as an incentive toboth government agencies and notforprofit organizations to privatize or commercialize their research databases. such action would have the undesirableoutcome of reducing the number of databases in the public domain and thuswould have a chilling effect on the full and open data exchange and sharing ethosthat benefits so many areas of scientific and engineering research.since a strong case for significantly greater protection of databases has notbeen made, primarily because existing protections already go a long way towardprotecting database providers, the committee believes that the concerns regarding33 examples of this problem are already abundant in the restrictions on experimental research usesof patentable or otherwise protected innovations in the biotechnology sector. see m.a. heller andr.s. eisenberg (1998), òcan patents deter innovation? the anticommons in biomedical research,óscience, vol. 280, p. 698. such a problem would be more insidious in the case of noncopyrightablefactual databases, which are subpatentable innovations that do not merit strong property rights andthat have been used much more widely and openly in research to date.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations83increased encumbrances on access and use, as well as the potential for higherprices and related transaction costs, cannot be ignored. in light of these concerns, the committee recommends that any new federal statutory protectionof databases should limit any additional protection to prohibition of acts ofunauthorized taking that cause substantial competitive injury to the database rights holder in the rights holderõs actual market. the standard ofharm should be sufficiently clear to permit goodfaith users to know whenthey are infringing on a database rights holderõs rights and should not undermine the nationõs capabilities for innovation or competition in the marketplace. such a formulation would help prevent undue and inappropriate interference with scientific inquiry and with other traditional and customarypublicinterest uses of data, as well as promote legitimate and socially beneficialcommercial competitive activities.scope of protectionthe first section of all three of the legislative proposals considered by thecommittee defined a database as a òcollection of information collected and organized for the purpose of facilitating access to discrete items of the information.óall three proposals also provided protection to databases developed through theinvestment of substantial monetary or other resources. òinformationó was defined to include data, facts, or other intangible material capable of being collectedand organized in a systematic way. the coalition proposal, however, excludedòworks of authorshipóña term applicable to subject matter protected by thecopyright system. such an exclusion would deny protection to copyrightableworks such as anthologies of an authorõs works or a scientific journal that mightotherwise be regarded as a database of articles. the h.r. 354 and senate discussion draft proposals included these works, consistent with the subjectmatterscope of the e.u. directive. the committee believes that the inclusion of collections of works of authorship, which are already unambiguously protected bycopyright, is both unnecessary and unsupportable. if the purpose of this legislation is to fill a purported gap in the legal protection currently available tononcopyrightable databases, then that scope of protection should not extend sobroadly as to cover fully copyrightable anthologies, journals, and textbooks. thecommittee therefore recommends that the subjectmatter scope of any newfederal statutory protection of databases be constrained to databases comprising a collection of discrete facts and items of information, and expresslyexclude collections of copyrightable material, which is already protected.further, protection under any new statute should extend only to a databasethat is the product of a substantial investment, and not to any idea, fact,procedure, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discoverydisclosed by the database.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84a question of balanceterm of protectionh.r. 35434 and its predecessor bills, as well as the senate discussion draft,35provided protection for a nominal term of 15 years, reflecting an effort to meetthe e.u. database directiveõs term of protection36 in response to the e.u.directiveõs attempt to assert a reciprocity requirement. however, no analysis orempirical study supports the choice of 15 years of protection by the europeanunion, in comparison with other potential terms of protection. the committeebelieves that unquestioningly adopting an arbitrary term of protection developedby a foreign power without any experience as to its potential effects would beunsupportable. further, the european unionõs reciprocity requirement contravenes a wellestablished u.s. government policy requiring national treatmentunder all international intellectual property law agreements.37 nonetheless, onekey difference between the two congressional proposals above and the e.u.directive is that the e.u. directive allows the period of protection for the entiredatabase to be extended for another 15 years with each substantial new investmentñthereby providing the rights holder with the possibility of perpetual protection of the entire databaseñwhile the two congressional proposals tried tolimit the extension of protection to the new data that might be added.38despite these efforts to limit protection to 15 years, the committee is concerned about such a long term of initial protection for factual data, whether forresearch and education purposes or any other uses, especially if the standard ofharm remains as strong as proposed in h.r. 354. indeed, there has been acomplete failure on the part of the proponents for a 15year term of protectioneither to justify that term, independent of the arbitrary decision made by theframers of the e.u. directive, or to compare it with other, shorter terms of34 section 1408(c).35 section 1310(c).36 article 10.37 see andrew pincus testimony on behalf of the administration from march 18, 1999, hearing,note 7, which states in part: òthe administration opposes such ôreciprocityõ requirements, bothdomestically and internationally. we believe that commercial laws (including intellectual propertyand unfair business laws) should be administered on national treatment terms, that is, a countryõsdomestic laws should treat a foreign national like one of the countryõs citizens. this principle isembodied in article 3 of the agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights(trips agreement) as well as more generally in the paris convention for the protection of industrialproperty and the berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works. the administration believes that congress should craft u.s. database protection to meet the needs of the american economy....ó, p. 32.38 failure to limit the term of protection, coupled with a strong proprietary right such as the oneproposed in h.r. 354, has led some legal commentators to question the constitutionality of such aprovision under u.s. law. see generally william michael treanor (1998), note 12, and marcihamilton, cardozo law school, letter to howard coble, chairman of the subcommittee on courtsand intellectual property, house committee on the judiciary, february 10, 1998, 5 p.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations85protection used in other intellectual property law models.39 although, in comparison, the term of copyright is much longer, historically the term has beenjustified and set according to an authorõs likely lifetime, plus some additionaltime in which the authorõs heirs can benefit.40 moreover, there are other constitutionally imposed limits on both the scope and length of such protection. if adatabase meets the constitutional and statutory requirements for copyright, thenthe rights holder can obtain the longer term of protection that copyright law affords.however, the committee has been unable to find any rationale for the 15yearterm and, based on market factors relevant to databases, questions that length ofprotection for noncopyrightable databases or òsubstantial portions thereof.óthe committee notes that the average highactivity life span of original datain an online commercial database is approximately 3 years.41 consequently,most of the incentive for creating and distributing databases comes from thereturn on investment achieved in the first 3 years, when demand for and use ofdatabases are highest. it is important to note, however, that there is a significantdifference between how long databases have value and how long statutory protection for noncopyrightable databases should be accorded. although there ares&t databases in rapidly progressing areas of research, such as some in the lifesciences, whose research and commercial values plummet very quickly as newdata supersede old, many research endeavors, such as the study of environmentaltrends, longitudinal socioeconomic studies, and various types of historical analyses, not only depend on consistently collected longterm data sets, but also require access to both current and historical data for comprehensive and comparative study and verification. the committee believes that any term of protectionthat is set should have a duration deemed sufficient to create incentives forproducing original new databases. it should not be set to assure that rightsholders capture all the value, since that would require an exceedingly long periodto cover all cases and would constitute establishing protected markets that areinappropriate. as a general rule, the broader and stronger the scope of protection,the shorter the period of protection needs to be to provide an appropriate incentive for creating a database. in any event, the case for the term of protection to beused should be made by those who are seeking the new protection, and this hasnot been done.neither h.r. 35442 nor the senate discussion draft43 completely addressed39 see, for example, j.h. reichman and pamela samuelson (1997), òintellectual property rightsin data?ó vanderbilt law review, vol. 50, pp. 137152.40 see 17 u.s.c., section 302.41 see generally, martha e. williams (19841999), information market indicators: informationcenter/library marketñreports 160, information market indicators, inc., monticello, il.42 section 1408(c).43 section 1310. however, the hatch discussion draft did include a provision for voluntarydeposit of databases to the copyright office in section 1311.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86a question of balancethe potential problem of extending protection to substantial portions of old datathat may become inseparably intermingled with new data, which raises the issuesof how to effectively track such activity and how to provide adequate notice ofwhich substantial portions remain subject to statutory protection.44 importantfactors to consider in this regard are scientific and legal authentication methodsand the necessary documentation (metadata) requirements. adequate databaseauthentication and documentation are essential not only as prerequisites for accurately tracking the term of protection for any given database, but also for improving the reliability and value of databases for research and other uses. in addition,although the committee did not explicitly consider it, some observers have notedthat a registration system similar to the one administered by the copyright officefor copyrighted works could be helpful in notifying users about the expiration ofthe term of protection for any given database.45both proposals also allowed for 15 years of retroactive application of protection by not limiting causes of action to databases created on or after the date ofenactment of the legislation. the committee finds little justification for legislation that is supposed to be necessary to stimulate and protect new investment toapply to databases already created without the benefit of such protection.the coalition proposal traded off a much weaker standard of harm and scopeof protection for an unlimited term of durationñbasically for as long as thedatabase has some commercial value to the rights holder. the cause of actionwas limited to a duplication of a database that is placed in direct commercialcompetition,46 and this was coupled with additional exemptions for scientific,educational, or research uses.47 the committee believes that the unlimited termof duration proposed in the coalition proposal is not unreasonable in the overallcontext of that proposed bill, since it would also provide some added protectionto those databases that have significant commercial value beyond 15 years andthat have long existed. it is important to emphasize, however, that any furtherstrengthening of the standard of harm under this proposal would likely make theunlimited term of duration not only unacceptable, but unconstitutional.48 finally, neither the problem of identifying substantial portions of old versus newdata nor the problem of retroactive application of the statute arose in the coalition proposal.as a general principle, the committee recommends that the term ofprotection in any new federal statutory protection of databases be limited toa period of time sufficient to provide incentives found necessary for the44 for a discussion of how such legislation might address this problem, see testimony of andrewj. pincus, march 18, 1999, note 7.45 id.46 section 1405(4).47 section 1402(e).48 see documents referenced in note 38.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations87creation of new databases. if legislation with a fixed term of protection isadopted, an appropriate term of protection most likely should be substantially shorter than the proposed 15year term. it should also be based on ananalysis of the economics of the database industry, rather than set arbitrarily.the committee also recommends that any new legislation with a fixedterm of protection also should require database rights holders to providenotice of expiration of the term of protection. specifically, any such legislation should:¥require database rights holders to identify the date on which the databasewas created so that the user will know when it no longer enjoys statutory protection (of course, those databases that remain commercially valuable longer thanthe statutory period of protection can continue to be protected by other means,such as copyright, trade secret, contract, and technical and other measures); and¥for databases that are updated continuously, or at periodic intervals, require database rights holders to identify with reasonable precision those substantial portions of the database that are and are not subject to protection. failure toidentify the date of creation for each new substantial portion of a database shouldserve as a basis for a defense against infringement after the expiration of the termof protection for the original portion of the database.finally, the committee recommends that protection be applied only todatabases created after the effective date of any new legislation, in recognition that a major purpose of enacting enhanced protection is to provideadditional incentives for the development of new databases.exemptions for notforprofit research and educationit might be asked why notforprofit research and education should haveaccess to data on better terms than commercial enterprises, and why those communities should get special òsubsidiesó from database producers. after all, theydo not receive parallel subsidies from suppliers of laboratory mice or telescopes.in chapter 2, the committee argues that the price of access to commercialdatabases will typically be higher than the efficientaccess price, leading to inefficient use. (this is not true of (nonproprietary) laboratory mice or telescopes.mice and telescopes do not have the increasingreturns cost structure of a database, and their price in a competitive market will be the òefficientaccessó price.)the consequent reduction in data use could negatively affect both commercialusers and public users of databases, but commercial users have an advantage.they can recover some of the high access fees by pricing their own productsappropriately. in contrast, the revenues of public users, such as public researchlaboratories and universities, come mostly from public agencies (taxpayers). thea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88a question of balancescientific community legitimately predicts that any increase in the price of accessto data will not be compensated by increased public subsidies.49 hence publiclyfunded users are likely to be more negatively affected than commercial users bynew database protection legislation.the consequent reduction in resources available for education and sciencewould be particularly damaging because education and science have a publicgood aspect. they generate ònonexcludable benefits,ó sometimes called externalities, that go beyond any benefits that could be realized on their own ledgers orto their own constituents. all of society benefits when children are educated,when a cure is discovered for a disease, or when significant trends in climate aredetected, and society will receive these benefits even without paying directly forthem. to ensure an appropriate level of investment in these activitiesña levelproportionate to the benefits likely to be achievedñsome public subsidy is required. this explains, in part, the longstanding u.s. tradition of public education and public funding of researchña tradition that can claim a significant shareof the acclaim for our economic and social standing.the privileged status of publicinterest data users was in fact recognized tovarying degrees by all three of the legislative proposals under consideration.they all attempted to grant education, science, and research more leeway inutilizing protected databases, but they varied with respect to their degree ofanticipated effectiveness.h.r. 354 and the senate discussion draft initially permitted extraction oruse of information for notforprofit educational, scientific, or research purposes,as long as the use does not interfere with the database rights holderõs òactualmarket.ó50 under this provision, research that produces a product that potentially, or in fact, opens a new market not exploited by the database rights holderwould not violate the law. both proposals went further, to protect some educational or research activities, even if they do interfere with the rights holderõsactual market. h.r. 354 provided a factdependent exemption similar to the fairuse privilege in copyright law.51 an individual act of use or extraction ofanotherõs database for teaching or research would be privileged if reasonableunder the circumstances.52 the reasonableness of the use or extraction was to bedetermined by consideration of four factors: the commercial or notforprofitnature of the use or extraction, the good faith of the user, whether the portion usedor extracted is incorporated into an independent work, and whether the use orextraction is in the same field as the original database. however, notwithstanding49 see national research council (1997), bits of power: issues in global access to scientificdata, national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 114.50 section 1403(a)(1) in h.r. 354, and section 1303(c) in the hatch discussion draft.51 see 17 u.s.c., section 107, and the discussion of fair use in chapter 3.52 section 1403(a)(2).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations89these factors, a use or extraction would not be privileged if it was likely tobecome a market substitute for all or part of the original database.53the senate discussion draft proposed that anyone can use a protected database for purposes of òillustration, explanation or example, comment or criticism,internal verification, or scientific or statistical analysis of the portion usedó andfurther authorized notforprofit scientific, educational, or research activities òforsimilar customary or transformative purposes.ó54 this exemption was limited ifsubstantial harm accrues to the original database rights holder because the usewas more than reasonable and customary, consists of a substitute for the originaldatabase, is intended to avoid payment of reasonable fees for use of a databasespecifically marketed for education, scientific, or research purposes, or is a partof a pattern of systematic use.55because the coalition proposal prohibited the duplication of a database onlyif the duplication displaces substantial sales or licenses of the original database,there was less need for a strong research privilege. nonetheless, that proposalprovided that uses for science, research, or education are privileged unless theuses are part of a òconsistent patternó designed to compete directly with theoriginal database, or to avoid reasonable fees for access to a database specificallydesigned for a scientific, research, or educational program.56 under the coalition proposal, the use of anotherõs database for scientific or technical researchwould be permitted unless the use directly undermines the incentive to invest inthe original database.57 this model, based on unfair competition law, stronglyacknowledged the value of promoting unfettered scientific research but still offered protection to prevent database rights holders from being the victims ofcommercial misappropriation. finally, the coalition proposal recognized thefairness of reasonable access charges for databases whose only purpose is forscientific research.58however, h.r. 354 and, to a lesser extent, the senate discussion draftwould represent a considerable risk for the conduct of research and education.the nature and value of the products of research frequently are unknown untilwell after the research is conducted. scientists will not know whether a particularuse of a database under h.r. 354 will affect the òactual marketó for the original orwhether a court will subsequently weigh the factors in such a way as to make theuse privileged. the senate discussion draft, which allowed notforprofit scientific research for òsimilar customary or transformative purposes,ó still withdrewthe privilege if the ultimate result would be òlikely to serve as a substituteó for the53 section 1403(a)(2)(a).54 section 1304(a).55 section 1304(b).56 section 1402(e).57 section 1405(4).58 section 1402(e).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90a question of balanceoriginal database.59 thus, under both of these proposals, a researcher could notbe certain of the authority to utilize anotherõs database until the results of theresearch were known. also, neither a researcher nor any other user would knowwith any certainty what the database rights holder might consider to be a quantitatively or qualitatively substantial part of the rights holderõs database, and therights holder would have every incentive to define its protected domain as broadlyas possible. this uncertainty could discourage uses that would otherwise occurunder a more privileged access and use provision.60 moreover, the òactualmarketó of the originator might be undermined in many ways other than by directcompetition, such as by research demonstrating the original database was inaccurate, was built on false premises, or did not do what it was marketed to do.the uncertain results of research make license transactions for the use ofdatabases intrinsically difficult. although a licensor will want to establish a feethat protects against any reduction in value of the licensorõs database and thatprovides for sharing in the economic value of the resulting product, not knowingthe value of the research results in advance confounds defining òthe harm to theoriginal databaseó or the database value.both h.r. 354 and the senate discussion draft also prevented patterns ofsystematic extraction or uses of individual items of information or other insubstantial parts of a database,61 and the h.r. 354 exemption for science was limitedto an òindividual act of use.ó62 both of these limitations failed to reflect thenature of some scientific research. for example, the potential for new treatmentsfor disease represented by the development of databases arising out of the humangenome project is likely to be achieved by the systematic and continuous analysis of the resulting databases rather than by an individual use. the coalitionproposal permitted research using existing databases unless the purpose of theresearcher was direct competition with the database rights holder, an approachthat fosters continuous discovery using databases.63the provisions proposed in h.r. 354 and the senate discussion draft alsoshould be contrasted with the operation of fair use under the copyright act.copyright fair use, like the h.r. 354 provision, depends on an afterthefactbalancing of factors to assess whether a subsequent otherwise infringing use isprivileged. however, copyright law protects only the expression of a protectedwork and not the ideas or facts contained therein. scientists may freely mine theworld of existing copyrightprotected works for the data upon which their research depends, without fear of liability. one of the significant aspects of a59 section 1304(b)(2).60 see reichman and uhlir (1999), note 15, p. 815.61 section 1403(b) and section 1303(a), respectively.62 section 1403(a)(2).63 section 1402(e).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations91databaseña collection of factsñis that it can be difficult to draw the line between facts and expression. neither h.r. 354 nor the senate discussion draftpurported to do so, but each prohibited the òextraction and useó of a substantialpart (measured qualitatively or quantitatively) of a database.64 the traditionalmethods of scientific researchñas well as the mining of existing storehouses ofideas or facts (i.e., databases) upon which to build knowledgeñwould be placedat risk by these proposals. the coalition proposal, in addition to its narrow scopeof initial prohibition, also expressly exempted from protection any òidea, fact,procedure, system, method of operation, concept, principle or discovery,ó65 consistent with the copyright act.66 this breadth of exemption is also recommended by the committee.even the limited privileges offered to teachers and researchers in h.r. 354and in the senate discussion draft could be further undermined by the enforceability of contractual limitations on use of databases, or by technical measuresthat can prevent uses even if privileged. neither h.r. 354 nor the senate discussion draft imposed limits on the ability of a rights holder of a database to imposeadditional restrictions on use by contract or technical measures.67 the senatediscussion draft did, however, attempt to temper unreasonable contractual overrides, particularly in cases of solesource databases, by raising the issue of thepotential application of the legal doctrine of misuse in the draft legislative history68 and by including such issues as part of a required review of the effects ofthe legislation69 (see the next section). the coalition proposal, on the otherhand, adopted a òmisuseó provision, which would authorize courts to deny reliefto a database rights holder if òpermitted actsó of database use are òfrustrated bycontractual arrangements or technological measuresó or if òaccess to informationnecessary to researchó is prevented.70as noted above, research and education produce externalities that conferbenefits on society at large. it is not clear that private parties through contractswill take these externalities into account when negotiating a license to use anexisting database. where this is true, licensors are likely to authorize fewer usesof their databases than would be socially optimal. reliance on private decisionsto ensure widespread availability of scientific and technical data runs the risk ofinterfering with research and education. therefore, the creation of unprecedentednew federal statutory rights for rights holders of databases must be balanced by64 h.r. 354, section 1402; hatch discussion draft, section 1302.65 section 1402(d).66 see 17 u.s.c., section 102(b).67 section 1405(e) in h.r. 354, and section 1306(e) in the hatch discussion draft.68 section 1306 of the proposed conference report language, pp. 3637.69 see section 4(a), study regarding the effect of the act.70 section 1407(b).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92a question of balancesome affirmative duties not to unilaterally override by contract the publicinterestexemptions and other permitted uses allowed under any new law.71one approach would be to affirmatively state by legislative provision thattraditional or customary scientific, educational, and research uses could not constitute infringements under unfair competition database legislation. this wouldhold true even if such traditional or customary publicinterest uses caused potential or actual economic harm to the rights holder in a database. this approachclosely parallels the existing òfirst saleó doctrine in that although current purchasing and subsequent lending of traditional books and journals (such as is done bylibraries) may reduce the sales of these works and allegedly harm the economicinterests of publishers, the sharing of legally acquired works is so important tosocietyõs scientific, educational, and social advancement that the potential oractual harms to authors and publishers are considered inconsequential when balanced against the benefits to society of allowing sharing. the customary andtraditional practices of the research and educational communities were formedunder the copyright law milieu, which achieved a careful balance of the rights ofrights holders and users over time. the balance of interests struck by the law inpaper publishing environments has worked well, and an analogous balance has tobe developed in electronic sharing environments, particularly for scientific andtechnical databases.it is important that any carvedout rights for traditional and customary scientific uses in any legislation that may be adopted not be able to be overridden ordenied to scientists, educators, and other publicinterest users through use ofcontracts.72 in addition, integrative and derivative uses extending from otherintegrative and derivative uses have become one of the major methods of scientific inquiry today. as discussed in chapter 1, scientific inquiry involves notonly controlled observation and confirmation based on the published data, information, and knowledge from books, journals, and other intellectual works, butalso the mining of electronic data sets that may have been gathered for scientificor other purposes. the sifting and winnowing of data and knowledge from allavailable sources contribute indispensably to the advancement of knowledge andthe development of yet further derivative databases upon which others may build.thus there is a need to minimize the barriers to access and use of facts andcompilations of factual information, not increase them. it is extremely important71 for a discussion of proposed òpublicinterest unconscionabilityó clauses in licensing agreements for copyrighted works and noncopyrightable databases, see j.h. reichman and jonathan a.franklin (1999), òprivately legislated intellectual property rights: reconciling freedom of contract with public good uses of information,ó u. penn. l. rev., vol. 147, no. 4, pp. 929951.72 for a discussion of legal and policy issues at the interface of contract law and copyright law seedavid nimmer, elliot brown, and gary n. frischling (1999), òthe metamorphosis of contract intoexpand,ó cal. l. rev., vol. 87, p. 19, and charles r. mcmanis (1999), òthe privatization (oròshrinkwrappingó) of american copyright law,ó cal. l. rev., vol. 87, p. 1763.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations93that traditional and transformative uses of scientific and technical data be allowedby right without requiring permission of rights holders, similar to the legal situation for hardcopy documents under the òfirst saleó doctrine.the òfair useó doctrine under copyright law and the òfirst saleó doctrineapply to all intellectual works and not just to òtraditional or customary scientific,educational, and research usesó as proposed in the paragraphs above. thus thebalance between the exclusivity interests of the commercial community and theopenness and sharing interests of the scientific and education communities is notfully preserved by the proposed legislationõs exemptions for scientific inquiry.the committee therefore recommends that any new legislation that maybe adopted expressly continue to provide legal rights of access to and uses ofproprietary databases equivalent to those that notforprofit researchers,educators, and other publicinterest users enjoyed under traditional or customary practice prior to enactment. courts should be allowed to invalidateany nonbargained73 licensing terms that are shown to interfere unduly withotherwise legislatively permitted customary uses by notforprofit entities.additional steps need to be taken by the government and by the research, education, and other publicinterest communities, however, in the implementation of anew database protection regime to help ensure that the traditional and customaryrights of publicinterest data users are not unduly compromised. these steps arediscussed in some detail in the section below titled òassessment of policy options, with recommendations for government action.óperiodic assessments of effects under any new statuteas pointed out above in this chapter, the commission of the european communities (cec) conducted no economic studies of the database industry, or of thepotential effects of different models and provisions, to specifically support thedrafting of the e.u. database directive. the only significant economic analysisdone in the united states with regard to the pending legislation was an articlecommissioned by two of the principal supporters of h.r. 354, reedelsevier,inc., and the thompson corporation.74 while neither the cec nor the u.s.congress has undertaken such studies in advance of their legislative initiatives,both legislative bodies have implicitly recognized that some negative effects arelikely to be generated by this new legal regime. the e.u. directive requires thecec to submit to the european parliament, the council, and the economic andsocial committee of the cec a report73 by ònonbargained termó the committee means any term, usually contained in a standard formcontract, over which, as a practical matter, no actual bargaining by the parties to the contract takesplace.74 see tyson and sherry (1997), note 31.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94a question of balance. . . on the application of this directive, in which, inter alia on the basis ofspecific information supplied by the member states, it shall examine in particular the application of the sui generis right, including articles 8 and 9, and shallverify especially whether the application of this right has led to abuse of dominant position or other interference with free competition which would justifyappropriate measures being taken, including the establishment of nonvoluntarylicensing arrangements.75neither h.r. 354 nor its predecessor bills in the house, h.r. 2652 or title vof h.r. 2281, had any provision for review of the economic effects of the bill oncompetition, consumers, or publicinterest users. in contrast, the senate discussion draft did provide for the conduct of a òstudy regarding the effect of theactó by the general accounting office, in consultation with the register ofcopyrights and the department of justice, within 5 years of enactment and every10 years thereafter.76 the issues for study that the senate discussion draftwould require are fully reproduced below, not only because they represent concerns regarding effects that might arise as a direct consequence of the enactmentof this type of legislation, but also because they form the basis for a core set ofquestions that can be addressed independently by those studying the effects of thebill.(b) elements for considerationñthe study conducted undersubsection (a) shall considerñ(1)the extent to which the ability of persons to engage in the permitted actsunder this act has been frustrated by contractual arrangements or technological measures;(2)the extent to which information contained in databases that are the solesource of the information contained therein is made available through licensing or sale on reasonable terms and conditions;(3)the extent to which the license or sale of information contained in databases protected under this act has been conditioned on the acquisition orlicense of any other product or service, or on the performance of anyaction, not directly related to the license or sale;(4)the extent to which the judiciallydeveloped doctrines of misuse in otherareas of the law have been extended to cases involving protection of databases under this act;75 article 16(3). articles 8 and 9, which are referred to in article 16(3), concern òrights andobligations of lawful usersó and òexceptions to the sui generis right,ó respectively. it should benoted that until a very lastminute decision by the e.c. council of ministers, the proposed databasedirective contained a mandatory compulsory license for solesource providers. see reichman andsamuelson (1997), note 39, p. 87.76 section 4(a).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations95(5)the extent, if any, to which the provisions of this act constitute a barrier toentry, or have encouraged entry into, a relevant database market;(6)the extent to which claims have been made that this act prevented accessto valuable information for research, competition, or innovation purposesand an evaluation of these claims;(7)the extent to which enactment of this act resulted in the creation of databases that otherwise would not exist; and(8)such other matters necessary to accomplish the purpose of the report.77this type of monitoring and review of the effects of database protectionlegislation should focus not only on national database activities, but on international ones as well, since the market for all online databases is inherently international, as are many s&t research activities. although the committee believesthat such periodic reviews would be important, particularly if they are not carriedout prior to enactment of any new legislation, there are a number of other aspectsto consider. there are several government entities that congress might considerin addition to, or instead of, the three suggested above, including the congressional budget office, the department of commerce, and the federal trade commission, all of which would bring relevant expertise and interests to such areview. also, because of the complexity of the issues to be examined, the rapidlychanging nature of digital information technologies, and the lack of empiricaldata to fully support the analysis of these issues, the federal entities charged withdoing the review should consider, in conjunction with the various stakeholdergroups, what kind of data would be desirable to track and should initiate somemeans of doing so. finally, the committee suggests that instead of an assessmentof effects under the statute, congress consider enacting a sunset provision thatwould take effect after a 5year period and place the burden of proof and actionon those who would want the legislation to continue. in light of the concernsabout the possible unintended effects of such legislation, the rapid pace of changein digital information and network technologies, and the need to exercise duecaution in the enactment of any such legislation, a sunset provision with thepossibility of renewal may be the better option.the committee therefore recommends that any new legislation provideeither for a sunset provision with the possibility to renew, or for periodicassessments of the effects of new statutory database protection on competition in the database market and on consumers of databases, as well as onaccess to and use of datañincluding s&t datañby notforprofit, publicinterest users, in order to enable timely and appropriate revisions of legislation as needed.77 id., (b).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96a question of balanceexemptions for government databasesas discussed throughout this report, s&t databases created either by thegovernment or with government funding provide the largest and, in many scientific areas, the most important source of data for research and education. moreover, existing u.s. law and policy prohibit proprietary protection of data orinformation created at the federal level, and generally limit such protection at thestate and local levels as well. maintaining these exemptions is of crucial importance, not only to publicinterest users of databases in the research and educational communities but to all citizens. it therefore is not surprising that all threelegislative proposals attempted to provide broad exemptions for government orgovernmentfunded databases.nevertheless, there are some notable differences among these proposals.under h.r. 354, protection provided by the proposed legislation would not extend to collections of information gathered by or for a governmental entity,whether federal, state, or local.78 for example, databases compiled by state ormunicipal governments in conjunction with their geographic information systems(giss) would not be protected, although state and local governments wouldretain any copyright, contractual/licensing, trade secret, and technological protections that currently apply. h.r. 354 made it clear that the proposed legislation,and presumably federal copyright law, would preempt conflicting state laws.79this means that state misappropriation laws could not be applied by a state orlocal agency in a claim against a commercial business or vice versa.h.r. 354 provided protection for collections of information created by stateand federal educational institutions engaged in the course of education or scholarship.80 relative to civil law suits, the court would be required to reduce orremit entirely monetary relief òin any case in which a defendant believed and hadreasonable grounds for believing that his or her conduct was permissible underthis chapter, if the defendant was an employee or agent of a notforprofit educational, scientific, or research institution, library, or archives acting within thescope of his or her employment.ó81 a similar nonapplicability provision wouldapply for criminal offenses under that proposed legislation.82 this allowance,however, is merely an òinnocent infringeró provision; once the notforprofitresearcher or educator is notified the first time, this immunity would be removed.these liability relief provisions would not apply to state or local governmentagencies under h.r 354. thus, if a state or municipal government gis operationwould use data from a commercial collection of information without permission,78 section 1404(a)(1).79 section 1405(b).80 section 1404(a)(1).81 section 1406(e).82 section 1407(a)(2).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations97the government operation and employees acting even within the course of theiremployment would be subject to the liability provisions set forth in h.r. 354.criminal violations would apply in situations where losses to the commercial company aggregated to more than $10,000 in a year or if the state or local governmentran its operation for òdirect or indirect commercial advantage or financial gain.ó83on the other hand, and again by example, commercial firms extracting government data from state or municipal gis operations would not be subject to eithercivil or criminal liability provisions under that proposed legislation.under the coalition proposal, prohibitions against duplication would notapply to ògovernment databases.ó84 here, however, ògovernment databaseó wasdefined as being òa database (a) that has been collected or maintained by theunited states of america; or (b) that is required by federal statute or regulation tobe collected or maintained, to the extent so required.ó85 under the coalitionproposal, state and local governments would gain most of the protections of thenew database legislation, in a manner similar to that of commercial firms, andcould choose to not avail themselves of the proposed legislative provisions attheir option. this option is similar to the current situation in which many localgovernments choose not to seek copyright protection for their public records anddatabases. under the liability provisions it is also clear that state and local governments would be in a position similar to that of commercial firms in being able toseek damages from private and government competitors who duplicate their dataand compete with their income streams. like h.r. 354, the coalition proposalstated that the new federal legislation would preempt conflicting state laws.the research and education communities generally believe that the greatestbenefits would accrue if state and local governments followed the federal government principles of òa strong freedom of information law, no government copyright, fees limited to recouping the cost of dissemination, and no restrictions onreuse.ó86 this view appears to be gaining currency even in europe. a greenpaper issued by the commission of the european communities in january 1999comes to the conclusion that publicsector information is a key resource foreurope and suggests that e.u. nations should more closely follow the model ofu.s. federal government policies with regard to promoting broader access togovernment databases.87 regardless of the merits of providing open access to83 section 1407(a)(1).84 section 1403(a).85 section 1405(5).86 peter n. weiss and peter backlund (1997), òinternational information policy in conflict: openand unrestricted access versus government commercialization,ó in borders in cyberspace: information policy and the global information infrastructure, brian kahin and charles nesson, eds.,mit press, cambridge, ma.87 dgxiii (1998), public sector information: a key resource for europe, ògreen paper onpublic sector information in the information society,ó european commission, luxembourg. available online at <www.echo.lu/legal/en/access.html>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98a question of balancegovernment information, the individual states in the united states traditionallyhave determined which policies they will follow in providing access to their stateand local government information. the coalition proposal appeared to supportcontinuation of this state and local government selfdetermination concept.the senate discussion draft more closely paralleled h.r. 354 than it did thecoalition proposal in its effect on government data collections. for instance, theterm ògovernment databasesó was again defined to include databases of government entities at all levelsñfederal, state, or local.88 therefore the protection andliability ramifications of the senate discussion draft for governments would besimilar in many respects to those of h.r. 354.the senate discussion draft theoretically would allow a library, archive,educational, scientific, or research institution to extract government data contained in a commercial database.89 however, the requester would bear heavyburdens regarding data identification and proof of need, and the extraction wouldbe allowed only in the unlikely event that the information was still available in itsoriginal format in the commercial database and separate from other portions ofthe commercial database. the requesting notforprofit organization also wouldneed to pay the costs of fulfilling the user request. from a practical perspective,it is difficult to envision the ability of libraries and educational institutions tosuccessfully pursue such extractions.the adoption of a strong standard of harm also could accelerate theprivatization of government data dissemination with potentially negative results,as noted in chapter 2. while privatization of some government functions may,under appropriate circumstances, produce net benefits, the committee urges caution in the context of government s&t database privatization in light of thepublicgood aspects of the data.90 because government databases are not andwill not be legally protectable and the governmentõs policy is to make public databroadly available, any entity can take the original data, add value, andredisseminate them as it wishes. in such cases, the original government data arenonetheless supposed to be (but are not always) maintained and to continue to bemade available by the government source or archive.there are some situations in which the government seeks to transfer the datadissemination function to a privatesector party, whether notforprofit or commercial, on either a nonexclusive or an exclusive basis. the benefit of nonexclusive licensing is that several disseminators can compete in the market, and so tendtoward providing access at a reasonable price for end users. in practice, however,88 section 1301(6).89 section 1305(b).90 see national research council (1997), bits of power, note 49, pp. 116124 for a discussion ofcircumstances in which privatization of the governmentõs data dissemination function is appropriateand inappropriate.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations99few organizations would be willing to enter into a formal agreement to handle amajor data management and dissemination function on behalf of the governmentunless they could see some reasonable opportunity to at least recoup their operating expenses. therefore, most such data management and dissemination functions are performed at university or other notforprofit institution data centersthat are partly subsidized by the originating government agency and are limitedeither by the terms of their agreement with the government or by their institutional charter (or both) to recovering operating costs, but prohibited from earninga profit.in certain instances, government agencies have given exclusive licenses tocommercial firms for dissemination of government data.91 if the governmentagency subsequently does not continue to maintain and make available the original database, an exclusive license will result in a monopoly situation, which canlead to higher prices. since stronger statutory database protection is likely toenhance the potential for profit by commercial data distributors, it also is likely toencourage the licensing of government data dissemination functions, perhaps ona de facto exclusive basis and without appropriate safeguards, thus defeating theexisting open access and use law and policy of the u.s. government. as discussed in chapter 2, the negative aspects of this trend are further exacerbated byother legislative initiatives that require government science agencies to purchasedata from the private sector, rather than generate those same or similar data as apublic good.finally, the exceptions for instructional and library uses articulated in thesenate discussion draft and in h.r. 354 were weak. uses by academic institutions and libraries regarded as fair use under the senate discussion draft areexplicitly stated and represent a very narrow and qualified set of activities.92 forexample, display of the contents of a data collection during teaching in a normalclass session that also is viewed by students at a distance enrolled in world widewebbased instruction would be in violation of the provisions of the senatediscussion draft. numerous additional impositions on efficient approaches toinstruction were raised by the senate discussion draft; however, h.r. 354 didnot even have a separate exemption for those activities.the senate discussion draft, and especially h.r. 354, focused primarily onstrengthening proprietary protection without adequately balancing the publicinterest, consumer, and commercial competitive values. the coalition proposal,by attempting to minimize social costs while providing some additional protection for commercial databases, appeared to arrive at a result that would be farmore acceptable for maintaining the viability and vitality of the academic and91 see the landsat privatization example discussed in national research council (1997), bits ofpower, note 49, pp. 121123.92 section 1307.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100a question of balanceresearch communities upon which innovation and broadbased economic growthultimately depend.the committee thus recommends that although privatesector databasesderived from government data should be eligible for protection, protectionshould not be extended to databases collected or maintained by the government. any new legislation should expressly affirm the need for continuationof existing legal norms for wide distribution of government data and of datacreated pursuant to a government mandate or funding.assessment of policy options,with recommendations for government actionin this section the committee discusses a number of actions that should betaken by various government institutions to help promote access to and use ofs&t databases for the public interest. the areas addressed include promotingavailability of government s&t data; maintaining nonexclusive rights in governmentfunded databases by notforprofit institutions and their employees; organizing discussions of licensing terms for notforprofit uses of commercials&t databases; improving the understanding of complex economic aspects ofs&t database activities; and promoting international access to s&t data. although the committee believes that its recommended actions in these areasought to be undertaken whether or not any new statutory database protection is enacted by congress, all of these actions will take on an increasedurgency and importance if relatively strong new proprietary rights in databases are established by federal statute.promoting availability of government scientific and technical dataincreased proprietary protection for commercial databases could have a significant effect on government data collection and distribution efforts. becauseresearchers and educators likely would be more constrained in their use of datadrawn from commercial databases, they might have to request additional fundsfor the purchase and administration of proprietary data or ask federal agencies tocollect and maintain more s&t data on a nonproprietary basis. thus budgetarystrains could increase for federal agencies trying to meet the data needs of theirown researchers as well as those related to fulfilling institutional mandates.under appropriate circumstances and conditions, government partnering withthe private sectorñespecially notforprofit institutionsñin accomplishing datacollection and maintenance can be highly beneficial and effective. the committee fully endorses the existing policy and practice of the federal government, asexpressed through omb circular a130, to make public s&t (and other) databases openly available at the lowest possible prices. it is through this policy ofa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations101efficientaccess pricing that the taxpayer derives maximum value from thegovernmentõs very substantial investments in its collections of data.consistent with current practice, government s&t agencies must not maketheir databasesñwhether created and owned by them or under their controlñavailable on an exclusive basis. they also should continue to maintain undertheir own control and archive all s&t databases that have value for research andthat are otherwise being disseminated on behalf of the government by a privatesector organization or company. such control should be maintained throughphysical possession or by appropriate contractual provisions. the longtermmaintenance of public databases and archiving of data in readily accessible formats are essential to ensure their availability for reuse in future research or toconfirm the results of research already conducted, among other uses.93 largequantities of government and governmentfunded data at all levels are lost, discarded, or rendered inaccessible owing to technological change or defects. although this constitutes a major information management and policy issue in itsown right that is beyond the scope of this report, the trend toward greater privatesector management and dissemination of public datañwhich the committee believes would increase under stronger statutory protection of databasesñmakes iteven more important for government agencies to pay attention to this issue.without adequate safeguards to ensure longterm preservation of public datacreated or disseminated on behalf of the government by privatesector entities,even larger amounts of such data may be lost or become inaccessible over time.finally, in making its data broadly available, the government should requirethat all privatesector disseminators or transformative users of its data identify thegovernment source(s) of the data being used. indeed, the same practice should befollowed with regard to all sources of data from the private sector as well. identifiers on privately disseminated government data will serve the objectives ofproviding notice to all users that they can contact the government agency sourceto obtain the original data, making the public aware of its governmentõs activities,and giving proper credit where credit is due. improving public awareness is animportant objective, because all too often the public lacks a full appreciation ofthe benefits it derives from taxpayerfunded datarelated activities.the committee therefore recommends that the following actions be takenby all government entities. scientific and technical data owned or controlledby the government should be made available for use by notforprofit andcommercial entities alike on a nonexclusive basis and should be disseminated to all users at no more than the marginal cost of reproduction anddistribution, whenever possible. while the private sectorõs creation ofderivative databases from government data should be encouraged, the source93 see generally national research council (1995), preserving scientific data on our physicaluniverse: a new strategy for archiving our nationõs scientific resources, national academy press,washington, d.c.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102a question of balanceof the original government data must ensure that those original data remainopenly available. any information product derived from a government database also should be required to carry an identifier stating the governmentsource(s) used.maintaining nonexclusive rights by notforprofits ingovernmentfunded databasesscience best advances by promoting a culture of openness and sharing,whereas individual commercial companies best advance by maintaining controland secrecy. the tension between these two cultures has been attenuated throughthe òfirst saleó doctrine, whereby a purchaser of a book, journal, or other intellectual work is free to use the facts and ideas in the work and the publisher is not ableto prevent the purchaser from placing the intellectual work in a library or passingit on to another person for similar uses, regardless of the medium in which thework is presented.94 as discussed in chapter 3, this right is being supersededincreasingly by licensing arrangements in the online digital environment. in theacademic sector, such institutional licenses typically permit users to share withcollaborators or colleagues on other campuses, so long as the sharing is notsystematic. in fact, in some cases, universities are now able to negotiate licensesthat òmeet or exceedó their usersõ needs.95 nevertheless, in order to maintain areasonable balance between the scientific and education communitiesõ interestsin openness and sharing, on the one hand, and the commercial communityõsinterests in exclusivity on the other, some minimal constraints ought to be placedon the commercial community to guarantee researchers and educators access toand unfettered use of facts, data, and intellectual works published by their peers.the existing practice in the publication of research results has been forresearchers to pay page charges and to contractually give up exclusive copyrightin their works in order to have their articles published in the primary journals read94 17 u.s.c., section 109.95 personal communication from ann okerson, yale university, september 1999. an example ofthis type of licensing language is contained in academic pressõs ideal license (for 200+ journals):copying and storing is limited to single copies of a reasonable number of individualitems. downloading an entire issue of a journal is not permitted. however, digital orprint copies may be included in coursepacks and reserves, or in internal corporate trainingprograms and drug application materials. authorized users may transmit downloadedcopies of individual items to persons who are not authorized users for the purpose ofscholarly communication, so long as the transmission is not done on a systematic basis.at the same time, the traditional user rights under the first sale doctrine are in danger of beingsignificantly eroded by the uniform computer information transactions act, which is currentlybeing considered for enactment at the state level. see generally, òa guide to the proposed uniformcomputer information transactions actó at <www.2bguide.com>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations103by their peers. because authors transfer exclusive copyright in their work, theymay be legally obligated to ask publishers for permission to distribute copies oftheir authored articles to their own students and to their close research associates.as one participant in the committeeõs january 1999 workshop wryly noted, òwehave a great system: we pay to publish and we pay to get it back.ó in addition,the pricing structure that seems to maximize profits for commercial scientificpublishers is one that limits acquisition of journals to the elite academic librariesand researchers that can afford them.96 many academic institutions now havedifficulty paying library subscription rates, and their researchers, professors, andstudents thus lack convenient access to many journals, even to those in whichthey publish.such concerns will only increase as electronic publishing becomes morewidespread. it is already common practice in electronic publishingñand one ofits tremendously productive featuresñto link electronic articles to the data setsupon which the research results depend. if legislation protecting databases isenacted, the current practice of requiring scientific authors to give up exclusiverights in their research articles on a takeitorleaveit basis could be extended tothe data sets underlying the results reported in the research articles. cedingcontrol of databases created in the notforprofit sector, especially those createdwith taxpayer support, to privatesector vendors that can establish their ownterms for access to and use of the underlying research data is thus a majorconcern. in scientific disciplines where marketplace competition is highly constrained or absent, there is a need to provide safeguards against monopolisticpractices.the committee therefore believes it important to initiate a òsafety netó approach in the digital database context to help preserve the balance previouslyprovided by the òfirst saleó doctrine. this approach will help ensure publicaccess to data and databases developed in whole or in substantial part at federalgovernment expense. databases developed primarily with government fundsshould not fall under the exclusive control of private parties such that dissemination of the data to the public or other scientists is limited. nor should publicaccess to governmentfunded databases be highly constrained. the economicbasis for funding science from governmental funds is that the research producespublic goods. one researcherõs use of these public goods does not decrease thevalue and benefits to others of the public goods.specifically, for any research accomplished wholly or in substantial partwith federal funds, universities and notforprofit organizations should be re96 see association for research libraries (1999), arl statistics: 199798, martha kyrillidou etal., eds., association of research libraries, washington, d.c., also available online at <www.arl.org/stats/arlstat/1997t2.html>, showing trends in average rise in costs of serial (journal) subscriptionsbetween 1986 and 1998, pp. 89. for a retrospective look at these issues see <www.lib.virginia.edu/mellon/mellon.html>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104a question of balancequired by the funding agency to retain nonexclusive rights in any resulting databases. under omb circular a110, federal grant recipients have initial controlover the intellectual property and databases that have been produced from theirfederally funded projects.97 the primary concern under a new statutory regimeis the inequality in bargaining power between large publishers and individualresearchers and scientific authors. based on past practices, the committee isconcerned that many researchers may be required to give up exclusive rights inthe databases produced at federal expense in return for having their researchresults published.if new database legislation is enacted, publishers may request rights in boththe intellectual work (i.e., typically the journal article), as well as rights to thecollected data sets from which the intellectual work arose or upon which the workmay depend and which might usefully be linked to the article in electronic publishing environments. if the negotiated contract provides for reasonable access toand use of the governmentfunded data for further scientific work, it is unlikelythat the right of the researcher to independently provide access to the governmentfunded data would ever have to be invoked. however, the proposed provision provides a safety mechanism. the retained right of the researcher to distribute the data is likely to be invoked only in the unusual situation in which datagathered through a federally funded project or grant have been transferred throughcontract from an academic institution to a commercial entity with highly constrained access to and use of the data.this approach has a relatively narrow application. the proposed requirement would not apply generally to copyrighted works that may have been produced using federal funds (e.g., research articles), nor would it apply to state orlocal government databases or to databases generally. the requirement alsowould not automatically apply to databases created with only partial (e.g., lessthan half) funding from the federal government, unless specifically agreed to bythe parties. the provision would allow notforprofit institutions and researchersto share underlying federally funded data with others regardless of contract provisions with the private sector, but would impose no affirmative requirement onthem to share such data. universities and other notforprofits, of course, couldnot distribute any valueadded features provided by the privatesector publisherto the government data unless agreed to by contract with that entity or otherwisepermitted by law.based on the foregoing discussion, the committee recommends that federal funding agencies should require university and other notforprofit researchers or their employing institutions that use federal funds, wholly or in97 office of management and budget (1997), circular a110, òuniform administrative requirements for grants and agreements with institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other notforprofit organizations,ó revised november 19, 1993; as further amended august 29, 1997.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations105substantial part, in creating databases not to grant exclusive rights to suchdatabases when submitting them for publication or for incorporation intoother databases.organizing discussions of licensing terms for notforprofit usesof commercial scientific and technical databaseswhether or not new database protection legislation is adopted, the committeebelieves that representatives from the notforprofit research and education communities should engage in a series of discussions with commercial databasepublishers and vendors in different market segments in order to achieve a betterunderstanding of their respective needs and concerns and thus foster the development of mutually acceptable licensing terms that can reduce uncertainty andtransaction costs. such discussions would be especially important in the monthsand years immediately after enactment of a any new federal database statute,since there would be many definitions and concepts that would not have beenfully defined and that would be subject to broadly divergent interpretations bydifferent parties. one personõs legitimate derivative use may be anotherõs harmful infringement.previously established guidelines or understandings concerning copyrightedworks will not in most cases be transferable to the database context and thereforewill most likely confuse user communities, without the benefit of a fresh set ofclarifying discussions. further complications will arise if currently copyrightedworks, such as journals, textbooks, reference books, and other anthologies, arealso included in the definition of protected databases or òcollections of informationó under any new u.s. legislation, as they already are in the european union.in addition to promoting some mutual understanding regarding licensing terms,clarifying discussions might help prevent unnecessary conflicts and litigation. it is unrealistic to assume that a model contract or even standard individualcontract terms could be developed to cover all or perhaps even most such transactions. as discussed in chapter 1, a key characteristic of s&t data is the heterogeneity of data types, sources, and uses. the expectation of developing a onesizefitsall approach would be not only illusory and impossible, but alsoultimately harmful. to avoid becoming futile, discussions among stakeholdersmust be founded on realistic and wellfocused objectives that would have areasonable chance of success.in establishing such discussions, it is essential that representatives of allmajor stakeholders be involved so that all relevant interests and viewpoints canbe considered. for example, the committee would not endorse a process such asthe one that resulted in the òagreement on guidelines for classroom copying.ó9898 for a history of academic fair use and classroom guidelines, see kenneth d. crews (1993),copyright, fair use and the challenge of universities, university of chicago press, chicago, il.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106a question of balancethat agreement has perhaps been workable for campus administrators, campuslibraries, and the photocopying centers on campuses, but not for students andfaculty, who were not involved as stakeholders in the discussions. examples ofboth classroom guidelines99 and of existing digital licensing terms and phrases,and their evaluation from the notforprofit perspective,100 may be found onlineon the world wide web already.privatesector s&t database producers and disseminators should remain cognizant of the social value of their products, particularly for notforprofit research, education, and other publicinterest uses. database vendors whose primary source of revenue lies outside the notforprofit s&t communities shouldendeavor to provide publicinterest users access to their databases on favorableterms. database vendors whose primary source of revenue is in the s&t researchand education community should be encouraged to provide access on favorableterms once a reasonable return on investment has been achieved.indeed, as noted in chapter 2, all pricing inhibits access, especially for thoseresearchers who do not have adequate and strong institutional funding, whetheracademic, research institute, or industrial. of course, the limitations are a matterof degree, depending on level and pattern of pricing. the goal should be to bringall sectors into a cooperative system in which data are made widely and readilyavailable for scientific and educational use at as low a total cost (to the userpopulation and society as a whole) as possible, and to do that within an environment that encourages, rather than inhibits, the inquisitiveness and inventivenessof the user while encouraging the entrepreneurship of suppliers. it is in thecommon interest of both database rights holders and usersñand of society generallyñto achieve a workable balance among the respective interests so that alllegitimate rights remain reasonably protected.the participants in these discussions would be primarily representatives ofcommercial s&t database disseminators and their government agency and notforprofitsector users. the committee makes its recommendation to the administration, rather than directly to those communities, however, because it believesthat the discussions should be held under a convener such as the copyrightoffice, which has the greatest subject matter expertise in these issues within thegovernment. such a focused venue would not only help stimulate progress onimportant issues, but would also mitigate the potential for accusations of collusion or conspiracy under federal antitrust laws. the committee therefore recommends that the copyright office sponsor discussions between the representatives of privatesector producers of databases and user stakeholderrepresentatives from government agencies and notforprofit groups to help99 some examples of classroom guidelines may be found online at <fairuse.stanford.edu/library/index.html>.100 see <www.library.yale.edu>, and type òlicensingó in the òsearchó box.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations107develop a common understanding and optimal terms for the licensing ofs&t databases and data products.improving the understanding of complex economic aspectsof scientific and technical database activitiesalthough a detailed economic analysis is well beyond the scope of thecommitteeõs charge for this study, this report raises significant questions throughout regarding the adoption of statutory database protection; the economic underpinnings of different types and mixes of provisions, and the potential effects ofboth an overall statutory regime and specific provisions on various segments ofthe database industry and on the relationships among the different parties involved in creating, disseminating, and using s&t databases. certainly, at aminimum, the questions raised in the e.u. database directive and in the senatediscussion draft, as well as any other questions that are ultimately identified inthe course of the legislative process, should be the subject of more detailed studyin advance of any legislatively mandated report on effects of increased protection. such a study would help provide a comprehensive base of knowledge withwhich to officially evaluate the effects of new statutory protection of databases.in addition to these broad economic issues, the committee suggests that researchbe devoted to, among others, the following specific issues affecting the creation,dissemination, and use of s&t databases by the government and by the notforprofit and forprofit sectors:1. is there an increase in the number of databases available that can berelated to (caused or affected by) an increase in database protection?2. is there an increase in the costs (or a reduction in the amount) of scientificresearch that can be related to an increase in database protection?3. what is the role of licensing restrictions on access to and use of databasesfor research and education activities and what are the effects?4. what are the effects of solesource databases on s&t niche markets andon the level of scientific research?5. what are the trends in privatization of government s&t data, and whateffects has privatization had on access to and use of such data?6. what have been the effects of the e.u. database directive on access toand use of european s&t data by the european research and education community, and by the u.s. government and by the u.s. research and education community?the committee recommends that the congressional research service,the national science foundation, the department of commerce, and otherfederal science agencies, as considered appropriate, should undertake andfund external research that investigates the changing and complex economica question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108a question of balanceaspects of s&t database activities, particularly in the context of any newlegislative database protection measures that may be enacted and in supportof the legislative principle recommended above regarding the conduct ofperiodic assessments of the effects of any new statutory protection of databases.promoting international access to scientific and technical datait is a wellknown truism that science knows no boundaries and that practically all research that is conducted on an open basis also involves internationalcollaboration to some degree. some research, such as that in observational spaceand earth sciences, is inherently international and cannot be conducted successfully without either the collection of global data or access to foreign databases.101as a result, the u.s. government science agencies in recent decades have concluded thousands of bilateral and multilateral general s&t cooperation and specific research program agreements.102 these agreements will take on added significance with the implementation of the e.u. database directive and withpossible adoption of restrictive database protection legislation in the united statesand elsewhere, since the negotiated terms of those agreements can specify theterms under which databases related to the research in question can be accessedand used. as the worldõs largest producer and disseminator of s&t data, the u.s.government has significant leverage in negotiating appropriate terms for the exchange and use of public data with other nations.at the same time, the committee agrees with the administrationõs concernsregarding the e.u. directiveõs reciprocity provision and supports the u.s. traderepresentativeõs (ustrõs) placement of that topic on the administrationõs 1998special 301 review.103 the committee would go one step further, however, andsuggest that the ustr and other appropriate entities within the administrationnegotiate with the commission of the european communities to review andrevise its e.u. directive, based on the substantial criticisms of that new legalregime in this report and in other position statements and articles cited above. ifthe u.s. congress enacts a new database protection statute based on properlybalanced unfair competition principles, the committee urges the ustr, the u.s.patent and trademark office, and other appropriate administration officials to101 for example, for a comprehensive listing of most internationally available data sets fromspace missions, see the nasa goddard space flight centerõs national space science data centerhome page online at <nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov>. for a listing of many international web sites coveringall aspects of earth science data, see the nasa global change master directory online at <http://gcmd.gsfc.nasa.gov/pointers/pointwais.html>.102 for a discussion of some of the large international research programs, see national researchcouncil (1997), bits of power, note 49, pp. 5861.103 see pincus statement, march 18, 1999, hearing, note 7, p. 33.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment and recommendations109promote that statute as a model for international database protection within theworld intellectual property organization.the committee recommends that all departments and agencies of thefederal government should continue to adopt international s&t agreementsthat include provisions to facilitate access to s&t data across national boundaries and should conduct periodic reviews of international policies and agreements to promote conformity to the above principles.in addition, the committee recommends that the u.s. government shouldnegotiate with the commission of the european communities to revise itshighly protectionist e.u. database directive.recommended approach for the notforprofitscientific and technical communityfinally, there is the question of what the research and education communityshould do in the event that highly restrictive statutory protection of databases isenacted by congress. certainly, leaders in all the major notforprofit research,higher education, and library associations and in many individual institutionshave voiced their concerns about the legislative proposals that have been introduced in the committee on the judiciary in the house of representatives in boththe 105th and 106th congress.104 as the various critics and this report point out,such a new statutory regime could have many negative effects, among themsignificant changes in the terms for access to and use of databases sold or licensedby the commercial sector, the possibility of increased economic exploitation on aproprietary basis of heretofore openly available s&t databases by notforprofitresearchers and educators and their institutions, and the stimulation of furtherprivatization of such publicgood activities by the government.the question thus raised is what actions the notforprofit community shouldtake on its own behalf if restrictive new provisions are enacted that encourage orexacerbate these negative effects. proponents of new legislation rightly point outthat any new law would not require individuals or organizations to make use ofthe new protections, and that if the notforprofits are concerned about these legaldevelopments as a matter of principle, they should resist the temptation to adoptproprietary restrictions on their databases. the committee agrees that much ofthe responsibility for maintaining a policy of full and open data availability in theacademic community rests with the community, which will have to act to ensurecontinuation of the broad sharing of data and research results. nevertheless, the104 see the testimony given by wulf, reichman, and neal at the october 23, 1997, hearing, note8; by stewart at the february 12, 1998, hearing, note 9; and by lederberg, phelps, and neal at themarch 18, 1999, hearing, note 29. see also the position statement signed by representatives of manyof these organizations, note 7.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110a question of balancecommittee also believes that the pressures to commercialize and privatize currently open data sources would increase inevitably under a regime such as thee.u. directive or the one proposed by h.r. 354, and that fully maintaining thecustomary or traditional approaches to data exchange would prove to be difficult.in the event that the universe of public domain s&t data is found to be shrinkingunacceptably, additional defensive measures may have to be taken to reinvigoratea robust publicinterest sector for such data.therefore, as its last recommendation, the committee urges that the notforprofit s&t community continue to promote and adhere to the policy offull and open exchange of data at both the national and international levels.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.111appendixesa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.113appendix abiographical sketches ofcommittee members113study committeerobert j. serafin (chair) is the director of the national center foratmospheric research (ncar). dr. serafin began his career at hazeltine research corporation where he worked on the design and development of highresolution radar systems. this was followed by 10 years at the iit researchinstitute and illinois institute of technology. he then joined ncar as managerof the field observing facility in 1973 and in 1980 became director of theatmospheric technology division, which is responsible for all of ncarõs observational research and research support facilities, used by scientists in universities and laboratories throughout the world. in 1989 he was appointed as ncarõsdirector. the holder of three patents, dr. serafin has published approximately 50technical and scientific papers and established the journal of atmospheric andoceanic technology, and was its coeditor for several years. he has served onseveral national research council (nrc) panels and committees, and he chairedthe nrc committee on national weather service modernization. he is a member of the national academy of engineering, a fellow of the american meteorological society, and a senior member of the institute of electrical and electronicsengineers. dr. serafin received his bs, ms, and phd degrees in electricalengineering from notre dame university, northwestern university, and illinoisinstitute of technology, respectively.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114appendix ai. trotter hardy is professor of law at the college of william &mary school of law, where he specializes in intellectual property law, law andcomputers, and tort law. he recently wrote a major report, òsketching the futureof copyright in a networked world,ó for the copyright office and has publishedextensively on issues relating to intellectual property law in the digital environment. mr. hardy holds a ba from the university of virginia, an ms fromamerican university, and a jd from duke university, order of the coif.maureen c. kelly is vice president for planning at biosis, the largest abstracting and indexing service for the life sciences community. she hasworked in different capacities for biosis since 1969. previously she had production responsibility for the bibliographic and scientific content of biosisproducts. while in that position, she led the team that developed the system forcapturing and managing indexing data in support of biosisõs new relationalindexing. ms. kelly has authored a number of papers on managing and accessingbiological information. she is currently secretary of the american associationfor the advancement of science section on information, computing, and communication. she has served on various professional society research and publishing committees, including participating in the national academy of sciences ejournal summit meetings over the past two years. ms. kelly has a ba degreefrom rutgers university.peter r. leavitt is a consultant and former chairman and chief executive officer of weather services corp., where he has developed online realtimemeteorological databases for national and international agricultural and commodity services. he has a bs in meteorology from the massachusetts institute oftechnology. mr. leavitt served previously on two nrc committees, as well ason several government advisory committees regarding data use and researchissues in meteorology.lee e. limbird is associate vice chancellor for research at vanderbiltuniversity and chair of the department of pharmacology. her responsibilities asassociate vice chancellor include development of new intra and interinstitutionalinitiatives for research, with a focus on research development in genetics andgenomics; neuroscience; and structural biology, broadly defined to include biophysics and bioengineering. the office of grants management and technologytransfer also represents areas of her responsibility. dr. limbird received a ba inchemistry from the college of wooster and a phd in biochemistry from theuniversity of north carolina. her area of research has been in the molecularpathways of signal transduction by g proteincoupled receptors using biochemical, cellular, and genetic strategies, including genetically modified mice.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a115philip loftus is vice president and director of worldwide informationservices architecture and technology for glaxo wellcome where he is responsible for both the information services infrastructure and global information management. from 1996 to 1998, he served as vice president and director of worldwide r&d information systems and was responsible for developing andimplementing a global information system strategy for r&d. prior to that, hewas executive director for research information systems at merck researchlaboratories, and from 1976 to 1993 he was a vice president for r&d information systems and a computational scientist at ici. dr. loftus has a bsc inchemistry and a phd in conformational isomerism from the university ofliverpool, and he was a fullbright hayes postdoctoral fellow at the californiainstitute of technology in 19741975. he holds a postgraduate certificate ineducation from the university of liverpool. he has published extensively in thearea of information technology applications for pharmaceutical research.harlan j. onsrud is professor in the department of spatial information science and engineering at the university of maine and a research scientistwith the national center for geographic information and analysis (ncgia). hereceived bs and ms degrees in civil engineering from the university of wisconsin and a jd from the university of wisconsin law school. his research focuseson (1) analysis of legal and institutional issues affecting the creation and use ofdigital databases and the sharing of geographic information, (2) assessing utilization of gis and the social impacts of the technology, and (3) developing andassessing strategies for supporting the diffusion of geographic information innovations. mr. onsrud has coled major multiyear ncgia research initiatives onthe use and value of geographic information, institutions sharing geographicinformation, and law, information policy, and spatial databases. mr. onsrud is alicensed engineer, lawyer, and land surveyor.harvey s. perlman is a professor of law and former dean of theuniversity of nebraska college of law. he is an expert in trademark law andunfair competition law. in addition to writing many articles in these areas, mr.perlman has coauthored legal regulation of the competitive process: cases,materials and notes on unfair business practices, which is now in its sixthedition under the title intellectual property and unfair competition (1998). healso was the coreporter for the american law instituteõs restatement (third) ofunfair competition and is a member of the national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws, which has been considering changes to the uniformcommercial code article 2(b) regarding private contracts for intellectual property. mr. perlman received his ba and jd from the university of nebraska in1963 and 1966, respectively.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116appendix aroberta p. saxon is a patent agent at skjerven, morrill, macpherson,franklin & friel, llp, a law firm specializing in intellectual property in san jose,california. prior to that, she was director of the chemistry laboratory at sriinternational, where she supervised research in advanced materials, atmosphericchemistry, computational chemistry, and atomic, molecular, and optical physicsand performed research in those areas for more than 20 years. dr. saxon has aba in chemistry from cornell university and an ms and a phd in chemicalphysics from the university of chicago. she is vice chair of the panel on publicaffairs for the american physical society, and she previously served on an nrcstudy for a research strategy for atomic, molecular, and optical sciences.suzanne scotchmer is a professor of economics and public policy atthe university of california, berkeley. her broad fields of research are in economic theory and industrial organization, with current emphasis on intellectualproperty, particularly as it relates to cumulative innovations, digital content, anddecentralized mechanisms by which firms share information. dr. scotchmerreceived her phd in economics from the university of california, berkeley in1980 and her ma in statistics in 1979.mark stefik is a principal scientist at the xerox palo alto researchcenter, where he focuses on trusted system approaches for creating, protecting,and reusing digital property in the network context. his current and past researchactivities include research on reasoning with constraints, and paradigms of programming, as well as applications of artificial intelligence and computer scienceto problems in molecular genetics, vlsi circuit design, configuration of computer systems, and systems for supporting collaborative processes in work groups.dr. stefikõs book, internet dreams: archetypes, myths, and metaphors, waspublished by mit press in 1996. dr. stefik received his bs and phd fromstanford university.martha e. williams is director of the information retrieval research lab and a professor of information science at the university of illinois aturbanachampaign. her research interests include digital database management,online retrieval systems, systems analysis and design, chemical information systems, and electronic publishing. she has published widely on these topics andhas been editor of the annual review of information sciences and technology(since 1975), computer readable databases: a directory & data sourcebook(19761987), and online review (since 1977). professor williams was chair ofthe board of engineering information, inc., from 1980 to 1988, was appointed tothe national library of medicineõs board of regents from 1978 to 1981 andserved as chair of the board in 1981. in addition, she served on several nrccommittees, including the numerical data advisory board (19791982). she hasan ab from barat college and an ma from loyola university.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a117study directorpaul f. uhlir is director of international scientific and technical information programs at the u.s. national academy of sciences/national researchcouncil (national academies) in washington, d.c., where he directs science andtechnology policy studies for the federal government. his current area of emphasis is issues at the interface of science, technology, and law, with primary focuson scientific data and information policy, and on the relationship of intellectualproperty law to r&d policy. mr. uhlir is also director of the u.s. nationalcommittee for codata. from 1991 to 1998, he was associate executive director of the commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications, andfrom 1985 to 1991 he was senior program officer at the space studies board,where he worked on solar system exploration and earth remote sensing studiesfor nasa. before joining the national academies, he was a foreign affairsofficer at the national oceanic and atmospheric administration in the department of commerce, where he worked on meteorological and land remote sensinglaw and policy issues. he is the author or editor of more than 50 books, reports,and articles. mr. uhlir has a ba in history from the university of oregon, and ajd and an ma in international relations from the university of san diego.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118workshop agendathursday, january 148:00 amcontinental breakfast8:30a. introductory remarksrobert serafin, study chair8:45keynote addressq. todd dickinsoncommissioner of patents and trademarks (acting), department ofcommerceb. summary of s&t databases to be discussed at the workshop9:00geographic data panelmoderator: harlan onsrud, associate professor, university of maine¥governmentsector data activity: barbara ryan, associatedirector for operations, u.s. geological survey, departmentof the interiorappendix bworkshop agenda and participantsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b119¥notforprofit sector data activity: james brunt, associatedirector for information management, longterm ecologicalresearch network office, university of new mexico1¥commercialsector data activity: barry glick, former presidentand ceo, geosystems global corp.9:45genomic data panelmoderator: philip loftus, vice president and director, glaxo wellcome¥governmentsector data activity: james ostell, chief,information engineering branch, national center forbiotechnology information, national library of medicine,national institutes of health¥notforprofitsector data activity: chris overton, director,center for bioinformatics, university of pennsylvania¥commercialsector data activity: myra williams, president andceo, molecular applications group10:30break10:45chemical and chemical engineering data panelmoderator: roberta saxon, patent agent, skjerven, morrill,macpherson, et al.¥governmentsector data activity: richard kayser, chief, physicaland chemical properties division, national institute of standardsand technology, department of commerce¥notforprofitsector data activity: james lohr, director,information industry relations, chemical abstracts service,american chemical society¥commercialsector data activity: leslie singer, president, isi, inc.11:30meteorological data panelmoderator: robert serafin, director, national center for atmosphericresearch¥governmentsector data activity: ken hadeen, director (retired),national climatic data center, national oceanic andatmospheric administration, department of commerce¥notforprofitsector data activity: david fulker, director,unidata program, university corporation for atmosphericresearch1 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix b¥commercialsector data activity: robert brammer, vicepresident and chief technology officer, tasc12:15 pmlunch1:15c. economic factors in production/dissemination/use of s&tdatabases in the public and private sectorsmoderator:suzanne scotchmer, professor, uc berkeleyspeaker:richard gilbert, professor, uc berkeley2:15d. overview of technologies for protecting and misappropriatingdigital ipr: the current situation and future prospectsmoderator:mark stefik, principal scientist, xerox parcspeaker:teresa lunt, principal scientist, xerox parc (by video)2:45break3:00e.1 summary overview of existing and proposed ipr regimesfor databases¥the status quo¥sui generis property rights model¥unfair competition/misappropriation modelmoderator:harvey perlman, professor, college of law, universityof nebraskaspeaker:marybeth peters, register of copyrights, library ofcongress3:45e.2 summary of federal government information law and datapoliciesspeaker:justin hughes, attorney, patent and trademark office,department of commerce4:00f. breakout sessions on the existing legal and technical situation4:15individual breakout sessions1) governmentsector data panelmoderator:shelton alexander, professor, pennsylvania stateuniversityrapporteur:suzanne scotchmer, professor, uc berkeleypanelists:¥barbara ryan, associate director of operations,u.s. geological surveya question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b121¥james ostell, chief, information engineeringbranch, national center for biotechnologyinformation, nlm/nih¥richard kayser, chief, physical and chemicalproperties division, national institute of standardsand technology¥kenneth hadeen, director (retired), nationalclimatic data center2) notforprofitsector data panelmoderator:maureen kelly, vice president for planning, biosisrapporteur:jerome reichman, professor, vanderbilt universityschool of lawpanelists:¥james brunt, associate director for informationmanagement, longterm ecological researchnetwork office, university of new mexico2¥chris overton, director, center for bioinformatics,university of pennsylvania¥james lohr, director, information industryrelations, chemical abstracts service, americanchemical society¥david fulker, director, unidata program, ucar3) commercialsector data panelmoderator:robert serafin, director, national center foratmospheric researchrapporteur:mark stefik, principal scientist, xerox parcpanelists:¥barry glick, former president and ceo,geosystems global corp.¥myra williams, president and ceo, molecularapplications group¥leslie singer, president, isi, inc.¥robert brammer, vice president and chieftechnology officer, tasc5:45adjourn5:45 6:45 pmreception2 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix bfriday, january 158:00 amcontinental breakfast8:30g. summary reports by rapporteurs from previous dayõsbreakouts9:20h. instructions by workshop chair and move to breakout rooms9:30i. breakout sessionssession 1:congress decides to enact a strong property rightsmodel protecting databasesmoderator:paul uhlir, study director, national research councilrapporteur:peter leavitt, consultantpanelists:¥ken hadeen, director (retired), national climaticdata center¥david fulker, director, unidata program, ucar¥robert brammer, vice president and chieftechnology officer, tasc¥jon baumgarten, attorney, proskauer rose llp¥peter jaszi, professor, american university schoolof law¥james neal, director, johns hopkins universitylibrary¥ferris webster, professor, university of delawaresession 2:congress decides to enact an unfair competitionmodel protecting databasesmoderator:harvey perlman, professor, college of law, universityof nebraskarapporteur:philip loftus, vice president and director, glaxowellcomepanelists:¥dennis benson, chief information resourcesbranch, national center for biotechnologyinformation, nlm/nih¥chris overton, director, center for bioinformatics,university of pennsylvania¥myra williams, president and ceo, molecularapplications group¥michael klipper, attorney, meyer & klipper, pllc¥jonathan band, attorney, morrison & foerster, llpa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b123¥thomas rindfleisch, director, medical library,stanford universitysession 3:promoting access to and use of government s&tdata for the public interestñan assessment of legal and policyoptionsmoderator:harlan onsrud, associate professor, university of mainerapporteur:shelton alexander, professor, pennsylvania stateuniversitypanelists:¥barbara ryan, associate director for operations,u.s. geological survey3¥james brunt, associate director for informationmanagement, longterm ecological researchnetwork office, university of new mexico4¥barry glick, former president and ceo,geosystems global corp.¥peter weiss, senior policy analyst, office ofmanagement and budget5¥prue adler, assistant executive director, federalrelations and information policy, association ofresearch libraries¥eric massant, director of government and industryaffairs, reed elsevier, inc.¥tim foresman, director, spatial analysis lab,university of maryland¥kenneth frazier, director, university of wisconsinlibrariessession 4:promoting access to and use of notforprofitsectors&t data for the public interestñan assessment of legal andpolicy optionsmoderator:martha williams, professor and director, informationretrieval research lab, university of illinois aturbanachampaignrapporteur:roberta saxon, patent agent, skjerven, morrill,macpherson et al.panelists:¥richard kayser, chief, physical and chemicalproperties division, nist3 ms. ryan was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.4 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.5 mr. weiss was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix b¥james lohr, director, information industryrelations, chemical abstracts service, americanchemical society¥leslie singer, president, isi, inc.¥allan adler, vice president for governmental andlegislative affairs, association of americanpublishers, inc.6¥jerome reichman, professor, vanderbilt universityschool of law¥r. stephen berry, professor, university of chicago10:45break11:00breakout session discussions (continued)12:45 pmlunch1:45j. rapporteursõ summary of breakout panel results2:45discussion of results with workshop participants3:45k. concluding remarksrobert serafin, chair4:00 pmend of public workshopworkshop participantsallan adler, association of american publishers, inc.prue adler, association of research librariesshelton alexander, pennsylvania state universitydave applegate (affiliation unknown)christopher ashley, national science foundationmary baish, american association of lawjonathan band, morrison & foerster, llpwinona barker, national biomedical research foundationed barron, senate committee on the judiciarybarbara bauldock, u.s. geological surveyjon baumgarten, proskauer rose, llp6 mr. adler was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b125dennis benson, national library of mediciner. stephen berry, university of chicagorobert brammer, tasclisa brooks, national institutes of healthfrancis buckley, jr., u.s. government printing officemark burnham, california institute of technologybonnie carroll, information international associates, inc.william cohen, federal trade commissionkathy covert, federal geographic data committeekaren dacres, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationjudge edward damich, u.s. court of federal claimsmatthew davis (affiliation unknown)deveny deck, vanderbilt universitypaul degiusti, information industry associationq. todd dickinson, u.s. patent and trademark officeanita eisenstadt, national science foundationadam eisgrau, american library associationjulie esanu, national research councilbob etkins, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationeric fischer, library of congresspeter folger, american geophysical uniontim foresman, university of marylandmark frankel, american association for the advancement of sciencekenneth frazier, university of wisconsin librariesdavid fulker, university corporation for atmospheric researchcarole ganzbrown, national science foundationrichard gilbert, university of california, berkeleypaul gilman, celera genomics, inc.barry glick, consultantkenneth hadeen, national climatic data center (retired)kelley heilman, maryland state department of healthstephen heinig, association of american medical collegesstephen heller, national institute of standards and technologymike hoffman (affiliation unknown)justin hughes, u.s. patent and trademark officepeter jaszi, american university school of lawbrian kahin, office of science and technology policyrichard kayser, national institute of standards and technologychris kelly, u.s. department of justicemaureen kelly, biosismichael keplinger, u.s. patent and trademark officeehsan khan, u.s. department of energymichael klipper, meyer & klipper, pllca question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix bmakoto kono, fujitsu, ltd.stephen koslow, national institute of mental healthpatrice laget, delegation of the european commissionrichard lambert, national institutes of healthcharles larson, industrial research institute, inc.peter leavitt, consultantrobert ledley, georgetown universitylynn levine, warren publishingdavid lide, consultantanne linn, national research counciljoan lippincott, coalition for networked informationphilip loftus, glaxo wellcomejames lohr, chemical abstracts servicejoe martinez, u.s. department of energyeric massant, reed elsevier, inc.stephen maurer, attorneygilles mcdougall, industry canadabruce mcdowell, national academy of public administrationshelia mcgarr (affiliation unknown)theodore miles, national science foundationjohn moeller, u.s. geological surveychristopher mohr, meyer & klipper, pllckurt molholm, defense technical information centerjames neal, johns hopkins university libraryjudge pauline newman, u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuitgoetz oertel, association of universities for research in astronomyharlan onsrud, university of mainejames ostell, national institutes of healthg. christian overton, university of pennsylvaniabob palmer, u.s. house of representativesharvey perlman, university of nebraskashira perlmutter, u.s. copyright officemarybeth peters, u.s. copyright officelarry pettinger, u.s. geological surveytony reichardt, naturejerome reichman, vanderbilt university school of lawthomas rindfleisch, stanford universityhedy rossmeissl, u.s. geological surveyjohn rumble, national institute of standards and technologybarbara ryan, u.s. geological surveycarolina saez, u.s. copyright officeroberta saxon, skjerven, morrill, macpherson, franklin & friel, llpterri scanlan, national research councila question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b127jean schirozavela, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationharold schoolman, national library of medicinesuzanne scotchmer, university of california, berkeleyrobert serafin, national center for atmospheric researchleslie singer, institute for scientific information, inc.mark smith, american association of university professorsmark stefik, xerox palo alto research centercharles sturrock, national institute of standards and technologyambassador james sweeney, consultantmargaret thomson, u.s. department of energypaul uhlir, national research counciljohn vaughn, association of american universitiesferris webster, university of delawarepeter weiss, office of management and budgetpamela whitney, national research councilmartha williams, university of illinois at urbanachampaignmyra williams, molecular applications groupjames wilson, house committee on sciencerichard witmer, u.s. geological surveybarbara wright, national research councilsusan zevin, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128part iñworkshop presentations1introductory remarksrobert serafin2keynote addressq. todd dickinson3characteristics of scientific and technical databasesgeographic data panelgenomic data panelchemical and chemical engineering data panelmeteorological data panel4economic factors in the production, dissemination, anduse of scientific and technical databasesrichard gilbertappendix cworkshop proceedingsñlisting of contentsnote: for the full text of the committeeõs proceedings, see national research council (1999),proceedings of the workshop on promoting access to scientific and technical data for the publicinterest: an assessment of policy options, national academy press, washington, d.c., availableonly online at < http://www.nap.edu>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1295overview of technologies for protecting and for misappropriatingdigital intellectual property rights: the current situation andfuture prospectsmark stefik and teresa lunt6legal and policy issuessummary overview of existing and proposed intellectual property rightsregimes for databases, marybeth peterssummary of federal government information law and datapolicies, justin hughespart iiñdiscussion sessions on the current legal and technical situation7governmentsector data8notforprofitsector data9commercialsector datapart iiiñdiscussion sessions on the potential impacts of legislation andassessments of policy options10a strong property rights model for protecting databases11an unfair competition model for protecting databases12promoting access to and use of governmentsector scientific andtechnical datañan assessment of legal and policy options13promoting access to and use of notforprofitsector scientific andtechnical data for the public interestñan assessment of legal andpolicy options14final plenary discussionappendixesabiographical sketches of study committee and workshop speakers andpanelistsbworkshop agenda and participantscraw knowledge: protecting technical databases for science and industry,stephen m. maurer, attorneyatlawdacronymsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130directive 96/9/ec of the european parliament and of the councilof 11 march 1996 on the legal protection of databasesthe european parliament and the council of the europeanunion,having regard to the treaty establishing the european community, and in particulararticle 57 (2), 66 and 100a thereof,having regard to the proposal from the commission (1),having regard to the opinion of the economic and social committee (2),acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in article 189b of the treaty (3),(1) whereas databases are at present not sufficiently protected in all member statesby existing legislation; whereas such protection, where it exists, has differentattributes;(2) whereas such differences in the legal protection of databases offered by thelegislation of the member states have direct negative effects on the functioning of theinternal market as regards databases and in particular on the freedom of natural andlegal persons to provide online database goods and services on the basis ofharmonized legal arrangements throughout the community; whereas such differencesappendix deuropean union directive on the legalprotection of databasesnote: an official version of this document can be found online at the eurlex web site at<http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/en/lif/dat/1996/en396l0009.html>.the material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic files available on theinternet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legal research or other workrequiring authenticated primary sources.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d131could well become more pronounced as member states introduce new legislation inthis field, which is now taking on an increasingly international dimension;(3) whereas existing differences distorting the functioning of the internal market needto be removed and new ones prevented from arising, while differences not adverselyaffecting the functioning of the internal market or the development of an informationmarket within the community need not be removed or prevented from arising;(4) whereas copyright protection for databases exists in varying forms in themember states according to legislation or caselaw, and whereas, if differences inlegislation in the scope and conditions of protection remain between the memberstates, such unharmonized intellectual property rights can have the effect ofpreventing the free movement of goods or services within the community;(5) whereas copyright remains an appropriate form of exclusive right for authorswho have created databases;(6) whereas, nevertheless, in the absence of a harmonized system ofunfaircompetition legislation or of caselaw, other measures are required in additionto prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of the contents of adatabase;(7) whereas the making of databases requires the investment of considerable human,technical and financial resources while such databases can be copied or accessed ata fraction of the cost needed to design them independently;(8) whereas the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of the contents of adatabase constitute acts which can have serious economic and technicalconsequences;(9) whereas databases are a vital tool in the development of an information marketwithin the community; whereas this tool will also be of use in many other fields;(10) whereas the exponential growth, in the community and worldwide, in theamount of information generated and processed annually in all sectors of commerceand industry calls for investment in all the member states in advanced informationprocessing systems;(11) whereas there is at present a very great imbalance in the level of investment inthe database sector both as between the member states and between thecommunity and the worldõs largest databaseproducing third countries;(12) whereas such an investment in modern information storage and processingsystems will not take place within the community unless a stable and uniform legalprotection regime is introduced for the protection of the rights of makers ofdatabases;(13) whereas this directive protects collections, sometimes called ôcompilationsõ, ofworks, data or other materials which are arranged, stored and accessed by meanswhich include electronic, electromagnetic or electrooptical processes or analogousprocesses;(14) whereas protection under this directive should be extended to covernonelectronic databases;(15) whereas the criteria used to determine whether a database should be protectedby copyright should be defined to the fact that the selection or the arrangement of thecontents of the database is the authorõs own intellectual creation; whereas suchprotection should cover the structure of the database;a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix d(16) whereas no criterion other than originality in the sense of the authorõs intellectualcreation should be applied to determine the eligibility of the database for copyrightprotection, and in particular no aesthetic or qualitative criteria should be applied;(17) whereas the term ôdatabaseõ should be understood to include literary, artistic,musical or other collections of works or collections of other material such as texts,sound, images, numbers, facts, and data; whereas it should cover collections ofindependent works, data or other materials which are systematically or methodicallyarranged and can be individually accessed; whereas this means that a recording or anaudiovisual, cinematographic, literary or musical work as such does not fall within thescope of this directive;(18) whereas this directive is without prejudice to the freedom of authors to decidewhether, or in what manner, they will allow their works to be included in a database,in particular whether or not the authorization given is exclusive; whereas theprotection of databases by the sui generis right is without prejudice to existing rightsover their contents, and whereas in particular where an author or the holder of arelated right permits some of his works or subject matter to be included in adatabase pursuant to a nonexclusive agreement, a third party may make use ofthose works or subject matter subject to the required consent of the author or of theholder of the related right without the sui generis right of the maker of the databasebeing invoked to prevent him doing so, on condition that those works or subjectmatter are neither extracted from the database nor reutilized on the basis thereof;(19) whereas, as a rule, the compilation of several recordings of musicalperformances on a cd does not come within the scope of this directive, bothbecause, as a compilation, it does not meet the conditions for copyright protectionand because it does not represent a substantial enough investment to be eligibleunder the sui generis right;(20) whereas protection under this directive may also apply to the materialsnecessary for the operation or consultation of certain databases such as thesaurusand indexation systems;(21) whereas the protection provided for in this directive relates to databases inwhich works, data or other materials have been arranged systematically ormethodically; whereas it is not necessary for those materials to have been physicallystored in an organized manner;(22) whereas electronic databases within the meaning of this directive may alsoinclude devices such as cdrom and cdi;(23) whereas the term ôdatabaseõ should not be taken to extend to computerprograms used in the making or operation of a database, which are protected bycouncil directive 91/250/eec of 14 may 1991 on the legal protection of computerprograms (4);(24) whereas the rental and lending of databases in the field of copyright and relatedrights are governed exclusively by council directive 92/100/eec of 19 november1992 on rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in thefield of intellectual property (5);(25) whereas the term of copyright is already governed by council directive93/98/eec of 29 october 1993 harmonizing the term of protection of copyright andcertain related rights (6);a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d133(26) whereas works protected by copyright and subject matter protected by relatedrights, which are incorporated into a database, remain nevertheless protected by therespective exclusive rights and may not be incorporated into, or extracted from, thedatabase without the permission of the rightholder or his successors in title;(27) whereas copyright in such works and related rights in subject matter thusincorporated into a database are in no way affected by the existence of a separateright in the selection or arrangement of these works and subject matter in a database;(28) whereas the moral rights of the natural person who created the database belongto the author and should be exercised according to the legislation of the memberstates and the provisions of the berne convention for the protection of literary andartistic works; whereas such moral rights remain outside the scope of this directive;(29) whereas the arrangements applicable to databases created by employees areleft to the discretion of the member states; whereas, therefore nothing in thisdirective prevents member states from stipulating in their legislation that where adatabase is created by an employee in the execution of his duties or following theinstructions given by his employer, the employer exclusively shall be entitled toexercise all economic rights in the database so created, unless otherwise provided bycontract;(30) whereas the authorõs exclusive rights should include the right to determine theway in which his work is exploited and by whom, and in particular to control thedistribution of his work to unauthorized persons;(31) whereas the copyright protection of databases includes making databasesavailable by means other than the distribution of copies;(32) whereas member states are required to ensure that their national provisionsare at least materially equivalent in the case of such acts subject to restrictions as areprovided for by this directive;(33) whereas the question of exhaustion of the right of distribution does not arise inthe case of online databases, which come within the field of provision of services;whereas this also applies with regard to a material copy of such a database made bythe user of such a service with the consent of the rightholder; whereas, unlikecdrom or cdi, where the intellectual property is incorporated in a materialmedium, namely an item of goods, every online service is in fact an act which willhave to be subject to authorization where the copyright so provides;(34) whereas, nevertheless, once the rightholder has chosen to make available acopy of the database to a user, whether by an online service or by other means ofdistribution, that lawful user must be able to access and use the database for thepurposes and in the way set out in the agreement with the rightholder, even if suchaccess and use necessitate performance of otherwise restricted acts;(35) whereas a list should be drawn up of exceptions to restricted acts, taking intoaccount the fact that copyright as covered by this directive applies only to theselection or arrangements of the contents of a database; whereas member statesshould be given the option of providing for such exceptions in certain cases; whereas,however, this option should be exercised in accordance with the berne conventionand to the extent that the exceptions relate to the structure of the database; whereasa distinction should be drawn between exceptions for private use and exceptions forreproduction for private purposes, which concerns provisions under nationallegislation of some member states on levies on blank media or recording equipment;a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix d(36) whereas the term ôscientific researchõ within the meaning of this directivecovers both the natural sciences and the human sciences;(37) whereas article 10 (1) of the berne convention is not affected by thisdirective;(38) whereas the increasing use of digital recording technology exposes thedatabase maker to the risk that the contents of his database may be copied andrearranged electronically, without his authorization, to produce a database ofidentical content which, however, does not infringe any copyright in the arrangementof his database;(39) whereas, in addition to aiming to protect the copyright in the original selectionor arrangement of the contents of a database, this directive seeks to safeguard theposition of makers of databases against misappropriation of the results of thefinancial and professional investment made in obtaining and collection [sic] the contentsby protecting the whole or substantial parts of a database against certain acts by a useror competitor;(40) whereas the object of this sui generis right is to ensure protection of anyinvestment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents of a database for thelimited duration of the right; whereas such investment may consist in the deploymentof financial resources and/or the expending of time, effort and energy;(41) whereas the objective of the sui generis right is to give the maker of a databasethe option of preventing the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents of that database; whereas the maker of a database isthe person who takes the initiative and the risk of investing; whereas this excludessubcontractors in particular from the definition of maker;(42) whereas the special right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilizationrelates to acts by the user which go beyond his legitimate rights and thereby harm theinvestment; whereas the right to prohibit extraction and/or reutilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents relates not only to the manufacture of a parasiticalcompeting product but also to any user who, through his acts, causes significantdetriment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the investment;(43) whereas, in the case of online transmission, the right to prohibit reutilization isnot exhausted either as regards the database or as regards a material copy of thedatabase or of part thereof made by the addressee of the transmission with theconsent of the rightholder;(44) whereas, when onscreen display of the contents of a database necessitates thepermanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of such contents toanother medium, that act should be subject to authorization by the rightholder;(45) whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization doesnot in any way constitute an extension of copyright protection to mere facts or data;(46) whereas the existence of a right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/orreutilization of the whole or a substantial part of works, data or materials from adatabase should not give rise to the creation of a new right in the works, data ormaterials themselves;(47) whereas, in the interests of competition between suppliers of informationproducts and services, protection by the sui generis right must not be afforded insuch a way as to facilitate abuses of a dominant position, in particular as regards thecreation and distribution of new products and services which have an intellectual,a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d135documentary, technical, economic or commercial added value; whereas, therefore,the provisions of this directive are without prejudice to the application of communityor national competition rules;(48) whereas the objective of this directive, which is to afford an appropriate anduniform level of protection of databases as a means to secure the remuneration of themaker of the database, is different from the aim of directive 95/46/ec of theeuropean parliament and of the council of 24 october 1995 on the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movementof such data (7), which is to guarantee free circulation of personal data on the basisof harmonized rules designed to protect fundamental rights, notably the right toprivacy which is recognized in article 8 of the european convention for theprotection of human rights and fundamental freedoms; whereas the provisions ofthis directive are without prejudice to data protection legislation;(49) whereas, notwithstanding the right to prevent extraction and/or reutilization ofall or a substantial part of a database, it should be laid down that the maker of adatabase or rightholder may not prevent a lawful user of the database from extractingand reutilizing insubstantial parts; whereas, however, that user may not unreasonablyprejudice either the legitimate interests of the holder of the sui generis right or theholder of copyright or a related right in respect of the works or subject mattercontained in the database;(50) whereas the member states should be given the option of providing forexceptions to the right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of asubstantial part of the contents of a database in the case of extraction for privatepurposes, for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, or whereextraction and/or reutilization are/is carried out in the interests of public security orfor the purposes of an administrative or judicial procedure; whereas such operationsmust not prejudice the exclusive rights of the maker to exploit the database and theirpurpose must not be commercial;(51) whereas the member states, where they avail themselves of the option topermit a lawful user of a database to extract a substantial part of the contents for thepurposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, may limit that permission tocertain categories of teaching or scientific research institution;(52) whereas those member states which have specific rules providing for a rightcomparable to the sui generis right provided for in this directive should be permittedto retain, as far as the new right is concerned, the exceptions traditionally specifiedby such rules;(53) whereas the burden of proof regarding the date of completion of the making ofa database lies with the maker of the database;(54) whereas the burden of proof that the criteria exist for concluding that asubstantial modification of the contents of a database is to be regarded as asubstantial new investment lies with the maker of the database resulting from suchinvestment;(55) whereas a substantial new investment involving a new term of protection mayinclude a substantial verification of the contents of the database;(56) whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization inrespect of a database should apply to databases whose makers are nationals orhabitual residents of third countries or to those produced by legal persons nota question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix destablished in a member state, within the meaning of the treaty, only if such thirdcountries offer comparable protection to databases produced by nationals of amember state or persons who have their habitual residence in the territory of thecommunity;(57) whereas, in addition to remedies provided under the legislation of the memberstates for infringements of copyright or other rights, member states should providefor appropriate remedies against unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of thecontents of a database;(58) whereas, in addition to the protection given under this directive to the structureof the database by copyright, and to its contents against unauthorized extractionand/or reutilization under the sui generis right, other legal provisions in the memberstates relevant to the supply of database goods and services continue to apply;(59) whereas this directive is without prejudice to the application to databasescomposed of audiovisual works of any rules recognized by a member stateõslegislation concerning the broadcasting of audiovisual programmes;(60) whereas some member states currently protect under copyright arrangementsdatabases which do not meet the criteria for eligibility for copyright protection laiddown in this directive; whereas, even if the databases concerned are eligible forprotection under the right laid down in this directive to prevent unauthorizedextraction and/or reutilization of their contents, the term of protection under thatright is considerably shorter than that which they enjoy under the nationalarrangements currently in force; whereas harmonization of the criteria for determiningwhether a database is to be protected by copyright may not have the effect ofreducing the term of protection currently enjoyed by the rightholders concerned;whereas a derogation should be laid down to that effect; whereas the effects of suchderogation must be confined to the territories of the member states concerned,have adopted this directive:chapter iscopearticle 1scope1. this directive concerns the legal protection of databases in any form.2. for the purposes of this directive, ôdatabaseõ shall mean a collection ofindependent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodicalway and individually accessible by electronic or other means.3. protection under this directive shall not apply to computer programs used in themaking or operation of databases accessible by electronic means.article 2limitations on the scopethis directive shall apply without prejudice to community provisions relating to:a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d137(a) the legal protection of computer programs;(b) rental right, lending right and certain rights related to copyright in the field ofintellectual property;(c) the term of protection of copyright and certain related rights.chapter iicopyrightarticle 3object of protection1. in accordance with this directive, databases which, by reason of the selection orarrangement of their contents, constitute the authorõs own intellectual creation shall beprotected as such by copyright. no other criteria shall be applied to determine theireligibility for that protection.2. the copyright protection of databases provided for by this directive shall notextend to their contents and shall be without prejudice to any rights subsisting inthose contents themselves.article 4database authorship1. the author of a database shall be the natural person or group of natural personswho created the base or, where the legislation of the member states so permits, thelegal person designated as the rightholder by that legislation.2. where collective works are recognized by the legislation of a member state, theeconomic rights shall be owned by the person holding the copyright.3. in respect of a database created by a group of natural persons jointly, theexclusive rights shall be owned jointly.article 5restricted actsin respect of the expression of the database which is protectable by copyright, theauthor of a database shall have the exclusive right to carry out or to authorize:(a) temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole orin part;(b) translation, adaptation, arrangement and any other alteration;(c) any form of distribution to the public of the database or of copies thereof. thefirst sale in the community of a copy of the database by the rightholder or with hisconsent shall exhaust the right to control resale of that copy within the community;(d) any communication, display or performance to the public;(e) any reproduction, distribution, communication, display or performance to thepublic of the results of the acts referred to in (b).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendix darticle 6exceptions to restricted acts1. the performance by the lawful user of a database or of a copy thereof of any ofthe acts listed in article 5 which is necessary for the purposes of access to thecontents of the databases and normal use of the contents by the lawful user shall notrequire the authorization of the author of the database. where the lawful user isauthorized to use only part of the database, this provision shall apply only to thatpart.2. member states shall have the option of providing for limitations on the rights setout in article 5 in the following cases:(a) in the case of reproduction for private purposes of a nonelectronic database;(b) where there is use for the sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenoncommercial purpose to be achieved;(c) where there is use for the purposes of public security of [sic] for the purposes of anadministrative or judicial procedure;(d) where other exceptions to copyright which are traditionally authorized undernational law are involved, without prejudice to points (a), (b) and (c).3. in accordance with the berne convention for the protection of literary andartistic works, this article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow itsapplication to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the rightholderõslegitimate interests or conflicts with normal exploitation of the database.chapter iiisui generis rightarticle 7object of protection1. member states shall provide for a right for the maker of a database which showsthat there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in eitherthe obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to prevent extraction and/orreutilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/orquantitatively, of the contents of that database.2. for the purposes of this chapter:(a) ôextractionõ shall mean the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantialpart of the contents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form;(b) ôreutilizationõ shall mean any form of making available to the public all or asubstantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, by renting,by online or other forms of transmission. the first sale of a copy of a databasewithin the community by the rightholder or with his consent shall exhaust the right tocontrol resale of that copy within the community;public lending is not an act of extraction or reutilization.3. the right referred to in paragraph 1 may be transferred, assigned or granted undercontractual licence.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d1394. the right provided for in paragraph 1 shall apply irrespective of the eligibility ofthat database for protection by copyright or by other rights. moreover, it shall applyirrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for protection by copyrightor by other rights. protection of databases under the right provided for in paragraph1 shall be without prejudice to rights existing in respect of their contents.5. the repeated and systematic extraction and/or reutilization of insubstantial partsof the contents of the database implying acts which conflict with a normal exploitationof that database or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the makerof the database shall not be permitted.article 8rights and obligations of lawful users1. the maker of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannermay not prevent a lawful user of the database from extracting and/or reutilizinginsubstantial parts of its contents, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, for anypurposes whatsoever. where the lawful user is authorized to extract and/or reutilizeonly part of the database, this paragraph shall apply only to that part.2. a lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in whatevermanner may not perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation of the databaseor unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker of the database.3. a lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in any mannermay not cause prejudice to the holder of a copyright or related right in respect of theworks or subject matter contained in the database.article 9exceptions to the sui generis rightmember states may stipulate that lawful users of a database which is made availableto the public in whatever manner may, without the authorization of its maker, extractor reutilize a substantial part of its contents:(a) in the case of extraction for private purposes of the contents of a nonelectronicdatabase;(b) in the case of extraction for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenoncommercial purpose to be achieved;(c) in the case of extraction and/or reutilization for the purposes of public security oran administrative or judicial procedure.article 10term of protection1. the right provided for in article 7 shall run from the date of completion of themaking of the database. it shall expire fifteen years from the first of january of theyear following the date of completion.2. in the case of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannerbefore expiry of the period provided for in paragraph 1, the term of protection bya question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix dthat right shall expire fifteen years from the first of january of the year following thedate when the database was first made available to the public.3. any substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the contents ofa database, including any substantial change resulting from the accumulation ofsuccessive additions, deletions or alterations, which would result in the databasebeing considered to be a substantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively orquantitatively, shall qualify the database resulting from that investment for its ownterm of protection.article 11beneficiaries of protection under the sui generis right1. the right provided for in article 7 shall apply to database [sic] whose makers orrightholders are nationals of a member state or who have their habitual residence inthe territory of the community.2. paragraph 1 shall also apply to companies and firms formed in accordance withthe law of a member state and having their registered office, central administrationor principal place of business within the community; however, where such acompany or firm has only its registered office in the territory of the community, itsoperations must be genuinely linked on an ongoing basis with the economy of amember state.3. agreements extending the right provided for in article 7 to databases made inthird countries and falling outside the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall beconcluded by the council acting on a proposal from the commission. the term ofany protection extended to databases by virtue of that procedure shall not exceedthat available pursuant to article 10.chapter ivcommon provisionsarticle 12remediesmember states shall provide appropriate remedies in respect of infringements of therights provided for in this directive.article 13continued application of other legal provisionsthis directive shall be without prejudice to provisions concerning in particularcopyright, rights related to copyright or any other rights or obligations subsisting inthe data, works or other materials incorporated into a database, patent rights, trademarks, design rights, the protection of national treasures, laws on restrictive practicesand unfair competition, trade secrets, security, confidentiality, data protection andprivacy, access to public documents, and the law of contract.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d141article 14application over time1. protection pursuant to this directive as regards copyright shall also be available inrespect of databases created prior to the date referred to article 16 (1) which onthat date fulfil the requirements laid down in this directive as regards copyrightprotection of databases.2. notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a database protected under copyrightarrangements in a member state on the date of publication of this directive does notfulfil the eligibility criteria for copyright protection laid down in article 3 (1), thisdirective shall not result in any curtailing in that member state of the remaining termof protection afforded under those arrangements.3. protection pursuant to the provisions of this directive as regards the right providedfor in article 7 shall also be available in respect of databases the making of whichwas completed not more than fifteen years prior to the date referred to in article 16(1) and which on that date fulfil the requirements laid down in article 7.4. the protection provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall be without prejudice toany acts concluded and rights acquired before the date referred to in thoseparagraphs.5. in the case of a database the making of which was completed not more thanfifteen years prior to the date referred to in article 16 (1), the term of protection bythe right provided for in article 7 shall expire fifteen years from the first of januaryfollowing that date.article 15binding nature of certain provisionsany contractual provision contrary to articles 6 (1) and 8 shall be null and void.article 16final provisions1. member states shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions necessary to comply with this directive before 1 january 1998.when member states adopt these provisions, they shall contain a reference to thisdirective or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their officialpublication. the methods of making such reference shall be laid down by memberstates.2. member states shall communicate to the commission the text of the provisions ofdomestic law which they adopt in the field governed by this directive.3. not later than at the end of the third year after the date referred to in paragraph 1,and every three years thereafter, the commission shall submit to the europeanparliament, the council and the economic and social committee a report on theapplication of this directive, in which, inter alia, on the basis of specific informationsupplied by the member states, it shall examine in particular the application of the suigeneris right, including articles 8 and 9, and shall verify especially whether thea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix dapplication of this right has led to abuse of a dominant position or other interferencewith free competition which would justify appropriate measures being taken,including the establishment of nonvoluntary licensing arrangements. wherenecessary, it shall submit proposals for adjustment of this directive in line withdevelopments in the area of databases.article 17this directive is addressed to the member states.done at strasbourg, 11 march 1996.for the european parliamentthe presidentk. h•nschfor the councilthe presidentl. dini(1) oj no c 156, 23. 6. 1992, p. 4 andoj no c 308, 15. 11. 1993, p. 1.(2) oj no c 19, 25. 1. 1993, p. 3.(3) opinion of the european parliament of 23 june 1993 (oj no c 194, 19. 7.1993, p. 144), common position of the council of 10 july 1995 (oj no c 288, 30.10. 1995, p. 14), decision of the european parliament of 14 december 1995 (ojno c 17, 22 1. 1996) and council decision of 26 february 1996.(4) oj no l 122, 17. 5. 1991, p. 42. directive as last amended by directive93/98/eec (oj no l 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.)(5) oj no l 346, 27. 11. 1992, p. 61.(6) oj no l 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.(7) oj no l 281, 23. 11. 1995, p. 31.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118workshop agendathursday, january 148:00 amcontinental breakfast8:30a. introductory remarksrobert serafin, study chair8:45keynote addressq. todd dickinsoncommissioner of patents and trademarks (acting), department ofcommerceb. summary of s&t databases to be discussed at the workshop9:00geographic data panelmoderator: harlan onsrud, associate professor, university of maine¥governmentsector data activity: barbara ryan, associatedirector for operations, u.s. geological survey, departmentof the interiorappendix bworkshop agenda and participantsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b119¥notforprofit sector data activity: james brunt, associatedirector for information management, longterm ecologicalresearch network office, university of new mexico1¥commercialsector data activity: barry glick, former presidentand ceo, geosystems global corp.9:45genomic data panelmoderator: philip loftus, vice president and director, glaxo wellcome¥governmentsector data activity: james ostell, chief,information engineering branch, national center forbiotechnology information, national library of medicine,national institutes of health¥notforprofitsector data activity: chris overton, director,center for bioinformatics, university of pennsylvania¥commercialsector data activity: myra williams, president andceo, molecular applications group10:30break10:45chemical and chemical engineering data panelmoderator: roberta saxon, patent agent, skjerven, morrill,macpherson, et al.¥governmentsector data activity: richard kayser, chief, physicaland chemical properties division, national institute of standardsand technology, department of commerce¥notforprofitsector data activity: james lohr, director,information industry relations, chemical abstracts service,american chemical society¥commercialsector data activity: leslie singer, president, isi, inc.11:30meteorological data panelmoderator: robert serafin, director, national center for atmosphericresearch¥governmentsector data activity: ken hadeen, director (retired),national climatic data center, national oceanic andatmospheric administration, department of commerce¥notforprofitsector data activity: david fulker, director,unidata program, university corporation for atmosphericresearch1 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix b¥commercialsector data activity: robert brammer, vicepresident and chief technology officer, tasc12:15 pmlunch1:15c. economic factors in production/dissemination/use of s&tdatabases in the public and private sectorsmoderator:suzanne scotchmer, professor, uc berkeleyspeaker:richard gilbert, professor, uc berkeley2:15d. overview of technologies for protecting and misappropriatingdigital ipr: the current situation and future prospectsmoderator:mark stefik, principal scientist, xerox parcspeaker:teresa lunt, principal scientist, xerox parc (by video)2:45break3:00e.1 summary overview of existing and proposed ipr regimesfor databases¥the status quo¥sui generis property rights model¥unfair competition/misappropriation modelmoderator:harvey perlman, professor, college of law, universityof nebraskaspeaker:marybeth peters, register of copyrights, library ofcongress3:45e.2 summary of federal government information law and datapoliciesspeaker:justin hughes, attorney, patent and trademark office,department of commerce4:00f. breakout sessions on the existing legal and technical situation4:15individual breakout sessions1) governmentsector data panelmoderator:shelton alexander, professor, pennsylvania stateuniversityrapporteur:suzanne scotchmer, professor, uc berkeleypanelists:¥barbara ryan, associate director of operations,u.s. geological surveya question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b121¥james ostell, chief, information engineeringbranch, national center for biotechnologyinformation, nlm/nih¥richard kayser, chief, physical and chemicalproperties division, national institute of standardsand technology¥kenneth hadeen, director (retired), nationalclimatic data center2) notforprofitsector data panelmoderator:maureen kelly, vice president for planning, biosisrapporteur:jerome reichman, professor, vanderbilt universityschool of lawpanelists:¥james brunt, associate director for informationmanagement, longterm ecological researchnetwork office, university of new mexico2¥chris overton, director, center for bioinformatics,university of pennsylvania¥james lohr, director, information industryrelations, chemical abstracts service, americanchemical society¥david fulker, director, unidata program, ucar3) commercialsector data panelmoderator:robert serafin, director, national center foratmospheric researchrapporteur:mark stefik, principal scientist, xerox parcpanelists:¥barry glick, former president and ceo,geosystems global corp.¥myra williams, president and ceo, molecularapplications group¥leslie singer, president, isi, inc.¥robert brammer, vice president and chieftechnology officer, tasc5:45adjourn5:45 6:45 pmreception2 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix bfriday, january 158:00 amcontinental breakfast8:30g. summary reports by rapporteurs from previous dayõsbreakouts9:20h. instructions by workshop chair and move to breakout rooms9:30i. breakout sessionssession 1:congress decides to enact a strong property rightsmodel protecting databasesmoderator:paul uhlir, study director, national research councilrapporteur:peter leavitt, consultantpanelists:¥ken hadeen, director (retired), national climaticdata center¥david fulker, director, unidata program, ucar¥robert brammer, vice president and chieftechnology officer, tasc¥jon baumgarten, attorney, proskauer rose llp¥peter jaszi, professor, american university schoolof law¥james neal, director, johns hopkins universitylibrary¥ferris webster, professor, university of delawaresession 2:congress decides to enact an unfair competitionmodel protecting databasesmoderator:harvey perlman, professor, college of law, universityof nebraskarapporteur:philip loftus, vice president and director, glaxowellcomepanelists:¥dennis benson, chief information resourcesbranch, national center for biotechnologyinformation, nlm/nih¥chris overton, director, center for bioinformatics,university of pennsylvania¥myra williams, president and ceo, molecularapplications group¥michael klipper, attorney, meyer & klipper, pllc¥jonathan band, attorney, morrison & foerster, llpa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b123¥thomas rindfleisch, director, medical library,stanford universitysession 3:promoting access to and use of government s&tdata for the public interestñan assessment of legal and policyoptionsmoderator:harlan onsrud, associate professor, university of mainerapporteur:shelton alexander, professor, pennsylvania stateuniversitypanelists:¥barbara ryan, associate director for operations,u.s. geological survey3¥james brunt, associate director for informationmanagement, longterm ecological researchnetwork office, university of new mexico4¥barry glick, former president and ceo,geosystems global corp.¥peter weiss, senior policy analyst, office ofmanagement and budget5¥prue adler, assistant executive director, federalrelations and information policy, association ofresearch libraries¥eric massant, director of government and industryaffairs, reed elsevier, inc.¥tim foresman, director, spatial analysis lab,university of maryland¥kenneth frazier, director, university of wisconsinlibrariessession 4:promoting access to and use of notforprofitsectors&t data for the public interestñan assessment of legal andpolicy optionsmoderator:martha williams, professor and director, informationretrieval research lab, university of illinois aturbanachampaignrapporteur:roberta saxon, patent agent, skjerven, morrill,macpherson et al.panelists:¥richard kayser, chief, physical and chemicalproperties division, nist3 ms. ryan was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.4 dr. brunt was unable to attend the workshop due to illness.5 mr. weiss was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix b¥james lohr, director, information industryrelations, chemical abstracts service, americanchemical society¥leslie singer, president, isi, inc.¥allan adler, vice president for governmental andlegislative affairs, association of americanpublishers, inc.6¥jerome reichman, professor, vanderbilt universityschool of law¥r. stephen berry, professor, university of chicago10:45break11:00breakout session discussions (continued)12:45 pmlunch1:45j. rapporteursõ summary of breakout panel results2:45discussion of results with workshop participants3:45k. concluding remarksrobert serafin, chair4:00 pmend of public workshopworkshop participantsallan adler, association of american publishers, inc.prue adler, association of research librariesshelton alexander, pennsylvania state universitydave applegate (affiliation unknown)christopher ashley, national science foundationmary baish, american association of lawjonathan band, morrison & foerster, llpwinona barker, national biomedical research foundationed barron, senate committee on the judiciarybarbara bauldock, u.s. geological surveyjon baumgarten, proskauer rose, llp6 mr. adler was unable to attend this session due to inclement weather.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b125dennis benson, national library of mediciner. stephen berry, university of chicagorobert brammer, tasclisa brooks, national institutes of healthfrancis buckley, jr., u.s. government printing officemark burnham, california institute of technologybonnie carroll, information international associates, inc.william cohen, federal trade commissionkathy covert, federal geographic data committeekaren dacres, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationjudge edward damich, u.s. court of federal claimsmatthew davis (affiliation unknown)deveny deck, vanderbilt universitypaul degiusti, information industry associationq. todd dickinson, u.s. patent and trademark officeanita eisenstadt, national science foundationadam eisgrau, american library associationjulie esanu, national research councilbob etkins, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationeric fischer, library of congresspeter folger, american geophysical uniontim foresman, university of marylandmark frankel, american association for the advancement of sciencekenneth frazier, university of wisconsin librariesdavid fulker, university corporation for atmospheric researchcarole ganzbrown, national science foundationrichard gilbert, university of california, berkeleypaul gilman, celera genomics, inc.barry glick, consultantkenneth hadeen, national climatic data center (retired)kelley heilman, maryland state department of healthstephen heinig, association of american medical collegesstephen heller, national institute of standards and technologymike hoffman (affiliation unknown)justin hughes, u.s. patent and trademark officepeter jaszi, american university school of lawbrian kahin, office of science and technology policyrichard kayser, national institute of standards and technologychris kelly, u.s. department of justicemaureen kelly, biosismichael keplinger, u.s. patent and trademark officeehsan khan, u.s. department of energymichael klipper, meyer & klipper, pllca question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix bmakoto kono, fujitsu, ltd.stephen koslow, national institute of mental healthpatrice laget, delegation of the european commissionrichard lambert, national institutes of healthcharles larson, industrial research institute, inc.peter leavitt, consultantrobert ledley, georgetown universitylynn levine, warren publishingdavid lide, consultantanne linn, national research counciljoan lippincott, coalition for networked informationphilip loftus, glaxo wellcomejames lohr, chemical abstracts servicejoe martinez, u.s. department of energyeric massant, reed elsevier, inc.stephen maurer, attorneygilles mcdougall, industry canadabruce mcdowell, national academy of public administrationshelia mcgarr (affiliation unknown)theodore miles, national science foundationjohn moeller, u.s. geological surveychristopher mohr, meyer & klipper, pllckurt molholm, defense technical information centerjames neal, johns hopkins university libraryjudge pauline newman, u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuitgoetz oertel, association of universities for research in astronomyharlan onsrud, university of mainejames ostell, national institutes of healthg. christian overton, university of pennsylvaniabob palmer, u.s. house of representativesharvey perlman, university of nebraskashira perlmutter, u.s. copyright officemarybeth peters, u.s. copyright officelarry pettinger, u.s. geological surveytony reichardt, naturejerome reichman, vanderbilt university school of lawthomas rindfleisch, stanford universityhedy rossmeissl, u.s. geological surveyjohn rumble, national institute of standards and technologybarbara ryan, u.s. geological surveycarolina saez, u.s. copyright officeroberta saxon, skjerven, morrill, macpherson, franklin & friel, llpterri scanlan, national research councila question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b127jean schirozavela, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationharold schoolman, national library of medicinesuzanne scotchmer, university of california, berkeleyrobert serafin, national center for atmospheric researchleslie singer, institute for scientific information, inc.mark smith, american association of university professorsmark stefik, xerox palo alto research centercharles sturrock, national institute of standards and technologyambassador james sweeney, consultantmargaret thomson, u.s. department of energypaul uhlir, national research counciljohn vaughn, association of american universitiesferris webster, university of delawarepeter weiss, office of management and budgetpamela whitney, national research councilmartha williams, university of illinois at urbanachampaignmyra williams, molecular applications groupjames wilson, house committee on sciencerichard witmer, u.s. geological surveybarbara wright, national research councilsusan zevin, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128part iñworkshop presentations1introductory remarksrobert serafin2keynote addressq. todd dickinson3characteristics of scientific and technical databasesgeographic data panelgenomic data panelchemical and chemical engineering data panelmeteorological data panel4economic factors in the production, dissemination, anduse of scientific and technical databasesrichard gilbertappendix cworkshop proceedingsñlisting of contentsnote: for the full text of the committeeõs proceedings, see national research council (1999),proceedings of the workshop on promoting access to scientific and technical data for the publicinterest: an assessment of policy options, national academy press, washington, d.c., availableonly online at < http://www.nap.edu>.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1295overview of technologies for protecting and for misappropriatingdigital intellectual property rights: the current situation andfuture prospectsmark stefik and teresa lunt6legal and policy issuessummary overview of existing and proposed intellectual property rightsregimes for databases, marybeth peterssummary of federal government information law and datapolicies, justin hughespart iiñdiscussion sessions on the current legal and technical situation7governmentsector data8notforprofitsector data9commercialsector datapart iiiñdiscussion sessions on the potential impacts of legislation andassessments of policy options10a strong property rights model for protecting databases11an unfair competition model for protecting databases12promoting access to and use of governmentsector scientific andtechnical datañan assessment of legal and policy options13promoting access to and use of notforprofitsector scientific andtechnical data for the public interestñan assessment of legal andpolicy options14final plenary discussionappendixesabiographical sketches of study committee and workshop speakers andpanelistsbworkshop agenda and participantscraw knowledge: protecting technical databases for science and industry,stephen m. maurer, attorneyatlawdacronymsa question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130directive 96/9/ec of the european parliament and of the councilof 11 march 1996 on the legal protection of databasesthe european parliament and the council of the europeanunion,having regard to the treaty establishing the european community, and in particulararticle 57 (2), 66 and 100a thereof,having regard to the proposal from the commission (1),having regard to the opinion of the economic and social committee (2),acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in article 189b of the treaty (3),(1) whereas databases are at present not sufficiently protected in all member statesby existing legislation; whereas such protection, where it exists, has differentattributes;(2) whereas such differences in the legal protection of databases offered by thelegislation of the member states have direct negative effects on the functioning of theinternal market as regards databases and in particular on the freedom of natural andlegal persons to provide online database goods and services on the basis ofharmonized legal arrangements throughout the community; whereas such differencesappendix deuropean union directive on the legalprotection of databasesnote: an official version of this document can be found online at the eurlex web site at<http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/en/lif/dat/1996/en396l0009.html>.the material presented in this appendix has been reprinted from electronic files available on theinternet and is intended for use as a general reference, and not for legal research or other workrequiring authenticated primary sources.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d131could well become more pronounced as member states introduce new legislation inthis field, which is now taking on an increasingly international dimension;(3) whereas existing differences distorting the functioning of the internal market needto be removed and new ones prevented from arising, while differences not adverselyaffecting the functioning of the internal market or the development of an informationmarket within the community need not be removed or prevented from arising;(4) whereas copyright protection for databases exists in varying forms in themember states according to legislation or caselaw, and whereas, if differences inlegislation in the scope and conditions of protection remain between the memberstates, such unharmonized intellectual property rights can have the effect ofpreventing the free movement of goods or services within the community;(5) whereas copyright remains an appropriate form of exclusive right for authorswho have created databases;(6) whereas, nevertheless, in the absence of a harmonized system ofunfaircompetition legislation or of caselaw, other measures are required in additionto prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of the contents of adatabase;(7) whereas the making of databases requires the investment of considerable human,technical and financial resources while such databases can be copied or accessed ata fraction of the cost needed to design them independently;(8) whereas the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of the contents of adatabase constitute acts which can have serious economic and technicalconsequences;(9) whereas databases are a vital tool in the development of an information marketwithin the community; whereas this tool will also be of use in many other fields;(10) whereas the exponential growth, in the community and worldwide, in theamount of information generated and processed annually in all sectors of commerceand industry calls for investment in all the member states in advanced informationprocessing systems;(11) whereas there is at present a very great imbalance in the level of investment inthe database sector both as between the member states and between thecommunity and the worldõs largest databaseproducing third countries;(12) whereas such an investment in modern information storage and processingsystems will not take place within the community unless a stable and uniform legalprotection regime is introduced for the protection of the rights of makers ofdatabases;(13) whereas this directive protects collections, sometimes called ôcompilationsõ, ofworks, data or other materials which are arranged, stored and accessed by meanswhich include electronic, electromagnetic or electrooptical processes or analogousprocesses;(14) whereas protection under this directive should be extended to covernonelectronic databases;(15) whereas the criteria used to determine whether a database should be protectedby copyright should be defined to the fact that the selection or the arrangement of thecontents of the database is the authorõs own intellectual creation; whereas suchprotection should cover the structure of the database;a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix d(16) whereas no criterion other than originality in the sense of the authorõs intellectualcreation should be applied to determine the eligibility of the database for copyrightprotection, and in particular no aesthetic or qualitative criteria should be applied;(17) whereas the term ôdatabaseõ should be understood to include literary, artistic,musical or other collections of works or collections of other material such as texts,sound, images, numbers, facts, and data; whereas it should cover collections ofindependent works, data or other materials which are systematically or methodicallyarranged and can be individually accessed; whereas this means that a recording or anaudiovisual, cinematographic, literary or musical work as such does not fall within thescope of this directive;(18) whereas this directive is without prejudice to the freedom of authors to decidewhether, or in what manner, they will allow their works to be included in a database,in particular whether or not the authorization given is exclusive; whereas theprotection of databases by the sui generis right is without prejudice to existing rightsover their contents, and whereas in particular where an author or the holder of arelated right permits some of his works or subject matter to be included in adatabase pursuant to a nonexclusive agreement, a third party may make use ofthose works or subject matter subject to the required consent of the author or of theholder of the related right without the sui generis right of the maker of the databasebeing invoked to prevent him doing so, on condition that those works or subjectmatter are neither extracted from the database nor reutilized on the basis thereof;(19) whereas, as a rule, the compilation of several recordings of musicalperformances on a cd does not come within the scope of this directive, bothbecause, as a compilation, it does not meet the conditions for copyright protectionand because it does not represent a substantial enough investment to be eligibleunder the sui generis right;(20) whereas protection under this directive may also apply to the materialsnecessary for the operation or consultation of certain databases such as thesaurusand indexation systems;(21) whereas the protection provided for in this directive relates to databases inwhich works, data or other materials have been arranged systematically ormethodically; whereas it is not necessary for those materials to have been physicallystored in an organized manner;(22) whereas electronic databases within the meaning of this directive may alsoinclude devices such as cdrom and cdi;(23) whereas the term ôdatabaseõ should not be taken to extend to computerprograms used in the making or operation of a database, which are protected bycouncil directive 91/250/eec of 14 may 1991 on the legal protection of computerprograms (4);(24) whereas the rental and lending of databases in the field of copyright and relatedrights are governed exclusively by council directive 92/100/eec of 19 november1992 on rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in thefield of intellectual property (5);(25) whereas the term of copyright is already governed by council directive93/98/eec of 29 october 1993 harmonizing the term of protection of copyright andcertain related rights (6);a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d133(26) whereas works protected by copyright and subject matter protected by relatedrights, which are incorporated into a database, remain nevertheless protected by therespective exclusive rights and may not be incorporated into, or extracted from, thedatabase without the permission of the rightholder or his successors in title;(27) whereas copyright in such works and related rights in subject matter thusincorporated into a database are in no way affected by the existence of a separateright in the selection or arrangement of these works and subject matter in a database;(28) whereas the moral rights of the natural person who created the database belongto the author and should be exercised according to the legislation of the memberstates and the provisions of the berne convention for the protection of literary andartistic works; whereas such moral rights remain outside the scope of this directive;(29) whereas the arrangements applicable to databases created by employees areleft to the discretion of the member states; whereas, therefore nothing in thisdirective prevents member states from stipulating in their legislation that where adatabase is created by an employee in the execution of his duties or following theinstructions given by his employer, the employer exclusively shall be entitled toexercise all economic rights in the database so created, unless otherwise provided bycontract;(30) whereas the authorõs exclusive rights should include the right to determine theway in which his work is exploited and by whom, and in particular to control thedistribution of his work to unauthorized persons;(31) whereas the copyright protection of databases includes making databasesavailable by means other than the distribution of copies;(32) whereas member states are required to ensure that their national provisionsare at least materially equivalent in the case of such acts subject to restrictions as areprovided for by this directive;(33) whereas the question of exhaustion of the right of distribution does not arise inthe case of online databases, which come within the field of provision of services;whereas this also applies with regard to a material copy of such a database made bythe user of such a service with the consent of the rightholder; whereas, unlikecdrom or cdi, where the intellectual property is incorporated in a materialmedium, namely an item of goods, every online service is in fact an act which willhave to be subject to authorization where the copyright so provides;(34) whereas, nevertheless, once the rightholder has chosen to make available acopy of the database to a user, whether by an online service or by other means ofdistribution, that lawful user must be able to access and use the database for thepurposes and in the way set out in the agreement with the rightholder, even if suchaccess and use necessitate performance of otherwise restricted acts;(35) whereas a list should be drawn up of exceptions to restricted acts, taking intoaccount the fact that copyright as covered by this directive applies only to theselection or arrangements of the contents of a database; whereas member statesshould be given the option of providing for such exceptions in certain cases; whereas,however, this option should be exercised in accordance with the berne conventionand to the extent that the exceptions relate to the structure of the database; whereasa distinction should be drawn between exceptions for private use and exceptions forreproduction for private purposes, which concerns provisions under nationallegislation of some member states on levies on blank media or recording equipment;a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix d(36) whereas the term ôscientific researchõ within the meaning of this directivecovers both the natural sciences and the human sciences;(37) whereas article 10 (1) of the berne convention is not affected by thisdirective;(38) whereas the increasing use of digital recording technology exposes thedatabase maker to the risk that the contents of his database may be copied andrearranged electronically, without his authorization, to produce a database ofidentical content which, however, does not infringe any copyright in the arrangementof his database;(39) whereas, in addition to aiming to protect the copyright in the original selectionor arrangement of the contents of a database, this directive seeks to safeguard theposition of makers of databases against misappropriation of the results of thefinancial and professional investment made in obtaining and collection [sic] the contentsby protecting the whole or substantial parts of a database against certain acts by a useror competitor;(40) whereas the object of this sui generis right is to ensure protection of anyinvestment in obtaining, verifying or presenting the contents of a database for thelimited duration of the right; whereas such investment may consist in the deploymentof financial resources and/or the expending of time, effort and energy;(41) whereas the objective of the sui generis right is to give the maker of a databasethe option of preventing the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents of that database; whereas the maker of a database isthe person who takes the initiative and the risk of investing; whereas this excludessubcontractors in particular from the definition of maker;(42) whereas the special right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilizationrelates to acts by the user which go beyond his legitimate rights and thereby harm theinvestment; whereas the right to prohibit extraction and/or reutilization of all or asubstantial part of the contents relates not only to the manufacture of a parasiticalcompeting product but also to any user who, through his acts, causes significantdetriment, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the investment;(43) whereas, in the case of online transmission, the right to prohibit reutilization isnot exhausted either as regards the database or as regards a material copy of thedatabase or of part thereof made by the addressee of the transmission with theconsent of the rightholder;(44) whereas, when onscreen display of the contents of a database necessitates thepermanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of such contents toanother medium, that act should be subject to authorization by the rightholder;(45) whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization doesnot in any way constitute an extension of copyright protection to mere facts or data;(46) whereas the existence of a right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/orreutilization of the whole or a substantial part of works, data or materials from adatabase should not give rise to the creation of a new right in the works, data ormaterials themselves;(47) whereas, in the interests of competition between suppliers of informationproducts and services, protection by the sui generis right must not be afforded insuch a way as to facilitate abuses of a dominant position, in particular as regards thecreation and distribution of new products and services which have an intellectual,a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d135documentary, technical, economic or commercial added value; whereas, therefore,the provisions of this directive are without prejudice to the application of communityor national competition rules;(48) whereas the objective of this directive, which is to afford an appropriate anduniform level of protection of databases as a means to secure the remuneration of themaker of the database, is different from the aim of directive 95/46/ec of theeuropean parliament and of the council of 24 october 1995 on the protection ofindividuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movementof such data (7), which is to guarantee free circulation of personal data on the basisof harmonized rules designed to protect fundamental rights, notably the right toprivacy which is recognized in article 8 of the european convention for theprotection of human rights and fundamental freedoms; whereas the provisions ofthis directive are without prejudice to data protection legislation;(49) whereas, notwithstanding the right to prevent extraction and/or reutilization ofall or a substantial part of a database, it should be laid down that the maker of adatabase or rightholder may not prevent a lawful user of the database from extractingand reutilizing insubstantial parts; whereas, however, that user may not unreasonablyprejudice either the legitimate interests of the holder of the sui generis right or theholder of copyright or a related right in respect of the works or subject mattercontained in the database;(50) whereas the member states should be given the option of providing forexceptions to the right to prevent the unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of asubstantial part of the contents of a database in the case of extraction for privatepurposes, for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, or whereextraction and/or reutilization are/is carried out in the interests of public security orfor the purposes of an administrative or judicial procedure; whereas such operationsmust not prejudice the exclusive rights of the maker to exploit the database and theirpurpose must not be commercial;(51) whereas the member states, where they avail themselves of the option topermit a lawful user of a database to extract a substantial part of the contents for thepurposes of illustration for teaching or scientific research, may limit that permission tocertain categories of teaching or scientific research institution;(52) whereas those member states which have specific rules providing for a rightcomparable to the sui generis right provided for in this directive should be permittedto retain, as far as the new right is concerned, the exceptions traditionally specifiedby such rules;(53) whereas the burden of proof regarding the date of completion of the making ofa database lies with the maker of the database;(54) whereas the burden of proof that the criteria exist for concluding that asubstantial modification of the contents of a database is to be regarded as asubstantial new investment lies with the maker of the database resulting from suchinvestment;(55) whereas a substantial new investment involving a new term of protection mayinclude a substantial verification of the contents of the database;(56) whereas the right to prevent unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization inrespect of a database should apply to databases whose makers are nationals orhabitual residents of third countries or to those produced by legal persons nota question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix destablished in a member state, within the meaning of the treaty, only if such thirdcountries offer comparable protection to databases produced by nationals of amember state or persons who have their habitual residence in the territory of thecommunity;(57) whereas, in addition to remedies provided under the legislation of the memberstates for infringements of copyright or other rights, member states should providefor appropriate remedies against unauthorized extraction and/or reutilization of thecontents of a database;(58) whereas, in addition to the protection given under this directive to the structureof the database by copyright, and to its contents against unauthorized extractionand/or reutilization under the sui generis right, other legal provisions in the memberstates relevant to the supply of database goods and services continue to apply;(59) whereas this directive is without prejudice to the application to databasescomposed of audiovisual works of any rules recognized by a member stateõslegislation concerning the broadcasting of audiovisual programmes;(60) whereas some member states currently protect under copyright arrangementsdatabases which do not meet the criteria for eligibility for copyright protection laiddown in this directive; whereas, even if the databases concerned are eligible forprotection under the right laid down in this directive to prevent unauthorizedextraction and/or reutilization of their contents, the term of protection under thatright is considerably shorter than that which they enjoy under the nationalarrangements currently in force; whereas harmonization of the criteria for determiningwhether a database is to be protected by copyright may not have the effect ofreducing the term of protection currently enjoyed by the rightholders concerned;whereas a derogation should be laid down to that effect; whereas the effects of suchderogation must be confined to the territories of the member states concerned,have adopted this directive:chapter iscopearticle 1scope1. this directive concerns the legal protection of databases in any form.2. for the purposes of this directive, ôdatabaseõ shall mean a collection ofindependent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodicalway and individually accessible by electronic or other means.3. protection under this directive shall not apply to computer programs used in themaking or operation of databases accessible by electronic means.article 2limitations on the scopethis directive shall apply without prejudice to community provisions relating to:a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d137(a) the legal protection of computer programs;(b) rental right, lending right and certain rights related to copyright in the field ofintellectual property;(c) the term of protection of copyright and certain related rights.chapter iicopyrightarticle 3object of protection1. in accordance with this directive, databases which, by reason of the selection orarrangement of their contents, constitute the authorõs own intellectual creation shall beprotected as such by copyright. no other criteria shall be applied to determine theireligibility for that protection.2. the copyright protection of databases provided for by this directive shall notextend to their contents and shall be without prejudice to any rights subsisting inthose contents themselves.article 4database authorship1. the author of a database shall be the natural person or group of natural personswho created the base or, where the legislation of the member states so permits, thelegal person designated as the rightholder by that legislation.2. where collective works are recognized by the legislation of a member state, theeconomic rights shall be owned by the person holding the copyright.3. in respect of a database created by a group of natural persons jointly, theexclusive rights shall be owned jointly.article 5restricted actsin respect of the expression of the database which is protectable by copyright, theauthor of a database shall have the exclusive right to carry out or to authorize:(a) temporary or permanent reproduction by any means and in any form, in whole orin part;(b) translation, adaptation, arrangement and any other alteration;(c) any form of distribution to the public of the database or of copies thereof. thefirst sale in the community of a copy of the database by the rightholder or with hisconsent shall exhaust the right to control resale of that copy within the community;(d) any communication, display or performance to the public;(e) any reproduction, distribution, communication, display or performance to thepublic of the results of the acts referred to in (b).a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendix darticle 6exceptions to restricted acts1. the performance by the lawful user of a database or of a copy thereof of any ofthe acts listed in article 5 which is necessary for the purposes of access to thecontents of the databases and normal use of the contents by the lawful user shall notrequire the authorization of the author of the database. where the lawful user isauthorized to use only part of the database, this provision shall apply only to thatpart.2. member states shall have the option of providing for limitations on the rights setout in article 5 in the following cases:(a) in the case of reproduction for private purposes of a nonelectronic database;(b) where there is use for the sole purpose of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenoncommercial purpose to be achieved;(c) where there is use for the purposes of public security of [sic] for the purposes of anadministrative or judicial procedure;(d) where other exceptions to copyright which are traditionally authorized undernational law are involved, without prejudice to points (a), (b) and (c).3. in accordance with the berne convention for the protection of literary andartistic works, this article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow itsapplication to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the rightholderõslegitimate interests or conflicts with normal exploitation of the database.chapter iiisui generis rightarticle 7object of protection1. member states shall provide for a right for the maker of a database which showsthat there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in eitherthe obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to prevent extraction and/orreutilization of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/orquantitatively, of the contents of that database.2. for the purposes of this chapter:(a) ôextractionõ shall mean the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantialpart of the contents of a database to another medium by any means or in any form;(b) ôreutilizationõ shall mean any form of making available to the public all or asubstantial part of the contents of a database by the distribution of copies, by renting,by online or other forms of transmission. the first sale of a copy of a databasewithin the community by the rightholder or with his consent shall exhaust the right tocontrol resale of that copy within the community;public lending is not an act of extraction or reutilization.3. the right referred to in paragraph 1 may be transferred, assigned or granted undercontractual licence.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d1394. the right provided for in paragraph 1 shall apply irrespective of the eligibility ofthat database for protection by copyright or by other rights. moreover, it shall applyirrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for protection by copyrightor by other rights. protection of databases under the right provided for in paragraph1 shall be without prejudice to rights existing in respect of their contents.5. the repeated and systematic extraction and/or reutilization of insubstantial partsof the contents of the database implying acts which conflict with a normal exploitationof that database or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the makerof the database shall not be permitted.article 8rights and obligations of lawful users1. the maker of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannermay not prevent a lawful user of the database from extracting and/or reutilizinginsubstantial parts of its contents, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, for anypurposes whatsoever. where the lawful user is authorized to extract and/or reutilizeonly part of the database, this paragraph shall apply only to that part.2. a lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in whatevermanner may not perform acts which conflict with normal exploitation of the databaseor unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the maker of the database.3. a lawful user of a database which is made available to the public in any mannermay not cause prejudice to the holder of a copyright or related right in respect of theworks or subject matter contained in the database.article 9exceptions to the sui generis rightmember states may stipulate that lawful users of a database which is made availableto the public in whatever manner may, without the authorization of its maker, extractor reutilize a substantial part of its contents:(a) in the case of extraction for private purposes of the contents of a nonelectronicdatabase;(b) in the case of extraction for the purposes of illustration for teaching or scientificresearch, as long as the source is indicated and to the extent justified by thenoncommercial purpose to be achieved;(c) in the case of extraction and/or reutilization for the purposes of public security oran administrative or judicial procedure.article 10term of protection1. the right provided for in article 7 shall run from the date of completion of themaking of the database. it shall expire fifteen years from the first of january of theyear following the date of completion.2. in the case of a database which is made available to the public in whatever mannerbefore expiry of the period provided for in paragraph 1, the term of protection bya question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix dthat right shall expire fifteen years from the first of january of the year following thedate when the database was first made available to the public.3. any substantial change, evaluated qualitatively or quantitatively, to the contents ofa database, including any substantial change resulting from the accumulation ofsuccessive additions, deletions or alterations, which would result in the databasebeing considered to be a substantial new investment, evaluated qualitatively orquantitatively, shall qualify the database resulting from that investment for its ownterm of protection.article 11beneficiaries of protection under the sui generis right1. the right provided for in article 7 shall apply to database [sic] whose makers orrightholders are nationals of a member state or who have their habitual residence inthe territory of the community.2. paragraph 1 shall also apply to companies and firms formed in accordance withthe law of a member state and having their registered office, central administrationor principal place of business within the community; however, where such acompany or firm has only its registered office in the territory of the community, itsoperations must be genuinely linked on an ongoing basis with the economy of amember state.3. agreements extending the right provided for in article 7 to databases made inthird countries and falling outside the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall beconcluded by the council acting on a proposal from the commission. the term ofany protection extended to databases by virtue of that procedure shall not exceedthat available pursuant to article 10.chapter ivcommon provisionsarticle 12remediesmember states shall provide appropriate remedies in respect of infringements of therights provided for in this directive.article 13continued application of other legal provisionsthis directive shall be without prejudice to provisions concerning in particularcopyright, rights related to copyright or any other rights or obligations subsisting inthe data, works or other materials incorporated into a database, patent rights, trademarks, design rights, the protection of national treasures, laws on restrictive practicesand unfair competition, trade secrets, security, confidentiality, data protection andprivacy, access to public documents, and the law of contract.a question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d141article 14application over time1. protection pursuant to this directive as regards copyright shall also be available inrespect of databases created prior to the date referred to article 16 (1) which onthat date fulfil the requirements laid down in this directive as regards copyrightprotection of databases.2. notwithstanding paragraph 1, where a database protected under copyrightarrangements in a member state on the date of publication of this directive does notfulfil the eligibility criteria for copyright protection laid down in article 3 (1), thisdirective shall not result in any curtailing in that member state of the remaining termof protection afforded under those arrangements.3. protection pursuant to the provisions of this directive as regards the right providedfor in article 7 shall also be available in respect of databases the making of whichwas completed not more than fifteen years prior to the date referred to in article 16(1) and which on that date fulfil the requirements laid down in article 7.4. the protection provided for in paragraphs 1 and 3 shall be without prejudice toany acts concluded and rights acquired before the date referred to in thoseparagraphs.5. in the case of a database the making of which was completed not more thanfifteen years prior to the date referred to in article 16 (1), the term of protection bythe right provided for in article 7 shall expire fifteen years from the first of januaryfollowing that date.article 15binding nature of certain provisionsany contractual provision contrary to articles 6 (1) and 8 shall be null and void.article 16final provisions1. member states shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions necessary to comply with this directive before 1 january 1998.when member states adopt these provisions, they shall contain a reference to thisdirective or shall be accompanied by such reference on the occasion of their officialpublication. the methods of making such reference shall be laid down by memberstates.2. member states shall communicate to the commission the text of the provisions ofdomestic law which they adopt in the field governed by this directive.3. not later than at the end of the third year after the date referred to in paragraph 1,and every three years thereafter, the commission shall submit to the europeanparliament, the council and the economic and social committee a report on theapplication of this directive, in which, inter alia, on the basis of specific informationsupplied by the member states, it shall examine in particular the application of the suigeneris right, including articles 8 and 9, and shall verify especially whether thea question of balance: private rights and the public interest in scientific and technical databasescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix dapplication of this right has led to abuse of a dominant position or other interferencewith free competition which would justify appropriate measures being taken,including the establishment of nonvoluntary licensing arrangements. wherenecessary, it shall submit proposals for adjustment of this directive in line withdevelopments in the area of databases.article 17this directive is addressed to the member states.done at strasbourg, 11 march 1996.for the european parliamentthe presidentk. h•nschfor the councilthe presidentl. dini(1) oj no c 156, 23. 6. 1992, p. 4 andoj no c 308, 15. 11. 1993, p. 1.(2) oj no c 19, 25. 1. 1993, p. 3.(3) opinion of the european parliament of 23 june 1993 (oj no c 194, 19. 7.1993, p. 144), common position of the council of 10 july 1995 (oj no c 288, 30.10. 1995, p. 14), decision of the european parliament of 14 december 1995 (ojno c 17, 22 1. 1996) and council decision of 26 february 1996.(4) oj no l 122, 17. 5. 1991, p. 42. directive as last amended by directive93/98/eec (oj no l 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.)(5) oj no l 346, 27. 11. 1992, p. 61.(6) oj no l 290, 24. 11. 1993, p. 9.(7) oj no l 281, 23. 11. 1995, p. 31.