detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9734summary of a workshop on information technology research forcrisis management104 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309067904 | doi 10.17226/9734committee on computing and communications research to enable better use ofinformation technology in government, commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applications, national research councilsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on computing and communications research to enablebetter use of information technology in governmentcomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.summary of a workshop oninformation technology research forcrisis managementsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved bythe governing board of the national research council, whose membersare drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, thenational academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. themembers of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation under grant eia9809120. any opinions, findings, conclusions, orrecommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors anddo not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsor.international standard book number 0309067901additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nw, box 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)(http://www.nap.edu)copyright 1999 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americasummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. williama. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on computing and communicationsresearch to enable better use of informationtechnology in governmentwilliam l. scherlis, carnegie mellon university, chairw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstdavid dewitt, university of wisconsin at madisonsusan dumais, microsoft researchwilliam eddy, carnegie mellon universityeve gruntfest, university of colorado at colorado springsdavid kehrlein, governorõs office of emergency services,state of californiasallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratorymichael r. nelson, ibmclifford neuman, information sciences institute, university ofsouthern californiastaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorjon eisenberg, program officer and study directorrita gaskins, project assistantivsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairfrances e. allen, ibm t.j. watson research centerjames chiddix, time warner cablejohn m. cioffi, stanford universityw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amhersta.g. (sandy) fraser, at&tsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjames gray, microsoft corporationpatrick m. hanrahan, stanford universityjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscobutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, interval researchjohn major, wireless knowledgetom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald norman, nielsen norman groupraymond ozzie, groove networksdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleylee sproull, boston universityleslie l. vadasz, intel corporationstaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistjerry r. sheehan, senior program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officergail pritchard, program officerjanet briscoe, office managerdavid drake, project assistantmargaret marsh, project assistantdavid padgham, project assistant (offsite)mickelle rodgers, senior project assistantsuzanne ossa, senior project assistantvsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.commission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationspeter m. banks, veridian erim international, inc., cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairwilliam f. ballhaus, jr., lockheed martin corp.shirley chiang, university of california at davismarshall h. cohen, california institute of technologyronald g. douglas, texas a&m universitysamuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc.jerry p. gollub, haverford collegemichael f. goodchild, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universitywesley t. huntress, jr., carnegie institutioncarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotajohn r. kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin co. (retired)marsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniadusa mcduff, state university of new york at stony brookjanet norwood, u.s. commissioner of labor statistics (retired)m. elisabeth pat…cornell, stanford universitynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryrobert j. spinrad, xerox parc (retired)norman metzger, executive director (through july 1999)myron f. uman, acting executive director (as of august 1999)visummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceas part of its new digital government program, the national sciencefoundation (nsf) requested that the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) undertake an indepth study of how informationtechnology research and development could more effectively supportadvances in the use of information technology in government. cstbõscommittee on computing and communications research to enable better use of information technology in government was established toorganize two specific applicationarea workshops and conduct a broaderstudy, based on these and other workshops, of how information technology research can enable improved and new government services, operations, and interactions with citizens.the committee was asked to identify ways to foster interaction amongcomputing and communications researchers, federal managers, and professionals in specific domains that can lead to collaborative research efforts. by establishing research links between these communities and creating testbeds aimed at meeting relevant requirements, nsf hopes tostimulate thinking in the computing and communications research community and throughout government about possibilities for advances intechnology that will support a variety of digital government initiatives.the first phase of the project focused on two illustrative applicationareas that are inherently governmental in natureñcrisis management andfederal statistics. the study committee convened two workshops to bringtogether stakeholders from the individual domains with researchers incomputing and communications systems. the workshops were designedviisummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceto facilitate interaction between the communities of stakeholders, providespecific feedback to mission agencies and nsf, and identify good examples of information technology research challenges that would alsoapply throughout the government. the first of these workshops, òresearch in information technology to support crisis management,ó washeld on december 12, 1998, in washington, d.c., and is summarized inthis volume. a second workshop, òinformation technology research forfederal statistics,ó was held february 910, 1999. the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), one of the participating agenciesin a federal interagency applications team addressing crisis management,1was a cosponsor of the studyõs workshop on crisis management.participants in the crisis management workshop were drawn fromthe information technology research, information technology researchmanagement, and crisis management communities (see appendix a).building on cstbõs earlier work,2 the workshop focused specifically onhow to move forward from the current technology baseline to futurepossibilities for addressing the information technology needs of crisismanagers through research. the workshop provided an opportunity forthese separate communities to interact and to learn how they might moreeffectively collaborate in developing improved systems to support crisismanagement in the long term.two keynote speeches outlined the status and current trends in thecrisis management and information technology research communities. aset of case studies (summarized in appendix b) and a subsequent panelexplored a range of ways in which information technology is currentlyused in crisis management and articulated a set of challenges to the fulldevelopment and exploitation of information technology for crisis management. the next panel described trends in key information technologiesñcomputing and storage information management, databases, wireless communications, and wearable computersñto establish a baselinefor defining future research efforts. through a set of parallel breakout1in february 1997, the federal information services and applications council (fisac) ofthe national science and technology councilõs computing information and communications research and development (cic r&d) subcommittee created an interagency applications team to address crises management. this group, now referred to as the informationtechnology for crisis management (itcm) team, was established to promote collaborations among federal, state, local, and international governmental organizations and othersectors of the economy in order to identify, develop, test, and implement computing, information, and communications technologies for crises management applications.2computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.computing and communications in the extreme. national academy press, washington, d.c.(summarized in appendix c).summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixsessions, workshop participants explored opportunities for collaborativeresearch between the information technology and crisis management communities and identified a set of important research topics. the workshopconcluded with panels that considered research management issues related to collaboration between the two communities and how the resultsof the workshop related to the broader context of digital government.this summary report is based on these presentations and discussions.the development of specific requirements is, of course, beyond thescope of a single workshop, and therefore this report cannot presume tobe a comprehensive analysis of the information technology requirementsposed by crisis management.3 nor is it an effort aimed at identifyingimmediate solutions (or ways of funding and deploying them). rather, itexamines opportunities for engaging the information technology researchand crisis management communities in longerterm research activities ofmutual interest and illustrates substantive and process issues relating tocollaboration between them.the organization and content of this report approximately follow thatof the workshop. for clarity of presentation, the committee has in severalinstances aggregated sessions in this reporting. also, where possible,related points drawn from throughout the workshop have been combined into consolidated discussions. in preparing this summary, the committee has drawn on the contributions of speakers, panelists, and participants in the workshop, who provided a rich set of illustrations of the roleof information technology in crisis management, issues regarding its use,possible research opportunities, and process and implementation issuesrelated to such research. workshop participants and reviewers of thereport provided clarification and additional examples subsequent to theworkshop. to these the committee has added some additional contextsetting material and examples. but this summary report remains primarily a reporting on the presentations and discussions at the workshop.synthesis of the workshop experience into a more general, broaderset of findings and recommendations for information technology researchin the digital government context is deferred to the main report from thiscommittee. this second phase of the project will draw on the two workshops organized by the study committee, as well as additional briefingsand other work on the topic of digital government, to develop a finalsynthesis report that will provide recommendations for refining the nsfõsdigital government program and providing more broadbased adviceacross the government in this arena.3the interagency itcm team is working to develop such requirements.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacesupport for this project came from nsf and nasa. the committeeacknowledges larry brandt of the nsf and anngienetta johnson of nasaalong with the other members of the interagency information technologyfor crisis management team for their encouragement and support of thisproject. this is a reporting of workshop discussions, and the committeethanks all participants for their insights expressed in the workshop presentations, discussions, breakout sessions, and subsequent interactions.the committee also wishes to thank the cstb staff for their assistancewith the workshop and the preparation of the report. jon eisenberg,cstb program officer, made significant contributions to the organizationof the workshop and the assembly of the report. his excellent facilitation,hard work, and valuable insights were pivotal in producing this report.jane bortnick griffith, interim cstb director in 1998, played a key role inhelping conceive and initiate this project. the committee also thanks ritagaskins, who assisted in organizing committee meetings, marshallingcommittee members, organizing the workshop, and preparing the report.finally, the committee is grateful to the reviewers for helping to sharpenand improve the report through their comments. responsibility for thereport remains with the committee.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs (nrcõs) report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid andcritical comments that will assist the authors and the nrc in making thepublished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the contents of the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation inthe review of this report:charles n. brownstein, corporation for national research initiatives,melvyn ciment, potomac institute for policy studies,david cowen, university of south carolina,david j. farber, university of pennsylvania,andrew c. gordon, university of washington,john r. harrald, george washington university,john d. hwang, city of los angeles information technology agency,david maier, oregon graduate institute,lois clark mccoy, national institute for urban search and rescue,thomas oõkeefe, california department of forestry andfire protection,xisummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiacknowledgment of reviewersjohn poindexter, syntek, andgio wiederhold, stanford university.although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests solely with the study committee and the nrc.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents1introduction1what is crisis management?, 2the response phase: difficult challenges forinformation technology, 5information technology users in crises, 6citizens, 6crisis responders, 6government and other crisis management organizations, 7business, 9information technology challenges and opportunities incrisis management, 10previous study, 10this workshop report, 112information technology trends relevantto crisis management13computing and storage, 13information management, 15databases, 17wireless communications, 19trends in wearable computers, 22xiiisummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontents3information technology researchopportunities25information management, 25information acquisition, 26integration and interoperability, 26data delivery, 29geographical information system performance, 29information for people, 29presenting and using information, 31supporting effective communications and coordination, 31supporting effective realtime decision makingunder uncertainty and stress, 32handling information overload, 33overcoming language and other barriers tocommunication, 34warning citizens at risk, 34learning from experience, 36using wearable computing, 37information infrastructure, 38robustness, 39infrastructure for citizens, 40modeling and simulation, 41role of modeling and simulation, 41research opportunities, 42electronic commerce, 44problems caused by the increased use of anddependence on electronic commerce, 44benefits of electronic commerce in crisis management, 45pitfalls of traditional electronic commerce incrisis management, 45research opportunities, 464achieving an impact in the crisismanagement community48interactions between the information technology researchand crisis management communities, 48management challenges to using information technologyin crisis management, 515the broader context: informationtechnology in government54information technology challenges across government, 58achieving innovation, 59summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvappendixesadetailed workshop agenda and participants65bbrief case studies of crises71csynopsis of the cstb report computing andcommunications in the extreme82summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11introductioncrises, whether natural disasters such as hurricanes or earthquakes,or humanmade disasters, such as terrorist attacks, are events with dramatic, sometimes catastrophic impact. natural disasters in the unitedstates and its territories were recently estimated as having taken a toll ofroughly 6,000 lives between 1975 and 1994, and catastrophic natural disasters have caused dollar losses of about $500 billion during the past twodecades, with frequent periods since 1989 when losses averaged about$1 billion per week.1 a single hurricane, mitch, killed more than 11,000people and destroyed a substantial portion of the infrastructure in severalcentral american countries in november 1998.crisis managementñan activity encompassing the immediate response to such events, recovery efforts, and mitigation and preparednessefforts to reduce the impact of future crisesñpresents problems of largescale and high complexity (measurable in numbers of people and amountand diversity of data, databases, and applications), unpredictable natureof the local infrastructure and other capabilities, and urgency. crisismanagement is an activity in which government plays a key role and inwhich a broad range of players at all levels of government are involved.as part of a broader study exploring how information technology1denis s. mileti. 1999.  disasters by design: a reassessment of natural hazards in the unitedstates. an activity of the international decade for natural disaster reduction. josephhenry press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2information technology research for crisis managementresearch can enable improved and new government services, operations,and interactions with citizens, the computer science and telecommunications boardõs (cstbõs) committee on computing and communicationsresearch to enable better use of information technology in governmentorganized a workshop focused on crisis management (appendix a). thisworkshop, on which this summary is based, explored how informationtechnology (it) research can contribute to more effective crisis management.what is crisis management?crises are extreme events that cause significant disruption and putlives and property at riskñsituations distinct from òbusiness as usual.óthe first panel of the six that made presentations at the workshop described a number of different crisis scenarios, covering a scope and scaleranging from localized effects of flash flooding to the regionwide impactof earthquakes and hurricanes to the impacts in cyberspace posed by y2kcomputer bugs.2 these case studies, which included both natural disasters and humanmade disasters such as nuclear accidents and the effectsof a terrorist bombing, provide a sense of the sorts of challenges faced inthe crisis management community, as well as a concrete context for theitfocused discussions that follow. the reader who is unfamiliar withsuch disaster scenarios may wish to read the case study overviews inappendix b, which are based on the experiences of crisis managers whoparticipated in the workshop.as used in this report, the term òcrisis managementó encompassesactivities ranging from the immediate response to mitigation and preparedness efforts that are aimed at reducing the impact of future eventsand take place over a longer time period.3 the following four, commonlydescribed phases of crisis management are referred to throughout thisreport:2the workshop from which this report stems focused largely on civilian crisis management, and most of the examples are related to natural disasters as opposed to such threatsas the use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists. however, the essential nature ofcrisis response in all these cases is not dissimilar. many of the requirements established bythe urgent, disruptive nature of both and the research opportunities discussed in this reportare generally applicable to both.3two notes on usage. the term òcrisis managementó is sometimes used to refer only tothe response phase and not to other elements of coping with crises such as mitigationefforts to reduce the impact of disasters in the future. also, in some contexts a distinction ismade between òcrisis managementó and òconsequence management.ó this distinction hasbeen made in a series of presidential decision directives and in the recently added terrorismsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction3¥crisis response is dedicated to the immediate protection of life andproperty. it requires urgent action and the coordinated application ofresources, facilities, and efforts beyond those regularly available to handleroutine problems. the response phase includes action taken before theactual crisis event (e.g., when a hurricane warning is received), in response to the immediate impact of a crisis, and as sustained effort duringthe course of the emergency. actions taken during the buildup of a crisissituation are designed to increase an organizationõs ability to respondeffectively and might include briefing government officials, reviewingplans, preparing information for release to the public, updating lists ofresources, and testing warning and communications systems.4 preimpactwarning systems may be activated, resources mobilized, emergency operations centers activated, emergency instructions issued to the public,and evacuation begun. the emphasis is on saving lives, controlling thesituation, and minimizing the effects of the disaster.crisis response includes the logistics of getting medical care, food,water, shelter, and rescue teams to the scene. regional, state, and federalresources may be provided to assist with helping those affected and reducing secondary damage, and response support facilities may be established.eventually, in the aftermath, crisis response becomes a more routineoperation and the challenge shifts from the need to get informationquickly and comprehensivelyñbut not necessarily entirely accuratelyñto an emphasis on process, accuracy, and accountability with systemscalled on to work more in a production mode. for example, activitiesfollowing the exxon valdez disaster ultimately became what might betermed the worldõs largest rockwashing operation.¥recovery encompasses both shortterm activity intended to returnannex to the federal response plan, the document that lays out federal agency responsibilities for responding to a crisis (federal emergency management agency (fema). april1999. federal response plan. fema9230.1 pl, fema, washington, d.c., available online at<http://www.fema.gov/rnr/frp>). there, òcrisis managementó is used to refer to thepredominantly law enforcement responsibilities to òprevent, preempt, and terminate threatsor acts of terrorism and apprehend and prosecute the perpetrators,ó whereas òconsequencemanagementó refers to measures to protect health and safety, restore services, and provideemergency relief to those affected. for the purposes of this report, the term òcrisis managementó is understood to encompass the full range of responses to a crisis, but the report doesnot specifically address requirements unique to law enforcement activities.4some of this discussion is adapted from office of emergency services planning section.may 1998. california emergency plan. planning section, governorõs office of emergencyservices, state of california. available online from the state of california governorõs officeof emergency services web site at <http://www.oes.ca.gov>.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4information technology research for crisis managementvital lifesupport systems to operation and longerterm activities designedto return infrastructure systems to predisaster conditions. this process ismuch slower than response, involves administrative work, and is subjectto regulations of many kinds (e.g., building codes). much of this worktakes place in an office and requires an appropriate set of tools and supporting network (voice and data) capabilities.¥mitigation, now recognized as the foundation of successful crisismanagement,5 is the ongoing effort to reduce the impact of disasters onpeople and property. mitigation includes steps such as keeping homesfrom being constructed in known floodplains, proper engineering ofbridges to withstand earthquakes, strengthening crisis service facilitiessuch as fire stations and hospitals, and establishing effective buildingcodes to protect property from hurricanes. mitigation can be a slow,timeconsuming processñorganizing a community buyout of homes in athreatened area (e.g., in a floodplain) can take many years, for example,because of the politics and the myriad players. the process is administratively intensive and involves countless situation and locationspecificdetailsña circumstance in which the use of computer systems clearlyapplies. predictive models are also an important tool in mitigation efforts. elevation data combined with hydrological models, for example,permit prediction of areas likely to be affected by riverbed flood. groundshakingintensity modeling allows prediction of the impacts of earthquakes on sites for storage of hazardous materials.¥preparedness covers a range of activities taken in advance of a crisis.it includes daytoday training and exercises as part of increased readiness, as well as development and revision of plans to guide crisis response and to increase available resources. preparedness is enhanced bytraining crisis responders who may be called into action in the event of anemergency. information technology contributes to a variety of preparedness efforts. for instance, the software tool hazus, a product developedby the national institute for building sciences in cooperation with thefederal emergency management agency (fema), simulates a postulatedearthquake and provides a mapbased analysis of casualties, infrastructure and building damage, and dollar losses expected. another dimension of preparedness is the development, improvement, and testing ofinformation and communication resources required for all phases of crisismanagement. systems for remote sensing (box 1.1) are identified anddeveloped, and the use of information technology tools is practiced, including how to integrate the multiple information resources that are likelyto be needed in a crisis.5see, e.g., dennis s. mileti. 1999. disasters by design. joseph henry press, washington,d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction5the response phase:difficult challenges for information technologycrisis response is characterized by the generation and distribution oflarge amounts of unstructured, multimedia data that must be acquired,processed, integrated, and disseminated in real time. as such, this phaseposes many of the most difficult information technology challenges incrisis management and is the context for much of the discussion in thisreport.the incident command system, a model commonly used to describethe functions required for command, control, and coordination of theresponse to a crisis, illustrates the range of activities undertaken as part ofcrisis response. 6 the incident commander provides overall commandand control for the response effort. additional command functions, typically carried out by command staff, include disseminating information tomedia, coordinating with other agencies participating in the response,and ensuring the safety of crisis responders. the incident commander issupported by general staff sections that provide the following functions:7box 1.1 remote sensingremote sensing plays an important role in many phases of crisis management,and a number of remote sensing tools are often used to capture spatial information. for example, the federal emergency management agency (fema) makesuse of department of defense satellites and assigns them, usually just before orafter a major emergency, to fly over the affected area and photograph it, a practicethat clay hollister observed is very useful and can be done reliably and quickly.fema receives the sensor information within 24 hours of the flyover, and it isimmediately distributed to the federal coordinating officerõs team in the field for usein crisis response planning. fema does not receive the actual photographs butrather uses and extrapolates the raw data to make maps showing degrees andpockets of damage where, for example, a storm hitone application of remote sensing that fema is working to develop, in conjunction with states, is the mapping of flood potential using synthetic aperture radarand light detection and ranging techniques. flood maps developed from thesesources are expected to be much more accurate and useful for response in thefield, as well as for the other phases of emergency management.6see, e.g., emergency management institute. 1998. incident command system. independent study course is195. emergency management institute, federal emergency management agency, emmitsburg, md.7exercise of military command requires a similar set of functions, and an analogous standard framework is used. a task force will typically have divisions responsible for personsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6information technology research for crisis management¥planning and intelligenceñcollection, evaluation, processing, anddissemination of information on situation and resources; documentationof the incident and the response to it;¥operationsñdirection and coordination of response operations;¥logisticsñmanagement of facilities, services, and material neededto support responders; and¥finance and administrationñtracking of incident costs and reimbursement accounting.information technology users in crisescrises touch many people, ranging from the crisis responders who tryto reduce the loss of life and property to those in the affected communitieswho rely on warnings and other information to inform their own, individual responses. because of the central role of information and communications for each group, information technology research challenges arisewhen considering how to improve crisis management from the perspective of each group of users.citizensinformation technology aimed at citizens is becoming an increasinglyimportant tool for crisis management. expanding access to tools such asthe internet and cell phones provides new possibilities for informing andinteracting with citizens affected directly by a crisis, as well as for supporting crisis responders. at the same time, however, citizens have become much more dependent on complex infrastructure services (e.g., cashmachines and other electronic commerce) whose advent has also increasedexpectations for speed and ease of access to relief funds. teleregistrationis an example of a technology aimed at improving the services providedto citizens following a disaster (box 1.2).crisis responderscrisis response requires effective delivery to and use of informationby many different actors. these crisis responders might be in an incidentcommand post, orchestrating efforts to respond to a disaster, or located innel; intelligence; operations; logistics; plans and policy; and command, control, communications, and computer systems. see, e.g., joint chiefs of staff (jcs). 1995. unified actionarmed forces (joint pub 02). jcs, department of defense, washington, d.c., p. iv13.available online at <http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/jel/newpubs/jp02.pdf>.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction7the field, requiring situational information about the disaster itself as wellas about their own location and that of other field responders. commonto all crisis responders is the dynamic, stressful nature of the situation andthe potential for information overload. many will have to integrate information from a wide range of sources and be able to coordinate activitiesamong a potentially large, diverse set of individuals and organizations.government and other crisis management organizationsgovernment at all levels may be involved in responding to a crisis,with counties, cities, and towns providing the primary response to mostemergencies. thus a major objective is providing these jurisdictions withthe resources to meet their disaster needs and maintain continuity ofgovernment. during the threat of, or in the midst of actual disaster conditions, local authorities must put emergency response plans into immediate operation and take actions required to cope with disaster situations.special districts (e.g., for fire protection) also play an important role inemergency preparedness and response.state emergency management offices provide planning, coordinatingresponse and recovery, mitigation, and training. they are responsible forcoordinating the provision of mutual aid and the allocation of essentialsupplies and resources; receiving and disseminating emergency alertsbox 1.2 teleregistration for disaster assistanceone component of femaõs national emergency management information system (nemis; see box 1.3) is teleregistration in the aftermath of a disaster. clayhollister observed in his remarks at the workshop that the federal disaster programused to operate almost entirely with pencils and paper. in the past, fema personnel met eyetoeye with disaster victims, at a table or in a tent, sometimes in pouring rain or snow, even if it meant that victims had to wait in line for as long as 24hours. registration had always been done that wayñit was preferred because itprovided a personal approach.when it was first suggested that victims could call tollfree telephone numbersinstead of waiting in line to register, the idea was widely rejected. still, there weresome who saw this as a promising approach. for a time, fema was conductingboth paper and telephone registrations. following the northridge, california, earthquake, however, disaster personnel recognized that they could not use inpersonregistration to process the claims of the hundreds of thousands of people affectedby the disaster. since that event, teleregistration has become the norm. its obvious advantages are convenience for victims of natural disasters, improved information management for fema, and better use of human resourcesñthe peoplehandling the teleregistrationñwho can be located outside the affected area.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8information technology research for crisis managementand warnings; monitoring and prioritizing resource requests in coordination with federal disaster operations; and, in conjunction with the federalgovernment, directing and coordinating recovery programs to mitigatefuture disasters and to recover disaster costs. other state agencies alsoplay a role in crisis management, cooperating as appropriate with stateemergency management officials, each other, and other political subdivisions to prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the effects of an emergency.at the federal level, overall responsibility for most emergency preparedness and operational activities is assigned to fema.8 to manage itsactivities, fema has recently put a new information technology tool, thenational emergency management information system (nemis), into production (box 1.3). assignments for other federal agencies, based on theirregular functions and capabilities in areas ranging from transportation tohealth and medical service, are detailed in the federal response plan.9federal emergency management activities include administering of natural disaster relief programs and responding to technological and otheremergencies requiring federal assistance. initial requests for federal assistance are normally coordinated with fema by state officials unlessother, more specific procedures are agreed on and contained in mutuallyapproved contingency plans.nongovernmental organizations also play a significant role in crisisresponse. the american red cross, also a signatory to the federal response plan, provides disaster relief to individuals and families, as well asemergency mass care in coordination with government and private agencies. other volunteer agencies, such as the salvation army, provide important services and resources. following a disaster, these organizationscontinue to provide services for their constituents, as well as for the governmental agencies that have need of their unique services. frequently,these organizations are preidentified through statewide information andreferral networks and are trained to maximize their efficiency and abilityto be integrated into responseandrelief efforts.8a newly issued annex to the federal response plan (federal emergency managementagency (fema). april 1999. federal response plan. fema9230.1 pl, fema, washington,d.c., available online at <http://www.fema.gov/rnr/frp>) on terrorism gives responsibility for crisis management, which has a significant law enforcement component for thissort of crisis, to the department of justice and responsibility for consequence management,that is, coping with the effects of attacks, to fema.9the federal response plan (federal emergency management agency (fema). april1999. federal response plan. fema9230.1 pl, fema, washington, d.c., available online at<http://www.fema.gov/rnr/frp>) is the master document describing the federalgovernmentõs plans for providing assistance to states in dealing with significant disasters,including planning assumptions, policies, and specific assignments of responsibility to federal departments and agencies in providing assistance.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9businessbusinesses also play an important role in crisis response, due to bothselfinterest and the significant resources they can bring to bear. businessand industry leaders recognize that mitigation and preparedness measures can make a difference in terms of a company surviving a disaster, asignificant positive outcome for a community that depends on its serbox 1.3 femaõs national emergency managementinformation systemthe national emergency management information system (nemis) is a $70million, 5year hardware and software automation project initiated in may 1996.this enterprisewide system allows fema to better manage the agencyõs disasterrelief program, including recording preliminary assessments of damage, performing incident monitoring, preparing the package requesting a presidential declaration of disaster, teleregistering disaster victims (box 1.2), collecting and managingdata from home inspections, issuing relief checks, and training. other functions ofnemis include coordinating and managing the distribution of donated goods andservices; logging requests for information from the public; providing support fordisaster field offices, including requisitioning supplies, equipment, and servicesand requesting, allocating, and obligating disaster funding; processing assistanceand supporting a fema customer helpline; managing requests for and disbursement of assistance for public infrastructure damage; and managing hazard mitigation grants. in addition nemis provides a set of common functions, known asnemiswide, that includes a reference library, correspondence tracker, databasefor managing the deployment of response workers, and geographical informationsystem tool.through the fema network, nemis provides service to the agencyõs headquarters, national processing service centers, 10 regional facilities, standby warehouses, and disaster field offices. nemis is also designed to improve access tostate emergency managers. for example, state emergency management officescan dial into nemis to check on the status of grants or applicants. as of december 1998, fema had used this system to respond to three disasters, and the system was put into production in early 1999.fema chief information officer clay hollister characterized the system as having a significant effect on the fema culture because it automates a great deal ofdecision making. for example, now that the new system is in place, an applicantfor relief funds can call a tollfree telephone number, and an inspector is automatically dispatched to the house to verify that the applicant in fact lives there and toassess the damage. the inspector enters information on the damage into a handheld computer and downloads the results of the inspection into the nemis system.when the application is determined to be valid, a check is issued.source: adapted in part from federal emergency management agency (fema). 1999.nemis overview. fema, washington, d.c. available online at <http://www.nemishome.fema.gov/overview/ovhomepage2.htm>.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10information technology research for crisis managementvices. for example, because of the critical role of infrastructures such asgas, electric, telecommunications (including wireless), water, wastewater, and petroleum pipeline industries, the participation and effective coordination of emergency responses with utilities is critical. emergencyplanning assists not only businesses but also the community at large byclearly articulating decisionmaking authority and identifying successors;identifying actions necessary to protect company property and recordsduring disasters; and providing such things as a listing of critical products and services, contacts with local emergency management officials,and methods to provide and accept goods and services from other companies during a crisis situation. (these issues are discussed in the contextof electronic commerce in chapter 3.)information technology challenges andopportunities in crisis managementprevious studyall phases of crisis managementñresponse, recovery, mitigation,planning, and preparednessñare information and communicationintensive efforts that impose demanding requirements on underlying information technologies. indeed, based on an earlier series of workshopsinvolving computing and communications researchers and crisis management professionals, a previous cstb committee concluded that preparing for and responding to crises pose demands that cannot be readilysatisfied with existing information technology tools, products, and services. their report, computing and communications in the extreme (national academy press, washington, d.c., 1996), identified opportunitiesfor incremental and more radical innovation in several areas, such ascommunications (requirements for communications networks extendingfrom handheld radios and the public telephone network to highspeeddigital networks for voice, video, and data); information processing andmanagement technologies (support for resource discovery, dealing withuncertainty, modeling and simulation, and multimedia fusion and integration of information); and technologies to support the instant bureaucracies that form and must collaborate in managing a given crisis (including support in stressful contexts and to meet needs for ease of use,ease of learning, adaptability, and judgment in decision making) (seeappendix c).summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction11this workshop reportthis workshop report builds on that earlier experience and can bedistinguished from it in several ways. since the mid1990s, some aspectsof the information technology base available for crisis management havechanged. the leading example is the internet, which in the past severalyears has become a pervasive element of the communications infrastructure that is being used in all aspects of crisis management, providing atleast part of the means for information exchange between organizationsand for individualized interactions with citizens, just as it does throughout government and society at large. more generally, citizens and crisisresponders alike with access to computers and the internet are more likelyto make regular use of networked information resources. anotherchange, spurred by the rapid emergence of the internet, has been therapid growth of electronic commerce, which presents both new challengesand new opportunities for crisis management.moreover, the context of this inquiry differs from that for the earliereffort. this workshop report summarizes the first phase of a study that isexamining the application of information technology research across government. an effort thus has been made to explore a range of crisis management activities, including some that have analogues elsewhere in government, such as how government and individual citizens, or governmentand business, interact. also, the overall study of which this workshopreport is a part more strongly emphasizes the process by which the itresearch community can collaborate with the crisis management community and by which it innovation can be translated into improvements inthe technologies and systems used in government.experience has shown that research and application communitiesboth potentially benefit from interaction. the introduction of new itfrequently enables organizations not only to optimize the delivery of existing capabilities but also to deliver entirely new capabilities. that is,advances in information technology research represent opportunities notonly for increased efficiency but also for a change in the way governmentworks, including the delivery of new kinds of services and new ways ofinteracting with citizens. collaboration with government agencies alsorepresents a significant opportunity for it researchers. government ingeneral, and crisis management in particular, provides a set of real, frequently largescale application domains in which to test new ideasñapplications that have texture, richness, and veracity that are not availablein laboratory studies.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12information technology research for crisis managementa first step in such interactions is the discussion of needs and theidentification of opportunities. chapter 3 of this workshop report explores a number of research topics that emerged during the discussionssummarized hereñopportunities that were identified as addressing thedemanding requirements of crisis management and presenting interesting research problems in their own right. in addition to yielding thesespecific opportunities, the discussions resulted in another outcome: anincreased recognition of the potential of such interaction. indeed, bothcrisis management professionals and it researchers who had expressedsome initial skepticism about the benefits of such research indicated afterthe workshop that the discussions had increased their awareness of theinteresting challenges and possible opportunities offered by the conductof it research for crisis management.the development of a comprehensive set of specific requirements or afull, prioritized research agenda is, of course, beyond the scope of a singleworkshop, and this report does not presume to do either. nor is it aneffort aimed at identifying immediate solutions (or ways of funding anddeploying them). rather, it examines opportunities for engaging the information technology research and crisis management communities inlongerterm research activities of mutual interest and illustrates substantive and process issues relating to collaboration between them.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132information technology trendsrelevant to crisis managementin one session of the workshop, panelists were asked to project howtrends in information technology research might affect crisis management. they discussed both the current state of technologies and futuredevelopments, and as part of their analysis identified broad areas of potential growth where new information technology research would have asignificant impact. in the area of computing and storage, paul smithdiscussed trends in highperformance computing, including supercomputer speeds and very large storage devices. barry leiner discussedsoftware issues in finding, integrating, and sharing the enormous amountof information available in current and future information networks. inthe related area of databases, david maier outlined trends in the development of database systems to support complex applications and data types.in the area of wireless communications, phillip karn gave an overview ofthe development of cellular, digital, and satellite communications devicesfor voice and packet data. finally, daniel siewiorek described the rapiddevelopment of computers designed to be worn in the field and touchedon what has been learned about how people interact with these devices.computing and storagepaul smith, from the u.s. department of energyõs (doeõs) office responsible for the safety, security, and reliability of the nationõs nuclearweapons stockpile, discussed highperformance computing trends. thesewere recently explored through a series of workshops conducted by doesummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14information technology research for crisis managementon data and visualization corridorsñpathways through which scientificdata can be exchanged and users can work collaboratively.1 smith startedby noting that visualizations based on large simulations, information inlarge scientific databases, and realtime observations, which depend onhighperformance computing, are a valuable tool that would have manyapplications in crisis management.one component of the doesponsored workshops was the development of a time line (1999 through 2004) for various computing performance parameters. for example, the computing speed of the fastest machines is expected to increase by a factor of more than 30 by 2004.2 thesize of a typical data query (with a constant transfer time) is projected togrow from 30 terabytes at the upper limit now to 100 terabytes and even1 petabyte (1 million gigabytes, the equivalent of 109 books or almost 2million audio compact disks) directed to archives that are 100 petabytes insize. different applications require different balances of cycle speed versus memory to achieve a specific result within a certain time. systemsmust advance in a balanced manner. the balancing process also musttake into account storage capabilities, speed of data access, and networkspeed.research is under way on storage technology to try to reduce the costand footprint of petabyte storage systems. in general, the development ofstorage technology is well financed, and the market is driving advancestargeted at the low end, such as personal computers, as well as the highend, such as largescale business and corporate systems. however, at thevery high end (e.g., intelligence and space systems), special efforts will berequired to achieve storage increases. according to smith, advances instorage technologies may be impeded by problems with device reliability,the physical transparency of devices to end users, the security of networkdata, and resource control and management.1see paul h. smith and john van rosendale, eds. 1998. data and visualization corridors:report on the 1998 dvc workshop series. technical report, california institute of technology, pasadena, california.2 microprocessor performance has increased rapidly throughout the last decade and hasbecome equivalent in many cases to that of large machines. this trend has enabled supercomputers to progress very rapidly, with sustained performance projected to reach 1petaflop by 2007. a number of forces are driving these advances. one is the progress inelectronics, particularly those to which mooreõs law applies and the associated decrease inthe feature size on microprocessors. achieving this progress will require using differenttechnologies. the industry currently relies on optical lithography, for example, but in a fewyears it is expected to have to convert to a different process, such as xray or electron beamlithography.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology trends relevant to crisis management15in its highperformance computing program, the doe is pursuing astrategy of leveraging commercial building blocks by combining manyprocessors and linking together small storage devices of a size driven bythe commercial marketplace to make larger or scalable systems. challenges associated with this strategy include how to design the information management or data management software needed to exploit thesecapabilities.information managementbarry leiner of the corporation for national research initiatives discussed software issues in finding, integrating, and sharing the enormousamount of information available in current and future information networks, as well as issues related to availability. these are issues that thedefense advanced research projects agency (darpa) has been exploring and for which it has established a useful framework for thinkingabout trends in information management (table 2.1). the following elements are necessary to provide information that enables workers to perform their jobs well, whether in a collaborative or individual setting:3table 2.1 trends in capabilities for information managementcapabilitycurrent levelgoalfederated repositoriestens (custom)thousands (generic)items per repositorythousandsmillionssize of òlargeó item1 mb100 mbtypical response times10 s100 msmodeplay and displaycorrelate and manipulateinteroperabilitysyntacticsemanticfiltersbibliographiccontextuallanguagemultilingualtranslingualcontext and tagsforms and tagssemistructuredsource: information technology office, defense advanced research projects agency. 1999.information management program goals. department of defense, washington, d.c. availableonline at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/research/im/goals.html>.3the discussion here is adapted in part from information technology office, defenseadvanced research projects agency (darpa). information management program goals. information technology office, darpa, department of defense, washington, d.c. available online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/research/im/goals.html>.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16information technology research for crisis management¥robust infrastructure. a crisis can threaten the integrity and performance of critical information infrastructure. how can the infrastructurebe better protected? how can it be designed to provide graceful degradation when under stress?¥information search and retrieval. decisionmaking processes in allsectors rely on enormous amounts of information, which is continuallybeing augmented and updated. how can users effectively query diverseinformation sources? how can they effectively manage the informationthey receive in order to support their activities?¥compatibility of formats. shared information can be represented in adiverse range of formats, which vary according to the syntactic structure,extent of meaning captured in the representation (e.g., an html table vs.a table in a relational database), and nuances of meaning within categories (e.g., various bibliographic representations in use in libraries). howcan diverse formats be reconciled and managed?¥building of knowledgesharing organizations. the ready availabilityof electronic information reduces barriers to communication, informationsharing, and collaboration. what are possible effects on how people andorganizations carry out their business?4the issue of infrastructure availability is a significant challenge incrisis management. one approach is to design systems that can degradegracefully. another is to design the system at a level that can be assuredñwhich is what the department of defense (dod) traditionally hasdone in building its own systems. a drawback of the latter approach isthat dod is less able to exploit advances in civilian technology. neitherapproach seems optimal.5 one alternative being explored would selectively provide key information to areas that incur great damage. forexample, when communications are degraded, only relatively recent information would be transmitted to affected areas, with òprepositionedóinformation resources providing the rest of the information needed. this4this issue is one of those proposed in the administrationõs information technology forthe twentyfirst century (it2) initiative under the heading òsocial, economic, andworkforce implications of information technology and information technology development.ó5commenting on the need for collaboration in information management technology,leiner cited the tremendous synergy between the civilian and military requirements forcrisis management. although, the military requirements are more stringent because of theneed to be able to react anywhere, anytime, anyplace, there is civiliansector technologythat lends itself to meeting those requirements (e.g., laptops provide portable computing inthe field, and commercial satellites provide suitable communications capabilities for manycircumstances).summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology trends relevant to crisis management17approach requires knowing in advance what a user will require. unlikethe case with disasters such as hurricanes, for which officials have anadvance idea of where the storm might hit and what information must beavailable, there are many other sorts of less predictable crises, that canoccur anywhere in the world at any time. an approach that depends on apreplanned distribution strategy cannot meet the requirements of suchcontingencies.beyond the challenge of taking the tremendous amount of information on the web and making it accessible to crisis management teamswhen they need it is the goal of making this information, as well as knowledge representations, available in a way that supports collaboration by adhoc teams assembled rapidly in a crisis.databasesdavid maier of the oregon graduate institute discussed severaltrends in the development of database systems to support more complexapplications and data types.¥support for application logic. databases are increasingly managingnot only the data but also the application logic, which consists of instructions on how to manipulate the data. this trend began in the mid1980s,when stored procedures and object databases began appearing on themarket. support for application logic then emerged in both databaseengines and affiliated tools. an example of the former is database engines storing multimedia types; an example of the latter is tools that convert data into htmlñthe language used to represent web pagesñtosupport user interfaces. the trend toward integration of application logicwas successful for several reasons. one reason is the ability to maskheterogeneity. in a large enterprise using many different types of machines, an application that can be written using only database services ismore easily moved than one that depends on platformspecific servicessuch as a file system. a second reason is manageability. applications arechanging rapidly and acquiring new functions, so help from a databasesystem is useful. the database can help deploy, configure, and manageapplications that use data and can help recover both the data and theapplication after something goes wrong. finally, incorporating application logic into databases helps provide scalability in applications, whichhave become quite complicated, require access to distributed data, andmust support large numbers of users. for example, transactions can beinitiated with a store or airline without any human intermediary, and sothe availability of sales representatives no longer limits the number ofusers that can access the database at once.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18information technology research for crisis management¥data type extensibility. the ability to add additional data types provides a database with additional information about an application. thus,rather than simply identifying an image representation inserted in a database as a large, untyped sequence of bits, the database understands thetype of image and how it can be manipulated. the result is that the usercan search and manipulate complex types directly in the database systemrather than in the external application program, leading to a reduction inapplication complexity and improved consistency of the data in the database.6¥data warehousing. database developers are realizing that userswant their products to provide support for executing complex decisionsupport queries on the same systems that process online transactions,spanning multiple data sources. at one time, it was believed that relational databases would enable users to run complex decision supportqueries. but in fact, systems optimized for transaction throughput do notsupport efficient analytical queries, and vice versa. today, because datacan be duplicated for an affordable price, a separate copy of the data canbe used in a database system organized for efficient support of decisionsupport queries. in addition, many tools are available for moving operational data into a warehouse, extracting and cleaning them, and loadingthem in parallel. the warehouses hold much more data than do operational transactionprocessing systems, often terabytes of information.database languages and query processors have extensions for efficientdata analysis. for example, they could analyze all sales for a large retailersuch as walmart and display it by store, by department, and by quarter.such tasks frequently involve analyzing hundreds of millions to billionsof records.7 ¥development of application servers. to support applications withmany users, a middle tier is evolving between the database and desktop.this application server acts as an intermediary between clients and backend databases. the client portion of an application might simply be aform in a web browser that captures some information about what dataand operations are needed. the application server determines what back6in an object database, extensions involve adding new classes of data. in relational databases, pluggable modules called extenders or cartridges are added.7this approach does not necessarily apply to database management in crisis managementapplications. a wellmanaged company such as walmart can be in control of all its dataand can make at least the formats consistent. the ad hoc composition that characterizesmuch of crisis management information processing is not centrally managed, due to thelarge number of independent organizations involved, and can present huge challenges foranalysis.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology trends relevant to crisis management19end database(s) to contact and performs the computationally expensiveparts of operations. maier said that the database companies are startingto figure out how their products can make this middle layer easier toconstruct and manage. a benefit of this approach is that, rather thantrying to update 10,000 clients with a new application (including worrying about providing and controlling remote access to each), one couldsimply update 10 application servers with new logic.amid all these advances, databases continue to have limitations. oneis the diskcentric focus of current database system products. for example, some people still argue that a large enterprise should not deployservers in all the locations where it conducts business but should insteadhave one large server to which each business site is connected. in otherwords, the focus is still on data storage rather than on data movement,which maier pointed to as a key to the future of database technology.database systems should involve data staging and movement, rather thanjust holding data in readiness for future queries.another current limitation of databases is that they do not handleunexpected types of data wellña formal structure known as a schemamust first be defined. that is, if a user uncovers some interesting information of a new type and wants to preserve it and its structure for manipulation and delivery later, the current generation of database systemproducts generally cannot readily accommodate the new information.for database systems to expand in scope, this òschema firstó requirementmust be relaxed.wireless communicationsphilip karn of qualcomm discussed some past, current, and futuretrends in wireless communications, which have been driven by a combination of increased demands for endtoend performance and the need toachieve greater efficiency in use of the finite radio spectrum.8in the mid to late 1970s, analog twoway radio systems were commonplace. analog technology continues to be used in combination withsophisticated control systems and is the workhorse for twoway publicservice and emergency communications. also at that time, darpa began funding a substantial amount of research in packet radio. the concept was that packet radio networks could be dropped into remote areas8for an extended discussion of the history of wireless communications development seecomputer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1997.the evolution of untethered communications. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20information technology research for crisis managementto fill gaps in existing systems. much of that early research is now starting to bear fruit in operational systems, karn said.in the early to mid1980s, advanced mobile phone service (amps),which uses traditional analog voice modulation, was developed and deployed. the major innovation was its use of digital control channels, sothat calls could be switched automatically from one cell site to another,allowing the user to treat an amps cellular telephone in much the samemanner as a wireline telephone.in the late 1980s, demand for cellular telephone service increased.qualcomm started trying to apply wellestablished spreadspectrum techniques to improve the efficiency of cellular telephony. in the early 1990s,the company launched tests of code division multiple access (cdma),which is based on the spreadspectrum technologies used in the military.at that time there were a number of competing digital systems. now inlimited use in north america, asia, and eastern europe, cdma was firstlaunched commercially in hong kong in 1995. two schemes (gsm andis54) based on time division multiple access (tdma) operate accordingto similar principles but are not compatible with each other.by the mid1990s, digital cellular systems were widely deployed. gsmis used primarily in europe but also in japan and the united states. is54is also used in the united states and elsewhere in north america.similar underlying technologies, particularly highspeed digital signal processing, video compression, and audio compression, are used inthe direct broadcasting satellite business, which is among the most rapidly developing consumer technologies. lowearthorbit satellite networks are close to commercial operation and, if successful, will provideaccess to disasterstricken remote areas where there is no cellular coverage. the prices are relatively low compared to those for todayõs satellitesystems but are high enough that competition with a terrestrial systemwill be difficult. therefore, many see these satellite services primarily asa way of filling in the gaps in terrestrial cellular coverage in remote areas.another interesting development is part 15 ad hoc networks. part 15of the federal communications commission (fcc) rules applies to lowpower unlicensed devices. certain segments of radio spectrum are setaside for use by lowpower devices that meet a relatively simple set oftechnical requirements. metricomsõs ricochet modems are an example ofa part 15 ad hoc network that employs a mesh network topology.efforts are also finally under way to set wireless standards for thenext generation of wireless telephony, which, given the multitude of possible design choices in digital systems, is important. this is an importantissue for emergency communications because interoperability problemsinhibit rapid network deployment. historically, the wireless industry hasbeen characterized by proprietary protocols, and getting true intersummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology trends relevant to crisis management21operable standards has been difficult, except when they are championedby large companies that are still licensing the technology.advances in digital wireless have been enabled by four importanttechnologies. spreadspectrum technologies simplify spectrum management and can enhance privacy. because the industry is close to the theoretical channel capacity limits established by claude shannon in the 1940s,lowbitrate voice coding is increasingly important. errorcontrol codingis another enabling technology that maximizes system capacity. in addition, applicationspecific integrated circuits have been crucial to makingthese systems work efficiently at low power. further increases in systemcapacity will come at high costs. companies could deploy more andsmaller cells, use directional antennas, or implement more flexible channel management strategies.a recent fcc mandate to improve capabilities for pinpointing thepositions of cellular telephones when they are used to report emergenciesof course has direct implications for crisis management. existing technologies can only identify in which cell the caller is located.particularly relevant to crisis management is the provision of dataservices by wireless carriers. in the early 1990s, carriers developed cellular digital packet data (cdpd), an overlay for the existing amps analognetwork, to provide some basic capability to send internet protocol (ip)data packets over cellular frequencies.9 although cdpd is becomingmore widely available, it is still not supported in many rural areas. cdpdsystems are also slow, and the wider the area covered, the slower a system will be. furthermore, cdpd is expensive; charges when the servicewas first offered were about 15 cents per kilobyte. the low adoption ratewas interpreted as being indicative of low demand for wireless data services. cdpd is now being sold by carriers on a flatrate basis, and its useis increasing.the potential exists to provide support for ip packet data in digitalcellular services. the existing infrastructure generally does not supportthis capability, in part because the transition to digital services was managed for fast deployment of voiceonly service. this situation is beginning to change.a related trend is the development of new modulation and channelaccess schemes specifically designed for packet data instead of voice. for9amateur packet radio was developed in the early 1980s in both terrestrial and satelliteversions. for many years it has provided support for emergency and disaster communications. today, as cellular telephones and other commercial systems are meeting most of theoperational requirements for disaster communications, the primary role of amateur packetradio has shifted toward technical experimentation and education.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22information technology research for crisis managementexample, qualcommõs new high data rate technology is somewhat like anasymmetrical digital subscriber line technology for cellular systems. instead of guaranteeing a particular quality of service, these systems perform the best they can in current conditions, optimizing overall systemthroughput.trends in wearable computersdaniel siewiorek of carnegie mellon university discussed trends inwearable computers. he demonstrated an earlygeneration wearablecomputer that was designed in about 1994 and supported a marine inperforming a 600element inspection of an amphibious tractor. this system, which employed a headmounted display to replace a clipboard, wasawkward to use in many situations. it did not use voice input, whichmight be overheard by an enemy, but relied instead on a keypad interface. field studies showed that the wearable computer saved 70 percentof the time needed to perform an inspection and enter the data into alogistics computer that would then generate work orders for mechanics.to indicate the possible roles of wearable computers, an analogy between computing and electrical motors is useful. about 100 years ago, bigdynamos produced energy, and people brought their work (e.g., drillpresses) to the dynamos. later, the fractionalhorsepower motor wasinvented, and it could be incorporated into an individual drill press andmoved out into small job shops.10 that change was analogous to thetransition from mainframe to desktop computing. today, a car may have50 electric motors, which pop the gas tank lid, run the windshield wipers,lock the doors, and so on. their function is transparent to the user; thereis no need for a 500page userõs manual to unlock a car. wearable computers are likely to follow analogous trends toward pervasive deployment of computer devices. one forecast is that a user might have five ipaddresses assigned to his or her body.as electronics become faster, smaller, and more portable, human factor issues are becoming more important, because it is not yet known howhumans will interact with wearable technology. a considerable amountof experimentation is under way in this area. for example, researchers atcarnegie mellon university have built 16 generations of wearable com10an historical analysis of how this change in organizational practiceñthe shift to usingindividual motorsñwas instrumental in realizing significant gains in manufacturing productivity is given in paul a. david. 1990. òthe dynamo and the computer: an historicalperspective on the modern productivity paradox.ó american economic review, 80(2):355361.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology trends relevant to crisis management23puting over the past 8 years and have learned much about critical factorsaffecting wearability such as placement on the body. placement at someregions of the body may be more favorable because a device will moveless as a person goes through the motions of a task. on the other hand,the degree to which device weight and thickness affect task performanceand comfort can vary with body location. body heat and device heatconduction also can affect wearer comfort significantly. a wearable device can act as a vapor barrier, affecting the comfort of a wearer workingon an airplane in a hot environment. intel corporation discovered that apersonõs lap is more sensitive to dissipated heat than the fingers. laptopcomputers are now designed to dissipate heat without making the userfeel uncomfortable, for example by dumping heat through the keyboard.researchers have found that users tend to have high expectations forwearable devices. the user of a wearable computer is much less patientthan one using a desktop model, expects an instant response to inputs,and wants the computer to be as easy to use as a flashlight. the demandis for a device that a user can simply turn on and operate, without recourse to a userõs manual.siewiorek also noted potential hazards in the use of this technology.given too much information, the user may focus too heavily on the computer and lose touch with the physical world. interaction design is also asignificant issue. users may also lose initiative, doing only what thecomputer tells them to do.applying mooreõs law to the computing power needed to supporthuman interfaces, one can predict the performance and styles of interfaces that will become feasible. in the early 1980s, computers could perform about 1 million instructions per second (mips), enough to support atextual alphanumeric interface with a keyboard. graphical user interfaces with a mouse and icons became supportable when processor speedsreached 10 mips. handwriting recognition systems require 30 mips;speech recognition systems, about 100 mips. these latest interfacesñspeech synthesis output, multimedia data typesñmay take some time todevelop, potentially requiring 5 to 10 years to develop data representations for threedimensional gesturing, position sensing, and stereo visualand audio output.energy is a key factor driving wearable computer technology. indeed, more than half of the weight of todayõs wearable devices is in batteries. projections show that it is possible to reduce energy use by anorder of magnitude, but that as this is done, the fraction of the totalenergy used by the various system components shifts. for example, ascomputing becomes more efficient, the radio uses a much greater proportion of system power, and the energy needed to transmit data becomes agreater factor.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24information technology research for crisis managementthe type of information being sent has a major impact on energyneeds. a national research council study looked at how much batteryweight is needed to acquire and transmit a particular piece of information.11 for example, it is estimated that about 1/100th of a gram in batteryweight is needed to perform speech recognition on voice input and transmit the information as text, and about 1/2,000th of a gram to digitize andtransmit voice as audio. but compression and transmission of videowould require about 10 grams of batteries. the battery weight requiredto distribute realtime data with fullcolor video among mobile users inthe battlefield would be quite large.11national research council. 1997. energyefficient technologies for the dismounted soldier. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.253information technologyresearch opportunitiesinformation managementworkshop participants identified several areas in which improvements in information technology could have a significant influence on themanagement of information during each of the four different phases ofcrisis management (see chapter 1). a fundamental goal of the use ofinformation systems in crisis management is the ability to supply decisionmakers at all levels with the information they need when they need it.the information users who must be served during a crisis include, amongothers, crisis managers themselves, field workers, and victims or potential victims of a disaster. supplying decision makers with informationrequires a number of capabilities. first, the appropriate data must beacquired, either as a preparedness activity or during the response to acrisis. crisis responders require retrieval and access mechanisms to allowthem to find and reduce to the essential items the information they need.delivery mechanisms are needed to get appropriate information to theright people. success in each phase of crisis management depends onsuccessful information management in the preceding phase. for example,the response relies on the development of an effective mobilization database and plan in the preparedness phase, and integration of crisis response resources depends on the effective tracking of people and otherresources during mobilization.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26information technology research for crisis managementinformation acquisitionseveral research topics were described to improve acquisition of better information for use in responding to crises. one challenge is discrepancies between the data stored in crisis respondersõ geographical information system (gis) databases and the òground truth.ó for example,crisis responders may have access to rough, outdated information onstorage facilities of hazardous materials but may lack uptodate, detailedinformation about what kind of material a particular building contains,even though such information is known to the operator of an industrialfacility. new data management paradigms are needed that would permitgeographically and administratively distributed gis repositories to operate with one another in a more seamless and transparent fashion.1improving the collection of both input and response data during(rather than only after) a crisis is obviously important for keeping crisisresponders informed during a crisis. in addition, mining the data afterthe event would facilitate formulating improved response plans for future crises by determining which response measures and mitigation efforts were effective. such data sets would be invaluable in validating andimproving the quality of crisis models.integration and interoperabilityintegration of information from a variety of sources and organizations is a fundamental issue facing crisis responders. requirements forintegrating data are not uniformñthe requirements for speed, completeness, and quality of the information and the integration among organizations all vary depending on the phase and location of the crisis. early inthe response to a crisis, integration must proceed rapidly, often in an adhoc fashion. describing a california department of forestry incidentmanagement team that manages large incidents including fires, floods,and earthquake, thomas oõkeefe observed at the workshop that theseteams must be able to go anywhere at a halfhourõs notice and mustmanage the uptoseveralthousand crisis responders arriving within 24to 36 hours. just getting this number of people to an incident quickly is amajor challenge that represents only the first part of the problem. integrating them for optimal performance is much more complex. integration efforts must extend both vertically within an organization and horizontally among organizationsñsometimes across a large number oforganizations. response to a major crisis in the united states, for in1the open gis consortium, with participation from government and industry, is working to develop standards for such sharing of geographical data.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties27stance, involves local, state, and federal governments as well as privatesector businesses and organizations. a crisis with international dimensions may be even more complex. jack harrald cited the recent crisis inrwanda, in which hundreds of organizations and hundreds of thousandsof people were involved. indeed, at one point during the rwanda crisis,each of more than 100 international organizations were producing information that in many cases was inconsistent.a number of significant nontechnical barriers impede implementation of solutions, including organizational resistance to sharing data or tointeroperating, lack of overall system architectures, security constraintsthat make information sharing difficult, and both the absence of applicable standards and nonadherence to extant standards.2in addition, workshop participants identified a number of ways inwhich research on interoperability and integration could make a significant contribution to improved crisis management. first, given the dynamic, rapidly developing nature of crises, improved techniques for thedynamic discovery of information relevant to a crisis and for the fusion ofinformation from multiple sources are important. central to discoveryand fusion of information are techniques that help determine the accuracy, reliability, or òqualityó of the information that is discovered andprocessed.some key approaches to integrating information and facilitatinginteroperability of information systems involve the creation and management of metadata, the information that describes the format and contentof other information, such as the fields in documents or annotations ofvideo sequences.standardization of the metadata describing the format of the manydatabases involved in crisis management systems could be achievedthrough agreement on xml dtds (document type definitions, which areformal descriptions of what can appear in a document and how documents are structured),3 and more work should be done in this area. metadata that describes the content or important topics covered by information objects and databases is more difficult to standardize but is a crucialpart of integrating heterogeneous information resources. this type of2many other factors make it difficult to achieve interoperability. see computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council. 1999. realizing the potential ofc4i: fundamental challenges.  national academy press, washington, d.c., for a discussionof factors affecting all organizations as well as special challenges faced in a u.s. militarycontext.3xml is the extensible markup language being developed by the world wide webconsortium.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28information technology research for crisis managementmetadata is often expressed using a predefined vocabulary, representedas a list of categories or more structured forms such as taxonomies andontologies. many taxonomies already exist in government agencies, andmany others are being created. developing technology to support thedevelopment and merging of taxonomies, as well as the application ofthese taxonomies to information objects, is an important research challenge. as part of these efforts ways must be found of coping with theevolution of metadata. another challenge is to find ways to addressheterogeneous standards, much as systems today must support multipleimage or document format standards.although metadata, ontologies, and the like are important tools forintegrating data, further work is needed on approaches to both systeminteroperability (ensuring that systems can successfully exchange data)and semantic interoperability (allowing data arising from heterogeneoussystems to be successfully interpreted), particularly when data integration must be conducted ad hoc and on the fly.the response to a crisis is characterized by the distributed generationof large amounts of unstructured, multimedia data that must be acquired,processed, integrated into the current situation model, and disseminatedin real time to be useful to crisis responders. technology that automatically captures the context of each piece of data would significantly increase its value. even relatively simple techniques such as automaticallygeolocating all input data elements would be beneficial.techniques are needed to filter both incorrect and duplicative dataitems and to summarize and automatically convert unstructured datainputs into progressively more structured forms for subsequent analysisby both humans and models. much of the unstructured data will be inthe form of text, so research on text filtering, summarization, extraction,and event detection will be particularly relevant. speech will be anotherimportant source of information, and exploiting it will require researchon recognition in noisy environments, segmentation, and indexing. videowill become increasingly important, and techniques for video segmentation, summarization, and indexing will be required. integrating and exploiting the rich information content in multiple video sources, such asmight be obtained from crisis responders in the field, are additional challenges.given that crisis management depends on the integration of information coming from multiple organizations and government agencies, eachof which may have policy constraints regarding confidentiality, a challenge is to develop techniques that permit integration for the purpose ofcrisis management consistent with maintaining those constraints.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties29data deliveryone important element of data delivery is ensuring that data will beavailable when and where needed. replicationñthe periodic copyingand distribution of updated versions of database contentsñis clearly akey component in availability. but simply replicating data in a safe location outside the region affected by a crisis is not necessarily effective if thecrisis cuts all communication paths to the replicated data. one obvioussolution is to increase the number of replicas, but determining what is anoptimal design requires understanding the appropriate tradeoffs both inthe cost of providing and managing local storage and in the performancepenalty entailed in keeping the replicas updated and consistent. datadelivery in a crisis situation is an example of the issue that david maierpointed to in his discussion of limitations of todayõs database systems (seeòdatabasesó in chapter 2)ñthe need for database systems that includedata staging and movement rather than just serving as repositories.the delivery of large amounts of information in real time or nearrealtime, for example, video or highresolution satellite imagery, is a significant challenge, particularly when existing infrastructure has been damaged or delivering to mobile units is required. one option pointed to byworkshop participants was the use of digital direct broadcast satelliteservices by crisis response teams deployed in the field. the defenseadvanced research project agencyõs (darpaõs) battlefield awarenessdata dissemination project was cited as having developed technology thatmight be adaptable to the data delivery requirements of crisis response.geographical information system performancean additional area of particular concern noted by workshop participants was the performance of giss, which play an important role in crisismanagement. participants noted that the major database system vendorssuch as oracle, ibm, informix, and ncr are rapidly improving both thefunctionality and scalability of the spatial capabilities of their standarddatabase products. over the next couple of years it is likely that themajority of large spatial data sets will reside in commercial database systems and not in specialized giss. as managing terabytesized spatialdata sets becomes as routine in the future as managing terabytesizedcommercial data sets is today, database vendors will need to provide asufficient level of gis performance.information for peoplelike any other humancomputer interfaces, crisis management systems should be developed using good usercentered design methods,summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30information technology research for crisis managementincluding an early focus on users and their tasks; ongoing empirical measurement and evaluation of systems; iterative design and testing; andintegrated focus on the endtoend systems, which considers the largersocial context in which they are deployed.however, crisis management poses a number of unique challenges(e.g., situations are nonroutine, rapidly changing, often very high risk,and so forth). interfaces must be designed so that they can operate effectively in a highstress environment, as well as be intuitive, given that theymay be operated by users who have had only minimal training or whomay not have operated a system since the last crisisñin a crisis, no onecan effectively digest a thick user manual.many of the most difficult humantechnology interface issues are evident in the initial response stage of crisis management, but some occur inthe recovery, mitigation, and preparedness phases as well. (in addition,as discussed below, there are important reasons to use the same tools andinterfaces across all these phases.) the response phase is characterized bythe need to observe, understand, and integrate a wide range of information sources; communicate and coordinate among the many different rolesof and requirements for information; and, most important, make rapiddecisions.the following general observations cut across many of the more specific comments below:¥there is no mooreõs law on human perception, attention, or cognitive andproblemsolving capabilities. the scarce resource in humancomputer interfaces is human attention. the situation is exacerbated in a crisis, becausethe novelty of the situation consumes attention that would otherwise beavailable. the issue of information overload is discussed further below.¥crises are nonroutine and complex. thus they pose challenges fortraining and iterative design and evaluation of systems. in addition,humans resort to welllearned and practiced behaviors during times ofcrisis and stress. creative problemsolving is difficult under these circumstances.¥communication and collaboration are critical. crises involve a varietyof phases, organizations, information needs, and roles for individuals.often people who have not worked closely together are brought togetherin demanding circumstances.¥crisis responders are best able to make effective use of tools that they alsouse routinely. priority should be given to developing tools and interfacesthat are useful in both routine and crisis situations. for example, mostusers today are familiar with the web browser user interface.¥decision making is key. people in all roles need to organize, abstract,summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties31and share information rapidly and flexibly in support of effective direction and coordination of crisis response activities.presenting and using informationcrisis responders need to get information quickly and flexibly.todayõs interfaces often exacerbate this problem by relying on a limitedset of input and output capabilities. researchers should continue to pushthe hardware and software envelope to support new interaction styles(e.g., richer visualization, perceptual user interfaces, multimodal input,support for a range of motor and language capabilities) to eliminate thisimpedance mismatch. advances are required at the cognitive level aswell, where peopleõs rich but fallible memories and vast amounts of general and domainspecific knowledge often do not match well with theinformation required by computer decision support systems. a richerrange of interaction styles is also important to match the userõs environment. for someone who is driving a vehicle, for example, an audio interface may be more appropriate than a screen display. at the forefront ofall design improvements should be the goal of better leveraging and augmenting of natural human capabilities.information presentation must be flexible. people need to extractrelevant information rapidly, but which information is relevant variesacross individuals and at different phases of crisis management. not allthe data collected during a crisis needs to be disseminated to all the various decision makers during the crisis (although capture of all the information may be invaluable later for analysis and training purposes). somecrisis responders need to get the òbig picture,ó others need to abstract andintegrate information, and others need access to finer and finer details.user interfaces that support integration of information with easily configurable òviewsó are needed. one approach might be to define a set ofwelltailored products aimed at predefined crisis responder òcustomermodelsó that then can also be fully customized by the user. developingimproved systems requires a better understanding of user requirements,information presentation techniques, information access strategies, andthe development of flexible and modular architectures for informationselection and presentation.supporting effective communications and coordinationin crisis management situations, crisis responders are quickly broughttogether, both physically and virtually. multiple existing infrastructures,bureaucracies, and individuals are quickly assembled into a virtual team.people need to quickly develop community and working relationships. asummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32information technology research for crisis managementhybrid of centralized and decentralized approaches to controlling andmanaging information resources is required.communications of all forms (onetoone, onetomany, manytoone,and manytomany) must be supported. interactions will take placeamong crisis responders and between crisis responders and citizens.people need to speak the òsame languageó (or find ways of translatingamong languages)ña challenge that encompasses both multilingual issues (e.g., facility in 27 different languages was required in a recent california crisis) and semantic mismatches (which are more difficult to detect).situational awareness provides an important background channel ofactivity (e.g., the command center òhubbubó) and must be maintained inelectronic environments. situational action depends critically on havinga good sense of the overall state of events. in addition, a common understanding of the general state of affairs gives all decision makers betterinformation for making necessary tradeoffs.supporting effective realtime decision makingunder uncertainty and stresscrisis situations are characterized by rich, rapidly changing information flows and by tremendous uncertainty. people in stressful situationsand conditions of information overload tend to resort to ineffective decisionmaking strategies. simply providing access to information is notenough to support decision makers. much more effective systems arerequired for helping crisis responders evaluate, filter, and integrate information. as one workshop participant put it, in a crisis, support must beprovided to overwhelmed and distracted individuals who are, for example, less able to take on new projects or use new information technologies. this situation is different from more routine circumstances in whichthe traditional rulebased systems for decision support operate. simulations and preparedness drills help in many ways, but training for unpredictable events is a difficult challenge. current interfaces also do nottypically provide support for quickly prioritizing tasks (though such toolshave been developed in some fields such as medicine).several measures can be taken to help mitigate these design challenges. increased automation was one approach suggested to compensatefor decreased capabilities and to reduce stress level. mixedinitiativesystems, which combine features of directly manipulable and agentbasedsystems, could also support more effective decision making in crisis situations. systems could be asked to monitor important situations and highlight changes that signify problems. systems could also suggest coursesof actions based on the situation. for example, automatic triggers in asummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties33disaster where many people are displaced from their homes could suggest to an emergency manager what resources (e.g., blankets or cots)might be necessary. better methods for users to interact with agents andmore effective tools for automated reasoning would help. the utility ofsuch systems will be enhanced if they incorporate emergency management current plans and the underlying assumptions. for example, if aplan has crisis responders entering a floodstricken area to evacuate residents, a system designed to know planned entry and exit routes couldprovide an automated early warning if the plan becomes infeasible because a bridge along the route has failed.another approach to coping with the needs of users under stress is toimprove the ease of use of systems through a better understanding of thevaried needs and capabilities of users. for example, systems that canmonitor a userõs performance would allow systems to adapt in real timeto the changing capabilities of users under stress.another area to explore is development of stress filters for the audio,visual, and textual (i.e., email) information that is provided to crisis responders. for instance, one of the major problems during crisis responseis the transfer of stress among the responders, a selfcompounding problem akin to what happens in a noisy restaurant when customers speaklouder in an attempt to make themselves heard. systems that detect anddefuse such stressful spirals would be usefulanother issue important to effective decision making is understanding the uncertainty in presented information. although people realize atan intellectual level that information, whether based on field reports orthe output of a simulation, may be uncertain, there are few external aidsto reinforce this. displays tend to show crisp and clear boundaries, reportnumbers to several places of accuracy, and so on. information presentation techniques that better represent the inherent uncertainty would facilitate a direct, intuitive, and more accurate understanding of the state ofknowledge.handling information overloadthe process of collecting, organizing, and disseminating informationduring the course of a crisis is time consuming. a single person in acommand post may need to listen to and integrate information from dozens of people in the field to get a complete picture of what is happeningduring a disaster. disaster situations force emergency managers to contend with 100 to 1,000 times the normal number of variables, and theimpacts of this stress level should not be underestimated. the scale ofinformation collection and dissemination during a significant emergencyis vast. in a santa ana fire, for example, 15,000 radio transmissions mightsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34information technology research for crisis managementoccur in a day. persontoperson, verbal communications cannot copewith this sort of information traffic volume, and no one can keep track ofthe entire picture. workshop participants suggested that innovations inspeech recognition technology may be helpful in meeting this challenge.in addition, other computing and communications technologies are beingdeveloped that can help identify, retrieve, filter, prioritize, and integratediverse sources of information to support a wide range of decision makers. some users will need access to details and others will need a higherlevel picture of a given situation. systems that provide situational awareness and a shared view of the information can help in communicatingwith others.overcoming language and other barriers to communicationduring routine and emergency incidents, 911 emergency operators,as well as firefighters, paramedics, and law enforcement officers, mustdeal with people who speak languages other than english. languagebarriers are, of course, also a factor in military operations. workshopparticipants pointed to the potential represented by the darpa multilingual interview system developed for use in bosnia (described in moredetail in box 3.1) in helping crisis responders communicate with citizensnot fluent in english. participants observed that this deviceõs potentialbenefit for the delivery of public safety services could be large. potentially, pcbased versions could be placed in every law enforcement, fire,and emergency medical dispatch center in the nation. a wearable versionmight be widely used by the fire service, paramedics, law enforcementagencies, correctional facilities, and hospitals. it would also be useful tobuild translator systems to cope with other communications barriers between crisis responders and citizens. devices could be built to facilitatefield communications with the hearing and speech impaired as well.warning citizens at riskearly warning systems have been developed for many hazards, including earthquakes, tornadoes, nuclear plant accidents, and tsunamis.in the case of earthquakes, even a few secondsõ warning can be useful.this was the case, for instance, following the loma prieta earthquake.rescue workers were able to receive a few secondsõ notice of an aftershock, giving them a chance to move to a safer location. warning systems also play an important role in flash floods. in that case, there havebeen significant advances in detection but less progress in the dissemination of information from the detection systems and in the response to thewarnings.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties35in all crises, providing uptodate information to large segments ofthe public is important because it permits them to take appropriate actions, helps prevent panic, can speed remediation efforts, and can preventfollowon crises. widespread broadcasts are not necessarily the best approachñthey can provide only limited situationspecific information andcannot provide details tailored to the needs of individuals, such as whatevacuation route to use. also, broadcast warnings are not well suited todisasters that have limited geographical impact. false alarms have theeffect of decreasing the attention people give to warnings.new technologies like òcall by locationó and zoned alert broadcastscould help by providing more focused (and presumably more accurate)warnings, and more detailed advice on what actions to take. one approach identified as worthy of further investigation is what is known as areverse 911 system, whereby the usual direction of interaction betweencitizens and emergency managers is reversed. in a crisis such as a fire orflash flood, such a system could automatically call all the households andbusinesses that might be affected, warn them of the impending danger,and instruct them on what evasive action should be taken.the approach can be extended beyond simply making calls overwireline telephones. for instance, the federal communications commission has mandated that cell phone systems be capable of providing accurate information on location. one could envision exploiting this capability to include automatic dissemination of information to cell phone usersbox 3.1 fielding a multilingual interview systemone new technology developed by the defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa) that has been rapidly translated into a fielded product is themultilingual interview system. the basic technology is simple, consisting of aspeech recognition system that recognizes which of a set of 200 or 300 phraseshas been uttered, consults an index, and pulls out a cd recording of that phrasespoken in another language. the system enables the user to get yesorno answers to basic questions, as well as directions using maps. such devices must bedesigned to be portable and easy to update. to construct a prototype, darpapackaged this system into a laptop device with a power supply and other components. the system has been provided in this form to users in the field in bosnia,where it has aided in such activities as interviewing bosnians about the locationsof mine fields.a handheld version is being developed by darpa that could be placed in acoat pocket. those who have used this technology have been very interested inits possible applications, and there appears to be a potentially strong commercialmarket, according to workshop participant ronald larsen.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36information technology research for crisis managementas they enter danger areas (e.g., a canyon where a there is a threat due toa flash flood).community education as part of mitigation efforts is another important approach, and one where information technology can play an important role. in general people have tremendous misperceptions of the risksinvolved in crisis situations and tend to believe that a disaster will notaffect them. what can be done to get people to prepare for the time whenòtoday is the dayó? one approach is suggested by the observation that itis easier to get peopleõs attention in areas that have suffered throughmany crises. simulations combined with virtual reality display systemsthat illustrate the likely outcome of a crisis such as a flood to those whowould likely be affected by such an event occurringñòa virtual realitystress induceróñmay be useful in convincing them to take appropriatemitigation measures.learning from experienceemergency preparedness drills and other planning activities are critically important and help to mitigate some of the communications andcoordination difficulties encountered in a crisis, but they are not enough.it should be possible to do a better job of learning from events. the basisfor such learning could take several forms, including postcrisis analysis,use of audit trails, and, for later learning, using internet resources to shareexperiences and materials. improved means for capturing and sharingpostcrisis analyses would help in identifying a variety of planning problems up front.archiving of data generated during a crisis would help with suchanalysis and would also be an aid to training. several research suggestions at the workshop centered on audit trails of crisis situations and theiruse in subsequent training. there are difficult issues here regarding secondguessing of specific decisions made during a crisis, but with appropriate security and abstraction of events this could be a valuable resourcefor enabling more realistic training.to support exploitation of past experiences, research might be donetoward creating an infrastructure to support the reporting and easy extraction of useful, highquality information on incidents.4 this goal isnontrivial and requires the development of capabilities that include thecapture of information in real time, including data from information sys4these points originally arose in the systems and network òinfrastructure: modeling andsimulationó breakout group (see appendix a) but are included here because they relateclosely to this discussion.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties37tems as well as video and audio; tools to create and manage metadata;ontologies and indexing capabilities to support access and retrieval; delivery mechanisms to share previously captured experiences, includingnearrealtime availability to permit use of prior knowledge during thecourse of a crisis; and capabilities for adding commentary to capturedinformation and conducting afterthefact analysis. in addition, the capturing of such information in computational modelsñallowing computersystems to reason based on the collected knowledgeñcould be useful forboth training and operational applications.in collecting audit trails, it is important to capture not only the actualstate of events at a given time but also when and where information wasreceived. for example, a fire might have jumped a firebreak at 0130, butthis fact might not have been detected until 0150, and the informationmight not have reached the headquarters for the area until 0205. becauseone of the goals of collecting audit trails is to test the effectiveness ofdifferent communication and information management strategies, it mustbe possible to reconstruct òflowsó of information and determine whereinformation bottlenecks or loss occurred or where delays or error wereintroduced.workshop participants also noted that process and workflow techniques could be applied to the response phase of crisis management so asto find ways of capturing and representing òbest practices.ó of particular interest was finding a way of sharing these practices across administrative domains, which requires finding ways of translating organizationspecific practices into practices that are applicable to a broader set oforganizations.another critical means of supporting crisis managers is to providethem with justintime training and help. the rudimentary technologiesavailable today for providing such assistance, such as contextsensitivehelp mechanism, are inadequate, and research here would be helpful.using wearable computingparticipants identified some opportunities that development of lowcost, highperformance òwearableó systems incorporating gis capabilities might offer. such systems, which would be designed to be usable byuntrained experts in the field, would operate using wireless communications (either terrestrially based or via satellite as such capabilities aredeployed; see òwireless communicationsó in chapter 2) as well as in adisconnected or only occasionally connected mode. they would need tobe capable of storing, manipulating, and displaying both standard spatialfeatures (e.g., roads and rivers) and transmitting and receiving realtimeimagery, voice, and video.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38information technology research for crisis managementone can envision a firefighterõs assistant for fighting forest and brushfires. in a wearable form with voice recognition software for handsoffoperation, such a computer could provide critical pieces of informationsuch as wind speed, fire boundaries, and temperatures in a visual displayformat. equipped with highprecision global positioning system receivers, the wearable device could also provide responders with situationalawareness about each firefighter.workshop participants also suggested that wearable computerswould be of considerable value in urban searchandrescue operations,such as the operation mounted in response to the oklahoma city bombing. such tasks could be assisted by the advent of tools that allow crisisresponders to use, update, and refine maps on the fly during a rescue.one might, for instance, provide each rescue worker with detailed information, such as building blueprints, on the environment they are workingin. an important caveat is that search and rescue personnel may bereluctant to overly depend on information of uncertain accuracy provided by such a system when they are working in an unstable, dangerousbuilding environment. thus, wearable computers might be more immediately applied to capture of critical information from the field rather thandelivery of information to rescuers.information infrastructureas discussed above, crisis management is an information and communicationintensive activity. information infrastructure is key to all aspects of crisis management. in preparedness efforts, networks are usedto provide training and conduct virtual exercises. in crisis response,networks support information interchange among crisis responders andthe provision of warnings and other information to citizens and after thedisaster strikes are used to register claims for disaster relief funds. theglobal disaster information network, gdin,5 for example, is a conceptfor an activity to provide access to disaster information resources, produce integrated information products, and deliver information to decision makers.5the disaster information task force, responding to a request from vice president gore,articulated the gdin concept in its report harnessing information and technology for disastermanagementñthe global disaster information network (disaster information task force. 1997.washington, d.c.). at the request of the transition team considering issues related toimplementation of a disaster information network, the national research council issued areport on how such a network could best provide information for decision makers. seenational research council. 1999. reducing disaster losses through better information. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties39robustnessmeeting the information requirements of crisis management dependson a communications infrastructure that is robust in the face of damage,particularly as greater reliance is placed on information technology tocope with crises and their aftermath. whereas for some applicationsinfrastructure can be brought in from outside the disaster area (as inmobile gis systems or satellite terminals to provide commander centerswith communications), in a number of other cases crisis response wouldbenefit from a more survivable infrastructure. two examples of suchapplications are teleregistration for disaster victims and the coordinationof crisis response activities among a large number of actors (see boxes 1.2and 1.3 in chapter 1).a second, related requirement for communications infrastructure isthe ability to adapt to changing demands, manage traffic congestion, andpermit priority overrides for emergency usage. in a crisis, loading characteristics may diverge from normal patterns and exceed normal loadsñatjust the time when large portions of the infrastructure may have sufferedphysical damage. these scaling and robustness questions arise in a number of large networks that are key to public safety, such as air trafficcontrol; police, fire, and safety communications networks; and 911 andother emergency dispatch systems. these issues also arise in efforts toleverage the public internet and private networks built using internettechnologies.several networking research questions arise from these requirements.networks that are selfadaptive, would, for example, be able to rapidlyconfigure and assemble themselves as, for example, wireless infrastructureelements deployed in response to a crisis. also, networks that can reconfigure themselves quickly in response to the effects of damage and changesin demand will be of much greater utility. infrastructure that is able todegrade gracefully as components of the infrastructure are affected by acrisis would be less likely to completely fail in a crisis situation.by their nature, crises result in a change in the normal demands forcommunications. there is likely to be more traffic, as well as traffic ofvarying priorities. a research question that addresses this requirement ishow to build networks that allow applications to interact with the infrastructure so as to allow the incorporation of capabilities such as priorityoverride features or the recognition and management of informationsurges during a crisis. also, because of the need to maximize a crisisresponderõs ability to utilize communications resources, it would be useful to develop interfaces that allow the combined use of both private andpublic infrastructure during a crisis, permitting crisis responders to exploit whatever infrastructure elements are available in the aftermath of asummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40information technology research for crisis managementcrisis. finally, efforts cannot be directed solely at improving the infrastructure. work needs to be done at the applications level to ensure thatapplications themselves are able to cope with lessthanoptimal networkperformance. applications intended for use in crisis situations cannotassume that large amounts of bandwidth will be available or that connectivity will be available on a consistent basis. strategies for coping wouldinclude adapting the frequency of updates to the available bandwidth orfalling back to activities that consume less bandwidth (e.g., transmittingtext instead of multimedia data).infrastructure for citizensworkshop participants also noted that if the communications infrastructure is to be available widely, especially for use in interacting withindividual citizens, then lowcost, ubiquitous access is required. a rangeof new capabilities might be enabled through the use of the internet,particularly highcapacity, alwaysconnected access (as opposed to lowspeed, dialup connections, which require an action to be taken by theuser every time any internet connection is desired). participants notedthat these alwaysconnected, broadband services, such as those offered bycable modem and dsl technologies, are only available to a small fractionof the u.s. population today. complex technical, economic, and policyissues surround the provision of broadband internet access to residences,6but deployment via a variety of technologies is proceeding, and it is useful to explore how such capabilities might be used for crisis management.in addition to enabling improved ability to interact with citizens,such as the opportunities discussed above for providing enhanced orfocused warnings, deployment of these new highcapacity data servicesto the home offers some interesting opportunities for determining theimpact of a disaster. as communications links to the home are upgradedto twoway technologies, with the deployment of twowaycapable cablesystems or deployment of fiber to the curb, a large number of small, fullynetworkable devices will be deployed throughout populated areas. interesting opportunities arise if one considers placing sensors in each of theseboxes. for example, in a region prone to earthquakes, a cheap accelerometer (e.g., of the sort used to trigger air bags) might be included in eachbox. one possible use of such information is to validate and refine thepredictions of damage models following an earthquake (see below). afteran earthquake, in the areas badly affected, the sensors (or network nodes)6the computer science and telecommunications board will be initiating a study of theseissues in 1999.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties41would cease to function, while those located outside that central regionwould provide indications of the shake intensity. polling these devicesafter the quake could yield almost immediately, two sorts of information:a map of where the communications infrastructure had failed and a roughmap of shake intensities in the surrounding areas.modeling and simulationrole of modeling and simulationmodels are physical or mathematical representations of a system,entity, phenomenon, or process. simulation is a method for implementing a model over time. modeling and simulation can be applied to numerous phenomenañsuch as hurricane track and intensity, earthquakedamage, and the airborne dispersion of chemicals following an accidentalreleaseñand they play important roles throughout crisis managementactivities.7 some of these roles are listed below:¥planning. models are used before disasters to help in planning.for example, the threat of a hayward fault quake is troubling because itcould be expected to have effects similar to those of the 1994 kobe, japan,quake, in which some 5,000 people died. the san francisco bay areatraffic problems following a major quake would be very bad, and the areacould be expected to be split and paralyzed. insights gleaned from modeling and simulation can be used to establish traffic routing contingencyplans for such disasters.¥mitigation. models showing potential flood risk, for example, assist mitigation efforts by allowing the identification of economic incentives for implementing changes and by serving as tools for educatingcommunities about the risks they face.¥prediction of damage before a disaster. the federal emergency management agency (fema), for example, makes use of predictive models ofthe paths of hurricanes, based on information from the national hurricane center, and plots outs factors such as potential damage to mobilehomes and numbers of hospitals in the area, in order to make resourcesavailable in advance. some models that predict specific amounts of dam7modeling and simulation are important in many other domains as well. for an exploration of areas of common interest to the department of defense and the entertainment industry, see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council.1997. modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defense. national academy press,washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42information technology research for crisis managementage have not been as well validatedñmost are derived from cold war eranuclear blast damage datañand thus are not relied upon much by crisisresponders.¥initial damage estimates. after an earthquake, quickly and directlyassessing the extent and distribution of damage is difficult because acquiring and synthesizing damage reports takes considerable time. theinitial damage estimates are essential for directing response efforts, aswell as estimating requests for federal aid following the disaster. thescale of this problem is illustrated by the northridge quake, in whichmore than 3 million buildings in the los angeles area were at risk. withdisasters of this scope, getting a clear view of the extent of the damagetakes time. one type of tool used to assess quake damage rapidly is amodel that indicates what a particular òshakeó means in terms of damage.the model, which includes building stock (structure type, age, etc.), critical facilities, and lifelines, as well as geological information and demographics, predicts the number of casualties and the need for shelter andhospitals across the various soil types.research opportunitiesbetter simulation and modeling capabilities would enhance the capabilities of crisis managers throughout the phases of a crisis. workshopparticipants identified a number of improvements in the design and useof models that could be helpful during a crisis:¥better meeting of the needs of crisis responders. the output from models is frequently not presented in a way suited to meeting the realworldinformation needs of crisis responders. models frequently produce results in units not of interest to the crisis responder. for example, plumemodels of a chemical spill or release of radioactive material typicallyproduce maps showing dispersion in parts per million as a function oftime. what a crisis responder actually needs is something that automatically translates the concentration of materials into more easily interpretable categories such as òsafe,ó òhazardous but not life threatening,ó oròlife threateningó so that appropriate action can be taken quickly. closelyrelated is the need to allow nonexperts to use models. this requires, forexample, that technical parameters of interest to experts tuning a modelare separated from those of interest to decision makers.¥data collection to support the realtime use and validation of models.models have limitations in their predictive capabilities. for example,even with all the background data used in earthquake models, beingprecise about damage estimates is difficult. in the area affected by thenorthridge earthquake there were more than 100 8inch water pipes, andsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties43yet a damage model of the quake would not be able to predict whichspecific pipes would be broken in the quake. similarly, building damagemodels might provide results applicable to a class of buildings in an areabut not to individual structures, and engineers would still need to be sentinto the field after the earthquake to assess damage to individual homesand buildings. incorporation of data in realtime data can significantlyimprove the output of models. integration of data collected during acrisis would allow both validation of the results of a model against theactual situation resulting from the crisis and better prediction of the nextstage of the crisis as it evolves. for example, as an earthquake mitigationmeasure one might deploy sensors in buildings that would provide datathat could be combined with shake models to improve the accuracy ofdamage predictions following an earthquake.¥model interoperability. models tend to be developed and used inisolation. to more fully exploit the results of models, techniques shouldbe developed that better allow models to be accessed and integrated intoinformation systems. in particular, it would be useful to facilitate suchcapabilities as the integration of realtime data with the results of modelsand the propagation of results and their uncertainty between differentmodels. the value of such integration between data and models can beillustrated using the watermainbreak example introduced above. improved integration would permit crisis responders to enter data fromfield assessments indicating which particular pipes were in fact damagedand then to recompute a model of the water system to provide an estimate of water availability, something of obvious interest in planningfirefighting activities. also, with such capabilities in place, systems thatwould permit different crisis models to be plugged in could be built,allowing comprehensive and realistic characterization of a variety of different crisis situations.one application proposed during the course of workshop discussionswas the use of simulations to enhance the realism of exercises. one specific aspect would be the incorporation of realistic levels of stress. although, of course, a major research goal is to provide emergency managers with tools to better manage the large volumes of information (such asnumerous reports from the field) or the coordination of a multitude offield activities, increased levels of stress are nonetheless an essential element of crisis management. providing realistic stress levels, such asthrough the simulation of very high information traffic levels, wouldgreatly enhance the realism and training value of exercises. audit trailand similar information captured during crises could be used to enhancethe realism of the pace and nature of simulated communications traffic.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44information technology research for crisis managementelectronic commerceelectronic commerce and related technologies can play the role ofboth enabler of and impediment to effective crisis management. for thepurpose of this discussion, electronic commerce (ec) technologies aredefined broadly to include electronic means for obtaining information onthe availability of physical goods, requesting goods, and paying for thosegoods; methods for entering and processing requests for benefits andpaying those benefits; and computer security technologies needed to control the flow of information or protect information from unauthorizedmodification. in crisis response, the logistics function lends itself to theuse of these electronic commerce techniques (even if the supplies arealready in the possession of agencies responding to the crisis and if noadditional funds will change hands).problems caused by the increased use of anddependence on electronic commercealthough certain aspects of electronic commerce can be helpful inresponding to a crisis, the routine dependence on electronic commercecan also serve to make recovery harder, unless the infrastructure supporting such commerce is able to survive the event that triggered the crisis. infact, misplaced reliance on technology could itself trigger the crisis. forexample, widespread power outages are considered crisis situations today, unlike years ago when there was no dependence on a power grid. infact, it is this dependence combined with a concern about the reliabilityand correctness of our computer software that has led to concern for theyear 2000 problem and its consequencesña potential crisis that manypeople seem to fear more than many natural disasters (see appendix b).some key ec technologies that are widely depended on include creditcard authorization, which is itself often dependent on the telephone; automated teller machines; and computer networks. the principal issueraised in workshop discussions regarding dependence on electronic commerce was the need to ensure survivability of the critical infrastructuresupporting ec.8 it is important to assess the reliability and survivabilityof different parts of the ec infrastructure in light of different kinds ofcrises, and, for those parts not likely to be available, one must not dependon them for recovery and must be prepared instead to mitigate the effectsof their loss.8see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c., for a discussion of criticalinformation infrastructure issues and associated research topics.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties45benefits of electronic commerce in crisis managementdiscussion pointed to several possible benefits of ec technologies incrisis management:¥information available from ec systems. some of the most compellingideas involved the use of information normally maintained in ec systemsto gauge preparedness, to locate available resources, and to reduce publicanxiety and hoarding. for example, inventory information from suppliers might be accessed in real time to find the nearest availability for supplies. in anticipated crises (for example, from a hurricane where there isplenty of advance warning), pointofsale data could be processed to determine preparednessñas indicated by the rate at which individuals arepurchasing plastic sheeting, plywood, and so forth. of course, this kindof access to supplier databases raises privacy, business, and independence concerns.¥national emergency purchasing directory. although ties to the localec infrastructure can identify local availability of supplies, resources willlikely need to be acquired from outside the crisisaffected area. an onlinepurchasing directory with information that will enable finding suitablesuppliers who also have available inventory can significantly speed upthe shipment of needed supplies into the affected area.¥processing input from many sources. besides the direct tie to ecdatabases, there is an indirect benefit of electronic commerce that can beexploited. in particular, many of the technologies developed and usedextensively in electronic commerce can also be applied to other crisismanagement needs. the ability to process data from many sources, eitherthrough web pages or though call centers located outside the affectedarea, can be particularly useful.if such benefits are to be realized during a crisis, relationships supporting such data exchange must be established in advance. further,procedures must be put in place to credential emergency responders electronically so that the authority of the various players to make requests orto offer services can be determined.pitfalls of traditional electronic commerce in crisis managementa critical aspect of the infrastructure for ec that will affect crisismanagement is management of the trust relationships between parties,such as the relationships between insurance companies and those insured,between citizens and relief agencies (citizens must trust that they areinteracting with legitimate representatives of those agencies), and betweensummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46information technology research for crisis managementcontractors and suppliers (who need assurances that they will be paid fortheir services or products). one of the differences between ec as it isnormally applied and ec during a crisis is that relationships will be moretransient during a crisis. there will be new players, and it will be necessary to determine whether they are authorized players with whom oneshould do business. in traditional commerce there may be more time tobuild a trust relationship. in a crisis, one must decide quickly whether tohonor a request.perhaps the most significant pitfall of traditional ec systems withrespect to their application in crisis situations is the rigidity of the rulesregarding authorization of particular operations. this rigidity has beenthe best way to limit fraud in routine use of ec systems. typically anorganization has a single entity who is able to authorize purchases. infact, for governmental agencies, this practice is often legislated. however, during a crisis, these rigid procedures could lead to delays or worseconsequences.some jurisdictions provide for delegated authority in particular situations, but todayõs systems for ec are not able to deal with this òconditional delegated authority.ó workshop participants felt that one of theresearch goals for ec should be to provide for more flexible authorizationpolicies that will maintain accountability yet support delegated authorityand other exceptions. such policies must be supported by the ec infrastructure as it is applied in the normal case, so that it will be availablewhen needed. however, the conditional aspect of the policies will limitcertain discretion from being applied except in the condition of a declaredemergency.research opportunitiesworkshop participants considered the following to be key researchopportunities for electronic commerce in crisis management:¥development of technologies and standards for escrow sites where citizens can store important information that they might need to access in a crisisbut that might not be available if systems within the affected area are inaccessible.this escrowed data would include medical records, financial data, familycontacts, and other essential records. the escrow technology must protect the userõs privacy, while improving the survivability of the userspersonal information.¥determination of the range of authorization policies to be applied in emergency electronic commerce situations. one such policy to be considered issummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research opportunties47conditional delegated authority and mechanisms to allow other kinds ofexceptions.¥development of a dynamic trust structure to support ad hoc or instantaccreditation of participants with limited authority and limited powers of delegation. such arrangements would greatly facilitate the purchase, for example, of critically needed supplies.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.484achieving an impact in the crisismanagement communityinteractions between the information technologyresearch and crisis management communitiesfor research by the information technology community to have animpact on the crisis management community, considerable interactionbetween the two is required. workshop participants representing different parts of these communities discussed a number of different modelsfor such interaction (box 4.1) and presented ideas on how research andtechnology transfer could be effective for crisis management. a widerange of issues were discussed, but there was agreement on some themesrelated to the interaction of information technology research and crisismanagement:¥the crisis management community is focused primarily on shortterm,integrated solutions using existing technology. information technology researchers, on the other hand, are interested in developing and testinglongerterm, leadingedge technology. this difference in outlook andgoals must be addressed in research programs such as the national science foundationõs (nsfõs) digital government initiative.¥technology transfer is a critical and often missing link in the crisis management view of information technology research. without a guarantee that atechnology will be supported after the initial development and prototypetesting, the crisis responders and the entire crisis management community have been wary of trying new ideas that are not offtheshelf technologies.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.achieving an impact in the crisis management community49box 4.1 types of interactions between the informationtechnology and crisis management communitiesin his presentation at the workshop, ronald larsen described four types ofinteractions that the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) hassponsored between information technology researchers and military units responsible for crisis management actions. these approaches support short to longtermresearch activities and a range of deliverables, from demonstrations to products.the first approach involves working in the field to deploy technology to endusers. this approach is the most difficult, slowest, and most expensive, yet it is themost likely to achieve the end result of getting technology into the hands of peoplewho need it.the second approach, which is perhaps the most familiar to information technology researchers, involves the development of laboratory integration prototypes.it involves understanding an application, giving researchers the task of developingsystems to address the needs of the application, and demonstrating the solutions.this approach requires good relations with the end users and close collaborationswith early adopters. these are the people in the field who have an interest intechnologies that will improve their performance.larsen called the third approach the òscience fairóñseveral researchers working on related and perhaps competing technologies are asked to prepare presentations based on a given scenario. the user community is then invited to see thesepresentations at a specific site, and people serving as brokers look for the mostpromising interactions.the final approach is serendipity, whereby a new application requirement appears that is ideally suited to a new technology that has been or is being developed. one example of this approach cited by ronald larsen was the teaming upin the early 1990s of u.c. berkeleyõs visual library project with the california department of water resources (dwr). the dwr was interested in making itslegacy documents more useful. the university decided to scan and enliven thematerials to make them more like typical digital documents. then, in the floods of1997, the dwr discovered that these digitized documents were its most valuableinformation resources. the universityõs resources also proved valuable in providing public information. the dwr gave pictures of flood damage and road washouts to the berkeley team, who scanned them, put them up in the library, andmade them available to the public and the press. it was òan extraordinarily successful experience from the standpoint of learning about how these technologiescan apply to crisis management,ó larsen said.¥when a technology is identified as promising, there is the challenge ofcommercializing it. the federal government typically provides fundingonly up to the prototype stage. when an experimental technology becomes interesting to a crisis manager, the need arises for both a processand a party to take on the task of identifying and interacting with acommercial vendor who will develop a product for sale.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50information technology research for crisis management¥interaction with end users from the crisis management community isessential. for example, usercentered design begins with an understanding of the user (e.g., crisis responders), and people who design systemsused in crises must have a good understanding of the environment inwhich their systems are used.¥testing in environments that are as realistic as possible is crucial to theacceptance of any new technology. the crisis management community regularly stages exercises using simulated crises to train people and to learnabout new systems and situations. these are valuable opportunities forresearchers to be involved in defining testbeds and specific problems thatwould form the basis for research programs. for example, workshopparticipant albert guber noted the importance of stress in emergencysituationsña feature that is difficult to replicate in laboratory settings butthat is one of the most important factors in determining how well a system will function in a real emergency. todayõs disasterresponse exercisesattempt to duplicate many of the real stresses.¥other research communities have a role to play in information technologyresearch for crisis management. for example, statistical techniques wouldbe useful in finding ways to validate crisis models, reduce the information overload during the response phase, and give rapid estimates of thestate of the crisis.¥successful interactions between information technology researchers andthe crisis management community are facilitated by having a third party actingas a bridge or broker. brokers that were mentioned during the workshopincluded the funding agencies (e.g., darpa and nsf) and organizationslike the pacific disaster center (box 4.2) and the center for integration ofnatural disaster information (box 4.3). these brokers see their role asunderstanding the problems of the crisis management community andbox 4.2 the pacific disaster centerthe pacific disaster center (pdc) supports emergency managers in the pacific region by providing them information that they can use to make better decisions.the pdc develops capabilities and information products based on user needs.the experience, according to the pdcõs ernest paylor, has been that the crisismanagement community is not interested in technology per se. instead, it is seeking integrated information solutions using offtheshelf technology as much as possible. the pdc has also found demonstrations to be an important part of thedevelopment path, particularly in helping potential users to develop trust in theinformation that the new products will be delivering. the pdc has served as abroker by identifying gaps between technology capabilities and user needs andencouraging research in those areas. one example is a new nasa research program built around providing modeling and simulation capabilities for the pdc.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.achieving an impact in the crisis management community51box 4.3 center for integration of natural disaster informationthe u.s. geological surveyõs (usgsõs) center for integration of natural disaster information (cindi) is a research facility that develops and evaluates technology for information integration and dissemination; performs research in data integration, analysis, modeling, and decision support; and supports the ongoingevolution of the usgsõs processing and delivery of hazards data. as part of thehumanitarian response to hurricane mitch, cindi has provided integrated information to support emergency managers and international relief organizations in understanding how to respond effectively to the devastation caused by mitch.one of the products developed by cindi is a digital atlas that provides morethan 60 different types of geospatial information in a form that can be manipulatedfor analysis. these maps, based on information extracted from satellite images,existing geologic maps, air photos, and other digital and paper sources, show thelocations of landslides and floods, damage to roads, bridges, and other infrastructure, precipitation information, and impacts on agricultural lands.source: adapted from center for integration of natural disaster information. 1998. cindi:center for integration of natural disaster information. u.s. geological survey, washington,d.c. available online at < http://cindi.usgs.gov/>.the capabilities of information technology research, identifying criticalgaps, and finding matches.management challenges to using informationtechnology in crisis managementworkshop participants noted that advances in information technology must be accompanied by changes addressing organizational, management, capacity, and resource issues. some of these issues are listedbelow:¥resistance to change. avagene moore observed during the workshop that people initially resist change and do not always appreciate thevalue of learning to use new technologies. information technology can beperceived in the crisis management community as imposing new tasksrather than providing useful tools for doing oneõs job.¥insufficient attention paid to education and training. one example ofan initiative in this area, described by avagene moore, is the emergencyinformation infrastructure partnership (eiip). the eiip has a virtual forum on the internet to involve local, state, and federal emergency managers, along with privatesector emergency management people who havesummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52information technology research for crisis managementan interest in using internet technologies. a goal of eiipõs activities is toprovide education and handson experiences to demonstrate how emergency managers can benefit from use of information technology such asthe internet. the forum is intended to enable dynamic exchange of emergency management information and provide innovative solutions toemergency management challenges. to that end, eiip conducted anonline exercise, webex, that drew participants from many different levels of emergency management.¥insufficient awareness. though emergency managers may appreciate the potential of information technology to improve their professionalcapabilities, new tools must be demonstrably more effective and accurateand must be affordable for them to be embraced widely.¥limited resources. resource constraints were pointed to as a fundamental issue, particularly at the local level. although costs have beensteadily decreasing, laptop computers, global positioning system units,and the like are frequently unaffordable. also, costs include not only thepurchase of systems but also other contributions to total cost of ownership, such as operational, training, and maintenance costs. availableemergency management resources may cover only basic elements of theemergency operationsñsalaries, utilities, and insurance. given a fixedlevel of spending, local governments considering investment in new technology must make tradeoffs, both with other elements of emergencyoperations and with spending on daytoday operations. before they willallocate additional resources for information technology, its advantagesmust be clearly demonstrated to them.¥obsolete technology base. many local governments have little information technology in place. offices may lack basic computer equipmentand lack access to tools such as email. even where local governmentshave made some investment in information technology, it may be old andobsolete.¥information technology investments that are focused on normal operations, not crises. workshop participant james morentz characterized thisissue as one of the most critical ones confronting crisis management information managers. organizations focus their investments on the transactional information systems that support daytoday operations rather thaninvesting in the systems required to manage the unusual situation andthus underinvest in crisis management capabilities. one suggestion madein response to this challenge by workshop participants was that one mightinitially focus investment in innovative systems for crises that are likely torecur with relatively predictable frequency, such as hurricanes in the gulfstates or california wildfires. information systems developed for thesepredictable events could then be transferred to the unpredictable.¥investment that focuses on distribution and tracking of emergency fundssummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.achieving an impact in the crisis management community53to victims. jack harrald, describing the allocation of emergency dollars toinformation technology, noted that crisis management places a premiumon providing relief funds directly to victimsñfunctioning much like aninsurance company. thus there is a reluctance to tap into the disasterresponse funding stream, which is much larger than daytoday operating funds, for investment in information technology to improve crisismanagement capabilities.¥inadequate systemwide planning. james morentz observed that theemergency management community does not always factor informationtechnology considerations into overall planning. although virtually allof the federal response agency organizations use software developed bymorentzõs company, essential technologies, their decisions to purchasethe software were made independently. no overall system plan existedthat would facilitate integration of these individual software systems intoa single system. another problem was raised by thomas oõkeefe, whoobserved that when emergency management structures are designed, theydo not always incorporate technology that is close at hand or already inplace. nor are interfaces that are already familiar to crisis responders,such as the web, always used.¥tendencies to òreinventó the same solutions in each organization. henrykelly observed that sharing information technology experience can bedifficult for agencies so they tend to reinvent their own solutions usingtheir own contractors. thus, the government may reinvent a technologymultiple times in different application contexts. although this practicemay have benefits in allowing an organization to select the technologicalbest of breed, the resulting multiplicity of systems may not effectivelyinteroperate or support upgrades. in addition, when underlying infrastructure such as the operating system changes, many parts of the wholesystem may have to be replaced or upgraded. this issue is a common onein many areas of systems integration and may be addressed throughactive reconsideration of architectural and design approaches.1¥coping with multiple standards. information systems depend onstandards. thomas oõkeefe pointed out, for example, that there are multiple standards for damage assessment after an incident such as a fire. tointegrate and compare this information across different organizations,standardsñor ways of reconciling multiple standardsñmust be established for every aspect of the information life cycle. in addition, identifying which standards to adopt poses a very real challenge for emergencymanagers purchasing hardware and software.1one approach is to emphasize commercial standards and components that may be assembled into composable systems rather than relying on tight integration to provide particular solutions.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.545the broader context:information technology in governmentthe federal government depends on information technology (it) tocarry out the various missions of the federal agencies and to provideservices to the public. programs have been launched to òreinvent government,ó with a particular focus in the 1990s on leveraging informationtechnology.1 it can enhance productivity for existing missions and services, and it can also enable entirely new approaches to services. effectivedeployment of new technology holds the potential for vastly enhancingcitizen access to government information and for significantly streamlining current government operations. the rapid spread of the internet andthe ease of use offered by the world wide web have afforded particularopportunities for extending electronic access to government resources.as a result, the number of computers and communications networks ingovernment has grown steadily in recent years.executive order 13011 (july 16, 1996) established agency responsibilities and governmentwide mechanisms to improve the acquisition andmanagement of information technology. the executive order created thechief information officers council as the principal interagency forum formore effective management of it investments, a government information technology services board to ensure implementation of the information technology recommendations of the national performance review1for example, vice president gore launched the national performance review, later renamed the national partnership for reinventing government, with the intent of makinggovernment work better and cost less.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broader context55(now the national partnership for reinventing government) and to develop shared approaches and services across agencies, and the information technology resources board to provide independent assessment toassist in development of selected major information systems.despite substantial investments, agencies still face many problemswhere todayõs information technology does not meet their needs, including in such areas as information integration, management, and retrieval;humancomputer interfaces; collaboration and computermediated interaction; authentication, privacy, security, and reliability; network infrastructure, survivability, and adaptability; software assurance; wearableand portable computing; and modeling and simulation.it researchers are actively working on questions that fall into theseareas. however, historically there has been relatively little interactionbetween the it research community and those who operate and developgovernment information systems or who run agency programs. agenciestend to rely on what is available from vendors in the marketplace or touse internal staff to build customized systems to meet their needs. bypromoting dialog between end users in government and those performing computing and communications research, it may be possible both toaccelerate innovation in pertinent technical areas and to hasten the adoption of those innovations into agency infrastructure.the recent presidentõs information technology advisory committee(pitac) report2 found that the federal government has underemphasizedfundamental research in it and has allowed research priorities to shift tonearterm applications and problem solving motivated by immediateneeds faced in mission agencies. a number of government applicationareas, including crisis management, were cited as significant areas forlongerterm information technology research (box 5.1).a key to addressing the needs and interests of both communities isthe establishment of appropriate mechanisms for collaboration betweenthe research community and government information technology managers. such mutual gain is an objective, for example, of the federal information services and applications council (fisac) of the national scienceand technology councilõs national coordination office for computing,information, and communications r&d. one major challenge is the definition of mechanisms for transition, such as testbed systems, that respectagency concerns over investment in legacy systems and risk. federal it2presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). february 1999.information technology research: investing in our future. pitac report to the president, national coordination office for computing, information, and communications,arlington, va.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56information technology research for crisis managementbox 5.1 crisis management and the presidentõs informationtechnology advisory committeein a february 1999 report, the presidentõs information technology advisorycommittee (pitac) expressed concern that no agency claimed the strategic advancement of it as a core mission, and that, in a budget squeeze, longerterm itresearch might be cut if it seems generic or ancillary to an agencyõs core mission.more specifically, there was concern that the defense advanced researchprojects agency (darpa) had been squeezed by budgetary pressure to respondto specific nearterm goals in a readily demonstrable way, and that fundamentaland basic research, traditionally carried out mostly by darpa and the nationalscience foundation (nsf), had been reduced in recent years.in the area of crisis management, this underinvestment in fundamental andbasic research has meant, for example, that the fundamental understanding required to build tools of interest to the crisis management community, such as thosethat would enhance, measure, or characterize the utility of software components indisasters, have not been developed. in his keynote address at the workshop,henry kelly related crisis management to the broader challenges of it, as articulated in the pitac report. kelly pointed out that òthis is a problem that absolutelygoes to the core of societyõs ability to use it. it certainly goes to the core of theproblem of whether you can use it effectively in a crisis. this is not something thatwill be solved in someoneõs spare time. . . . it needs to be a core mission ofsomebodyõs, and it is a 20year challenge.ó as an example, kelly expressed theneed to develop software that is selfhealing, fails gracefully, models its own defects, and can update itself.a second pitac concern that is related to crisis management is the design ofeffective humanmachine interfaces. how do human beings get the informationthey need, when they need it, and in the form they need it? in a crisis, users arestressed. they have less time and patience to express precisely what informationis needed; they will not be able to read manuals to learn new features, and they willhave difficulty understanding data that are displayed in a manner that is not absolutely clear. although, ideally, they will have had daytoday experience with manyof the systems they will be using in a crisis, in some instances they will be using asystem for the first time and will need to be trained to use it on the spot.a third major concern outlined by pitac relates to the scalable infrastructure ofcomputing and communications. the fundamental nature and role of computing inthe working environment has been changing. kelly noted that computer processors will be embedded everywhereñthere are already 25 microprocessors in acadillac, 10,000 microprocessors in an offshore drilling rig, and a million microproacquisition managers need mechanisms by which they can interact withthe research community without exposing operational users to unnecessary risk. whatever the specific mechanism, the process of incorporatingnew research ideas and technology requires spanning the cultural gulfbetween the practices of commercial systems integration and the workstyles of the research community. recognizing these needs and opportusummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broader context57nities, the national science foundation (nsf) launched a new digitalgovernment program in june 1998.to complement the workshop panels and breakout sessions that explored specific requirements of crisis management, several speakers wereasked to describe what they saw as more generic challengesñwhat arethe critical it research challenges and by what process can it innovationbe better directed to fulfill longterm government application needs?cessors in an aircraft carrier. these processors are linked together in complexnetworks and interact with other processors on a potentially global scale. fewengineers understand their failure modes and how they relate to the systems inwhich they are contained. how can this type of network be managed, and how dothese networks perform in a crisis when they are subject to extreme or unusualloads? do they adapt gracefully, or do they manifest catastrophic emergent behaviors?these infrastructures and the software that runs on top of them will drive manysystems that are important during a crisisñthe financial system; police, fire, andsafety teams; air traffic control; and emergency communications systems. thesesystems are also responsible for the physical operation of equipment such as forklifts or helicopters that may be used in an emergency. explicit attention to criticalinfrastructure is an emerging national concernñwhat technology developmentscan help make this infrastructure predictable, robust, and reliable, as well as scalable and affordable?a fourth issue raised in the pitac report is how to make the transition from acold war management paradigm, in which it was supported as an adjunct tospace technology or weapons production and development, to a new paradigm inwhich it research encompasses a wide range of socioeconomic goals, and isexplicitly managed for risk, sustainment of funding, and balance of fundamentalwork and applications. for example, it has been a challenge for nsf to be able toinvest in larger and riskier projects that require sustained funding for 3 or 4 years,involve substantial experimentation and engineering, and entail extensive collaboration and teaming. pitac was also apprehensive about how to manage theinterface between basic and applied research, given the difficulty of managinglongterm research and measuring its impact.1pitac recommended, among other things, a series of òexploration centersóthat focus on particular applications, with a longterm emphasis. the administration has been considering how to link interesting technologyrelated applicationsinto the it research community without diverting resources from fundamental research. in this context, henry kelly suggested that exploration of it applications tocrisis management could offer valuable learning experiences to the it researchcommunity.1this issue was discussed in the brookssutherland report. computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council. 1995. evolving thehigh performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58information technology research for crisis managementinformation technology challengesacross governmentcrisis management is characterized as posing some of the toughestinformation technology challenges in the area of digital government. because of the many analogies between the needs of crisis management andthe sorts of capabilities that might be needed for other government efforts, a perception exists that if the research community can help in effectively addressing challenges of crisis management, these results will alsocontribute toward solutions to many other major, generic challenges facedby government agencies. some of these challenges are listed below:¥many diverse players throughout government and the private sector. amajor challenge in crisis management that is mirrored in many othergovernment applications is the multitude of different entitiesñstate, local, and federal agencies, as well as lots of private players. each has itsown information systems, data standards, operating procedures, and thelike, so bringing these different organizations together to provide an integrated response to a crisis, or other government function, becomes difficult.¥wide range of capabilities of players. crisis management activities incalifornia, for example, must take into account differences in it capabilities between urban los angeles county and rural lake county. in somelocations, a 5yearold computer is deemed acceptable; however, in somecounties, states, and federal agencies, the technology is at the leadingedge. how can systems be built and procedures established that permitall these organizations and systems to work together effectively?¥validation, integration, search, and retrieval of large and diverse datasets. in the government arena, large amounts of data are collected, andthese data are often of varying quality. challenges include how to validate data sets; combine data, sometimes of different quality; and get ahandle on the flood of information that is now available on the internet,on cd, and in many other forms.¥heterogeneity of systems used by different organizations. existing notonly in crisis management but also across government, this challengearises at all levels, from computing platforms to database systems tohigherlevel semantic issues that make integrating information that spansmultiple agencies or organizations difficult.¥resource constraints. in crisis management, as well as in it effortsthroughout government, resources for investment in new technologiesare limited. this constraint makes investing in new capabilities moredifficult, even where the longterm payback may be significant. how canpayback be better measured to justify commitment of resources?¥inflexible rules that interfere with exploitation of opportunities offered bysummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broader context59advances in it. many outdated, inflexible processes and rules are in placethat were written in an era when systems were solely paper based. howcan government take advantage of the new electronic media and reviseobsolete rules?¥organizational structures that do not reflect changes in it. for example, how can a response team be organized in an itrich responseenvironment? understanding such questions can require the involvement of people with other kinds of expertise, such as sociologists, anthropologists, and organization and management specialists.¥increasing public demands for information and responses. citizensõ expectations for responsive government greatly increase when they havenew, more interactive channels for communicating with government.michael nelson noted, for example, that after the white house web sitewas established, 1,000 emails a day were sent to president clinton andvice president goreñnot just òglad youõre onlineó messages, but alsosubstantive queries. once easytouse, instantaneous communicationchannels have been established, responding accordingly becomes a majorchallenge.¥authentication. the lack of an authentication infrastructure poseschallenges in government. for example, in the email example above,replies to the emails were not sent electronically because authenticatingthat they in fact came from the president was impossible. similarly, whenthe social security administration launched a program to permit peopleto request their social security record via the internet, there were concernsthat requests could not be properly authenticated.3¥unreliability of new technologies. crisis managers will be reluctant torely on a technology, such as a network, for missioncritical applications ifthey know that there is a significant chance that it might fail during amajor disaster. likewise, citizens will be reluctant to depend on a systemthat is perceived as unreliable. similar challenges hold true throughoutgovernment.achieving innovationhow to support it research related to government missions and successfully transition the fruits of this research into government operations3in 1997, the social security administration launched a program to permit people toretrieve their personal earnings and benefit statement (pebes) through an online, interactive system. following expressions of concern that peopleõs privacy could be violatedusing this system, the social security administration suspended the interactive pebes system. the pebes system currently allows people to make online requests through a webbrowser (using encryption) but the statements are delivered by u.s. mail.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60information technology research for crisis managementwas a prominent theme throughout the workshop. some ideas considered by workshop participants follow:¥making support of r&d by mission agencies a priority. successfulcollaboration between government agencies and the it research community will require not only the support of nsf and other research agencies,but also the engagement of mission agencies.¥providing incentives for excellence and innovation in it. in the crisismanagement context, a major challenge to innovation is that if an organization is successful in improving its systems and thus its ability to respond to a crisis, no one will notice. on the other hand, when a majorcrisis inevitably causes significant harm, blame may be placed on an inadequate response. the it sector throughout government faces a similarchallenge: when it and other infrastructure systems are working properly, the people responsible tend not to receive much credit, but, whenthey fail, there may be serious repercussions.¥ensuring sufficient investment in it to support innovation. uppermanagement does not necessarily know much about it, and may notprovide sufficient resources or other support to succeed. another dimension of underinvestment is in compensation and career paths for peoplewho run government it systems, affecting governmentõs ability to attractthe best peopleñwhich often means shifting responsibility for innovationto contractors.¥establishing incentives and motivation for activity and collaboration. inorder to introduce new technologies, one must be willing to take somerisks and be in a position to understand the level of risk assumed. whena manager has a reasonable assessment of those risks, undertaking moreexperimental activities becomes easier. this issue applies particularly incontractual relationships with it contractors.¥building communities committed to innovation. although many individuals find ways to overcome organizational barriers to change, findingways to build communities is particularly valuableñin effect creating aninfrastructure of people and institutions committed to new ideas. anexample of a group working to build a community is the national coordination office for computing, information, and communications, whichwas formed to facilitate agencies working collaboratively.¥identifying the appropriate testbeds or skunkwork mechanisms. thesemechanisms offer managers a way to deal with risks. managers may notwant to spend money on what is perceived as a risky endeavor; however,testbeds can be valuable as a means of obtaining insight into the future,which can help with decisions on whether to make investments in newtechnology. in addition to having a good technology or even a goodtestbed in which the technology has been tried, it is important to establishsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broader context61longterm relationships between those developing the new technologyand the people who ultimately have to evaluate and adopt it for operational use. in particular, it is important to set the scale of such activitiesappropriately. the scale of a testbed activity can be difficult to get right.on the one hand testbeds must to be of sufficient scale to fully test thetechnology and stress its capabilities. on the other hand, there is a dangerthat testbeds will become selfperpetuating. however, it can be arguedthat this is how the internet evolved: a testbed was experimentally putinto operational context and people would not let go of it. in the crisismanagement community, the goals should be to establish a dynamic approach that permits people to move in and out of testbed activities, and toset flexible goals for what people are to accomplish.¥finding ways of measuring success. an understanding of how success is measured, how these decisions are made at the various levels ofgovernment, and how those values can be fed back into the researchcommunity is critical. a related and ongoing question is how the effect ofnew technology or improved system design can be evaluated in the absence of a full baseline of information about how things work today.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixessummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.65adetailed workshop agenda andparticipantsworkshop agendatuesday, december 1, 19987:30 ð 8:30 amregistration and continental breakfast8:30 ð 8:45welcome and overviewwilliam scherlis8:45 ð 9:15keynote 1g. clay hollister, chief information officer, federalemergency management agency9:15 ð 9:45break9:45 ð 12:00panel 1: case studies on crisis managementpanelists:nuclear/industrial scenario: albert guberearthquake: david kehrleinflash flood: eve gruntfesthurricane: william millermoderator: eve gruntfestsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66appendix a12:00 ð 12:30 pmlunch12:30 ð 1:30panel 2: analysis of information technologyissues in the case studiespanelists: avagene moore, thomas oõkeefe, jack harrald,james morentzmoderator: david kehrlein1:30 ð 3:00panel 3: information technology contextpanelists:information management: barry leinerdatabases: david maiercomputing/storage: paul h. smithcommunications/wireless: philip karnform factors and wearables: daniel siewiorekmoderator: david dewitt3:003:15task for discussion sessionswilliam scherlis3:15 ð 3:45break3:45 ð 6:00focused breakout sessionsinformation as needed (information integration,information management/retrieval, digital libraries,geographical and spatial information, . . .)session leaders: bruce croft and david dewittparticipants: paul bryant, elliot christian, gerraldgalloway, valerie gregg, david gunning, sally howe,david jensen, david kehrlein, david maier, robertneches, edie rasmusen, tom usselman, lou walter,robert winokurinformation for people (information services at theuser level, humancomputer interaction, visualization, collaboration, wearable computing, sensors androbots, . . .)session leaders: susan dumais and william eddysummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a67participants: eileen collins, mark deputy, wayne gray,eve gruntfest, ronald larsen, avagene moore, thomasoõkeefe, jean scholtz, daniel siewiorekcommerce and transactions (electronic commerce,transactions, security, privacy, . . .)session leaders: cliff neuman and michael nelsonparticipants: peter bloniarz, larry brandt, melvynciment, stephen crocker, cathryn dippo, clay hollister,frank jaffe, angienetta johnson, michael swetnam,douglas tygarsystems and network infrastructure; modeling andsimulation (software composition and assurance,middleware and infrastructure services, systemintegration and architectural issues, . . .)session leaders: karen sollins and sallie kellermcnultyparticipants: richard beckman, albert guber, philipkarn, barry leiner, joe lombardo, cathy mcdonald,avagene moore, james morentz, paul smith, carl staton,john toole6:00 ð 7:30reception7:00 ð 9:00 pmdemonstrationsemergency information infrastructure partnershipvirtual forum, avagene mooretransportation simulation, richard beckmanwednesday, december 2, 19987:30 ð 8:30 amcontinental breakfast8:30 ð 10:15focused breakout sessions (continued)10:15 ð 10:30break10:30 ð 11:00keynote 2henry kelly, white house office of science andtechnology policysummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68appendix a11:00 ð 12:30 pmpanel 4: principal information technologyresearch opportunitiespanelists: bruce croft, sally kellermcnulty, cliffneuman, susan dumaismoderator: william scherlis12:30 ð 1:30lunch1:30 ð 2:30panel 5: achieving an impact in the crisismanagement communitypanelists: ronald larsen, earnest paylor, albert gubermoderator: bruce croft2:30 ð 3:30panel 6: lessons for digital governmentpanelists: john toole, bruce mcconnell, michael nelsonmoderator: michael nelson3:30 ð 4:00concluding remarkswilliam scherlis4:00 pmadjournsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a69workshop participantsrichard beckman, los alamos national laboratorypeter bloniarz, center for technology and government, stateuniversity of new yorklawrence brandt, national science foundationpaul bryant, federal emergency management agencyelliot christian, u.s. geological surveymelvyn ciment, potomac institute for policy studieseileen collins, national science foundationstephen crocker, steve crocker associatesw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstmark deputy, montgomery county urban search and rescuedavid dewitt, university of wisconsin at madisoncathryn s. dippo, bureau of labor statisticssusan dumais, microsoft researchwilliam eddy, carnegie mellon universitygerrald galloway, international joint commissionwayne gray, george mason universityvalerie gregg, national science foundationeve gruntfest, university of colorado at colorado springsalbert guber, department of energy/bechtel nevadadavid gunning, defense advanced research projects agencyjohn r. harrald, george washington universityg. clay hollister, federal emergency management agencysally e. howe, national coordination office for computing,information, and communicationskay howell, national coordination office for computing, information,and communicationsfrank jaffe, bank of bostondavid jensen, university of massachusetts at amherstangienetta johnson, national aeronautics and space administrationphilip karn, qualcomm inc.david kehrlein, state of california, governorõs office of emergencyservicessallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratoryhenry kelly, office of science and technology policyronald larsen, defense advanced research projects agencybarry leiner, corporation for national research initiativesjoe lombardo, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universitydavid maier, oregon graduate institutebruce mcconnell, office of management and budgetsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70appendix acathy mcdonald, national coordination office for computing,information, and communicationswilliam miller, u.s. geological surveyavagene moore, av/pm inc., lawrenceburg, tennesseejames morentz, essential technologies inc.robert neches, university of southern californiamichael r. nelson, ibmclifford neuman, university of southern californiathomas oõkeefe, california department of forestry and fire protectionearnest paylor, national aeronautics and space administrationedie rasmusen, university of pittsburghwilliam scherlis, carnegie mellon universityjean scholtz, defense advanced research projects agencydaniel siewiorek, carnegie mellon universitypaul smith, department of energykaren sollins, massachusetts institute of technologycarl p. staton, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationmichael sullivan, bbn corporationmichael swetnam, potomac institute for policy studiesjohn c. toole, national center for supercomputing applications,university of illinois at urbanachampaignwilliam turnbull, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationdouglas tygar, university of california at berkeleytom usselman, national research councillouis walter, national aeronautics and space administrationrobert s. winokur, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationrich wojcik, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universitysummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71bbrief case studies of criseshurricaneshurricanes are second only to earthquakes as the most destructivenatural force on earth. they are capable of causing massive wind damage, catastrophic flooding, and landslides or mud slides, often coveringlarge geographical areas. improvements in advance warnings and consequent evacuations have led to a dramatic drop in u.s. casualties due tohurricanes. however, the economic losses continue to climb. in theunited states, infrastructure damage from hurricanes, although serious,is relatively less costly than damage to private property and structures. inless developed regions, loss of both life and infrastructure remains atcatastrophic levels. a recent illustration of the destructive power of hurricanes was hurricane mitch, which hit central america in november1998. the most destructive storm in the region since 1780, mitch left up to6 feet of rain in some places. more than 11,000 people died in this storm,which also destroyed a substantial portion of the infrastructure in nicaragua and honduras. box b.1 describes efforts to assemble an integratedpicture of the hurricaneõs aftermath.improved responses to hurricanes have been enabled by such information technology capabilities as advance warnings and modeling thatindicates which populations require evacuation. among the principalproblems in responding to hurricanes are communicating warnings, managing evacuations, and coordinating local response and recovery operations. warnings must be more precise and detailed to help people inparticularly vulnerable locations prepare for the effects of extreme windssummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72appendix band torrential rains. warnings must reach people in remote locations andbe specific enough to support evacuation of people to safe havens. optimized evacuation routes would help reduce gridlock. supplies and shelters must be identified and targeted for specific evacuee groups or individuals. mutual aid resources must be effectively utilized as theyconverge from outside the affected area. appropriate maps and positionlocation aids must be provided to crisis responders so they can operateeffectively. damaged infrastructure must be identified, and repairs mustbox b.1 creating an integrated view of the damagecaused by hurricane mitchdecision makers must know the scope of a disaster, its location, the size of thearea it covers, casualty levels, estimates of damage to infrastructure and property,and the ways in which all these factors relate to centers of population concentrations and to jurisdictional boundaries. to inform response actions, information isneeded on possible further damage, options for immediate action, legal responsibilities, and possible longterm effects and related followups.at the workshop, william miller described work done in 1998 by the center forintegration of natural disaster information (cindi) to prepare a synoptic view ofthe devastation caused in central america by hurricane mitch. the work wasrequested by the department of the interior as background information in preparation for a visit to the disaster area by mrs. tipper gore.1a number of products were developed in response to this tasking. cindi developed overview maps that indicated mitchõs storm track, including the areasstruck by l50 to 180mph winds. satellite images were used to produce thematicmaps with a 30meter resolution mosaic of central america and also helped tomake clear the magnitude of the damage, revealing, for example, forest coverdamage extending far into mexico. geographical information system databasesthat included a variety of remote sensing data were used to determine where roadscrossed flooded rivers and thus the extent of damage to the road infrastructure.integrating information from a variety of external sources presented a numberof challenges. for example, during the course of assembling its briefing materials,the team found that data that had been on the world wide web and elsewherewas no longer available. data sources had been moved or changed as the situation changed, and the team found that establishing an archive to capture data isessential. another data source the team employed was the earth resources observation systems data center of the u.s. geological survey. however, during thecourse of the work on hurricane mitch, a blizzard delayed staff attempts to reachthe center, located in sioux city, south dakota, to load and process images.1these models and data were compiled after the fact and were not used to support firstresponders.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b73be prioritized and adequately funded as rapidly as possible to lay thefoundation for broadbased disaster recovery.flash floodsdespite developments in hydrology and meteorology, prediction offlash floods is still difficult. flash floods result in deaths in both rural andurban areas. in 1972, 238 people were killed by a torrential rain storm inrapid city, south dakota. in 1976, a flash flood in the big thompsoncanyon in colorado led to the death of 140 people. more recently, duringthe fall of l998, more than 50 people were killed by flash floods in kansascity and in texas.most flash floods are not merely meteorological events. vulnerabilityto flash floods is a function of a number of human activities. more peoplehave moved to parts of the country that are vulnerable to flash floods, andurban development can intensify the impacts of small storms. althoughthe rainfall in a storm might indicate only a 10year event, land use patterns may result in the storm causing damage that exceeds the expectedmagnitude of a 100year storm. in fort collins, colorado, in july 1997, theloss of life was caused by a combination of heavy prolonged rainfall anda topography that had been altered by the construction of a railroad trestle.aging infrastructure, a consequence of reduced public investment in therepair of bridges and dams, also presents a growing problem.comprehensive emergency preparedness and response are essentialcomponents of reducing losses and include coordination between cityagencies and increased recognition of the importance of emergency planning in everyday city business.important factors in reducing deaths from flash floods include providing adequate warnings and helping people respond appropriately tothese threats. for instance, if the number of deaths from flash floods is todrop, people must be willing to abandon their cars and climb to safety. inanticipation of el niœo events in l998, riverside, california, adopted apublic education program that has reduced the number of people tryingto drive through high water. the number of deaths was reduced from anaverage of seven per year to zero. in the big thompson flood, sevenpeople initially responded appropriately and evacuated to high ground.they then decided to return to their homesñfor reasons such as retrieving household possessions or checking if the stove had been left on. theylost their lives because they did not know how little time they had.another challenge to reducing the impacts of flooding, including flashfloods, is the inadequacy of many floodplain maps. for example, themaps show natural features but do not show areas protected by levees tobe potential floodplains. yet these areas are where serious floods havesummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74appendix boccurred recently. in addition, even the improved maps are more reliablefor wide floodplains than for narrower or urban areas subject to severeflash floods. efforts are now under way in california to use new globalpositioning systembased data collection to improve the precision of thesemaps.response to flash flooding can be improved by information technology capabilities such as weather forecasting and hydrological modelingto predict flood levels for evacuations, sensor networks that provide input to the forecasting and modeling, and systems that provide affectedpopulations with advance warnings. the recent deployment of floodsensor networks that make realtime data available has widereachingapplications for not only flash flood warning but also other applicationssuch as water resource planning and recreation.1 principal challenges inresponding to these disasters include the lack of sufficiently accuratefloodplain maps, which decreases the accuracy of impact prediction aswell as the ability to disseminate to affected populations warning information that clearly conveys the nature and timing of the threat along withthe appropriate responses.nuclear emergenciesbecause of the potential for insidious, longterm effects, u.s. citizensare particularly conscious of the threat posed by nuclear accidents. incontrast to other types of disasters, the perception is that one could be thevictim of a nuclear disaster and not even be aware of it. in response to thepotential threat and the public concern about it, federal agencies havespent a great deal of effort to develop warning systems, evacuations plans,public awareness, and response capability. integrated exercises that include federal, state, and local participants are held on a frequent basis toensure a high level of readiness and maintain the confidence of the public.albert guber, with the department of energyõs nevada operationsoffice, provided an overview of the federal response to nuclear accidentwith a focus on data needs, available data sources, and the availableequipment to use those data. the federal response to a nuclear accidentwould start with establishment of a federal radiological monitoring and1workshop participants noted that the economic benefits of such alternative uses mightwell exceed the costs of the actual detection system. for a discussion of alternative applications of flood sensor networks, see eve gruntfest and philippe waterincks. september1998. beyond flood detection: alternative applications of realtime data. technical report,u.s. bureau of reclamation, department of the interior, denver, colo. available online at<http://web.uccs.edu/geogenvs/work/eve/beyond%20flood%20detection%20final.html>.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b75assessment center, based on plans developed from the lessons of the threemile island accident. guber emphasized how important it is that allpeople responding to an emergency have access to the best information asquickly as possible. the centers can be set up in offices or field tents andhave their own backup power. computing is pervasive, and there arelarge video monitors to provide situational awareness. drills are conducted to test equipment and, particularly, inter and intraagency communication. drills strengthen links between participating agencies,data sets, and individuals and are essential if emergency management isto be effective.major challenges in responding to nuclear emergencies include thedifficulty of tracing the threat (using sophisticated sensors); the laborintensive, slow nature of field assessment; and the difficulty of interpreting measured radiation values for both the general public and decisionmakers. information technology capabilitiesñincluding support for advance warnings; modeling for evacuations; realtime gps; field databaseentry and a tracking system to integrate field, laboratory, and analysisunits; and advanced graphics for decision supportñcan help to improvethe response to nuclear emergencies.fireslargescale fires capable of inflicting significant loss of life, property,and environmental resources are a serious disaster force worldwide.population pressures increase the risk of catastrophic fires. people aremoving into areas of known high fire hazard. in addition, fires are prevented from spreading through their normal course, creating a more serious threat in the future. a critical feature of fires is the need for totalextinction of the threat (òput the fire out, dead outó). many large fires,such as the 1991 fire in the hills of oakland, california, that burned morethan 2,000 structures worth $1.6 billion and killed 25 people, are flareupsof small fires thought to have been put out. this factor greatly increasesthe cost of eliminating the threat. once a fire starts, all possible hot spotsmust be put out completely. for this reason, 2,000 to 3,000 firefighters, ata cost of up to $2 million a day, may be needed to fight a large fire.fires have caused billions of dollars in damage to property and serious loss of life. they consume millions of acres every year, many of themin critical watershed areas throughout the world. ecosystems in manyareas of the world are dependent on fire to maintain a natural balance. inmost of these areas, human intervention, through eliminating much of theburning cycle, has caused serious imbalances, resulting in an even moreserious threat. when fires do occur in these areas, they often burn muchhotter than they would in a natural regime, burning much deeper into thesummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76appendix broot structures of plants. this situation leaves the hillsides much moresusceptible to landslides and debris flow in subsequent winters. additionally, these areas typically have little margin for error in their watersources. if local watersheds are destroyed, longterm economic and agricultural disruption may be the result.humanmade causes of fires include sparks from lawn mowers andother yard tools, cigarettes carelessly tossed from a car, and electricalwires blown into trees. the ease and numerous ways of starting a catastrophic fire also create a strong temptation for arsonists. consequently,firefighting agencies have to maintain an extremely high level of vigilancefor fire starts, thus reducing the threat posed by natural causes (such aslightning strikes), humanmade causes, and criminal acts.although the state of the art in physical remedies for fire suppressionis mature, the command and control of these resources can be dramatically improved with better technology. verbal command systems breakdown in complex environments and must be enhanced with digital systems. information about fire perimeters and intensities, derived in partfrom remote sensing and delivered to field personnel, is necessary tooptimize use of resources and increase safety. wearable computers couldplay a significant role in fire suppression activities by assisting firefighterswith such informationintensive tasks as hazardous material identification and by delivering information about building layouts or other environmental information to firefighters in the field.earthquakesearthquakes are the most devastating of all natural disasters. thecost can be prodigiousñthe 1995 kobe, japan, disaster caused as much as$100 billion in damage. hundreds of thousands of people could die in acatastrophic earthquake. modern building techniques have greatly reduced the death toll in developed countries, but the costs of earthquakeinduced damage have increased dramatically because of the enormousincrease in the built environment within highrisk areas. when majorearthquakes do strike, the damage can penetrate deep into physical infrastructure. roads and bridges are heavily damaged, as are pipelines carrying natural gas, water, and petroleum; communications lines and equipment are compromised; and satellite and microwave dishes are knockedout of alignment. earthquake damage can remain undetected for yearsinside walls, underground, and deep in foundations. the complexity ofthis kind of damage increases the amount of time required to determinethe extent of damage, so that reconstruction can be done.earthquakes can be very destructive, and they occur nearly instantaneously. in a minute or two perhaps a million or more people are facedsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b77with constructing a new reality for themselves. there is no warning timefor evacuation, staging of resources, or seeking of appropriate shelter.emergency operation centers are not staffed up in anticipation of increased activity.indeed, emergency staffing patterns are as much a victim of earthquakes as the rest of the community. when the quake occurs, nobodyknows yet where it was centered or how strong it was, so there is no wayfor people to grasp the overall context of their immediate personal experiences. was it the big one? is it better to leave home and go to a shelter?are the phones working? people are in a state of shock and need help tomake decisions on how to respond. information is essential to addressthis dimension of the earthquake problem.in the first few minutes after a quake, massive amounts of incidentgenerated information must be gathered from many sources. it must thenbe synthesized, interpreted, and distributed to everyone who needs it.different kinds of information packages must be created for differentsectors of the response effort. some information can be mass distributedvia television, radio, or the internet, whereas other information must betargeted to specific incident responders, perhaps located at remote sites.the critical time lines will vary from minutes to hours for massdistributed information, whereas the first responder may require a turnaroundtime on the order of seconds to minutes. analysis of the information,such as for probable sheltering sites and medical and rescue resourcesrequired to meet the disaster, must be completed accurately and quicklyand presented to critical decision makers in an easily understood format.aftershocks are almost certain to occur but may be erratic in theirtiming. as a result, extra care is required during many rescue operations.aftershocks also have implications with regard to immediate shelteringneeds. following the loma prieta, northridge, and kobe earthquakes,for example, hundreds of thousands of people camped out on the streetsfor the first few days until emergency shelters were set up or until theybecame confident enough to go back into their homes. early warningsystems for aftershocks could provide precious seconds to get rescueworkers out of harmõs way, and better understanding and modeling ofthe distribution and severity of aftershocks could provide the necessaryconfidence for many people to reenter their homes.critical infrastructure failure or attackthe administration has identified critical u.s. infrastructuresñsuchas water, communications, power, food, and transportationñthat mustcontinue to function during and after natural disasters or physical attacks.these infrastructures are all extensively supported by information techsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78appendix bnology systems and therefore are vulnerable when the information technology systems are attacked or fail abruptlyñas is expected from electronic clock mechanisms at midnight on december 31, 1999. to deal withthese threats, presidential decision directive 63, issued in may 1998, calledfor a national effort to assure the security of critical u.s. infrastructures.because the government does not operate most of these infrastructures,these efforts must be conducted in collaboration with the privatesectorowners and operators.the federal approach to dealing with critical infrastructure issues,especially the looming year 2000 (y2k) problem, was described by brucemcconnell, then chief of the information policy and technology branch ofthe office of information and regulatory affairs at the office of management and budget.mcconnell said that the federal government can use help in developing a coordinated detection system for dealing with a series of questionssuch as the following: how does one know that a system is actually goingdown? and then how does one diagnose what is happening? is theproblem a symptom of a coordinated attack or a series of coincidences? isthere a law enforcement or national security problem?mcconnell spoke about the expected y2k scenarios and some of thetechnical problems that are being addressed. the experience will be usedas a laboratory for studying and improving the response to critical infrastructure incidents, particularly in cyberspace, he said. indeed, he observed that if one had set out to create a disaster scenario to test it vulnerabilities and response capabilities, it would be difficult to come up withone better than the y2k problem.officials expect that multiple problems will occur in different placesat the same time. in the united states, it is anticipated that the majororganizations and pieces of the infrastructure will function adequatelybut that problems may arise in rural areas and in small and mediumsizedenterprises. thus, local power and telephone companies, and some lesstechnologically sophisticated systems such as water treatment plantscould, experience outages. many of these have microprocessors embedded in device controllers.more generally, three basic issues must be addressed in critical infrastructure failure. first, how will officials get information? when theworkload in a crisis center increases 100fold, will the it system have thecapacity to feed that information to the necessary recipients? the administration has been exploring, for example, how to handle multiple eventsat once. as local response capabilities become saturated, the workloadwill spill over to the state and federal levels. at that point, the higherechelons may have a limited capability to respond, so there will be heavyreliance on local capacity, at least at the beginning.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b79second, citizens will want to know early on if there is a crisis and howthe nation is holding up. specific information can reduce panic. forexample, in the case of y2k, plans are being made for a white houserepresentative, such as the presidentõs assistant on y2k matters, to provide a status report early in the afternoon of saturday, january 1, 2000. ofcourse, many will learn from news reports starting with the events thattake place at midnight in new zealand, where the new year arrives 17hours before it does in washington, d.c.third, the government will try to make decisions in real time aboutwhere help should be sent. this approach has been taken before in majordisasters such as the explosion in the federal building in oklahoma city,so critical disaster response groups already have been organized for y2k.some exercises performed during 1999 will help with evaluation of theinformation flow and capacities.federal agencies are expending substantial resources to address they2k problem. some agencies are deferring capital improvements in theirinformation infrastructures so they can deal with y2k issues first, whereasothers are using the opportunity to recapitalize in critical areas of theirinfrastructure to build nextgeneration, y2kcompliant systems. at lowerlevels of government, emergency managers from metropolitan areas arecollaborating to monitor the status of y2k planning, and they are alsoworking with private corporations.urban search and rescue at themurrah federal building bombinggeographical information systems (giss) (box b.2) played an important role in the response to the april 19, 1995, bombing of the alfred p.murrah federal building in oklahoma city. following the explosion,rescuers did not know if they were looking for 100 or 300 people in thebuilding, and they needed a precise map to target locations to look forpeople. to help build this map, they relied on a variety of sources, including interviews with the building maintenance manager. in recognition ofthe utility of giss in oklahoma city, especially the value of having peoplededicated to sorting out information, the urban search and rescue organization permanently added two gis positions to the incident support team.several lessons about the use of information systems emerged fromthe experience of the gis unit at oklahoma city:¥once an initial set of data is made available to responders, updatesand changes must be made. as soon as responders enter a damagedbuilding, they will undoubtedly discover discrepancies between the preexisting data and the actual situations they encounter (many a result ofsummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80appendix bthe disaster itself). this information is of great value to the entire response team. the ability to easily modify existing spatial data is one ofthe strengths of using digital data rather than, for example, printed maps.¥the level of preparedness and the element of surprise in a disastersuch as the bombing in oklahoma city affect what will be required inresponding to an emergency. indeed, a critical factor in the success of theoklahoma city gis support was that digital floor plans were available.these plans, which had been developed by a local architectural firm for aremodeling project involving the whole building, enabled the gis team toramp up quickly and to provide operations maps within hours. the morecomplex the structure, the more important it is to have preexisting information in a readily usable format available for emergency personnel.¥the reliability of the information provided to rescuers is a signifibox b.2 geographical information systemsgeographical information systems (giss)ñcomputer systems that manage,display, and support analysis of geographical reference datañare increasinglybeing used to fill many crisis management needs. all phases of crisis management deal with many locationspecific details, drawn from sources including remote sensing and global positioning system (gps) data on the region of an eventand its effects. a gis assists in managing such information by associating relatedgeographic information and integrating multiple geographic information elementsduring a crisis. gis offers a number of capabilities of interest for crisis management:¥dynamic capabilities. unlike a static map, a gis database can be updatedduring the course of a disaster to reflect what is known about the environment andsituation during the response efforts. for example, following some disasters suchas earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or floods, the topography itself will havechanged. in others, the topography itself may not have changed but the builtenvironment, including, roads, buildings, and utility services, will have been affected. crisis response is greatly assisted when changes such as damaged roads canbe reflected quickly in maps used to coordinate response efforts.¥ease of distribution. when put into a gis, spatial data can be reproducedelectronically for distribution and access (e.g., through a network, web access, ordialup modem), and updates can be distributed as required to reflect changes inthe situation.¥tool for analysis of data. in contrast to maps, a gis provides an effectiveway to combine many types of data of value for crisis management. for example,linguistic demographic data might be imported into a gis to determine the need fortranslators in the aftermath of a crisis. data from a variety of sources, such aslaser rangefinders or remote sensing, can also be imported directly into a gis andfurther analyzed and modeled. results of spatial models can be integrated together with incident data, existing map bases, and remotely sensed information.1summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b81to give another example, following the northridge earthquake, the results of anearthquake shake model were overlaid with zip code information to speed up processing of damage claims. a list of zip codes for areas that had shaking intensitiesof viii or greater was produced. based on this information all claims in these zipcodes could be given emergency checks immediately without waiting for casebycase field verification.the geographical data used in a crisis varies according to location. somestates have extensive giss of their own with uptodate details. these systemsinclude information on evacuation routes and location of emergency shelters andestimates of populationsatrisk at various times of the day. other sources usedinclude background gis maps, including roads and locations of industry; censusdata and some commercially available data sets; and aerial photographs for thearea. when these preexisting data sets are available, they are used. when notavailable, special sets will be created using aircraft photography or imaging fromremote sensing facilities.some types of crises place special requirements for accurate and precise geographical data sets. for example, workshop participants noted that in many casesthere are inaccuracies in the definitions of floodplains because topography is insufficiently understood. when dealing with a flood, 1 foot in elevation can make amajor difference, yet topographical maps are typically accurate to plus or minus 5or 10 feet. during the 1997 and l998 floods in california, problems with leveebreaks were difficult to handle because nobody knew where the breaks were (sincethen, california levee maps have been improved).1a recent nsfsponsored workshop explored research issues related to the integration ofmultiple data types and sources. see david m. mark, ed. february 1999. geographicinformation science: critical issues in an emerging crossdisciplinary research domain.national center for geographical information and analysis, state university of new york atbuffalo. available online at <http://www.geog.buffalo.edu/ncgia/workshopreport.html>.cant concern. the information developed by the gis team in the murrahbuilding was developed by experienced personnel working directly withthe people in the best position to have the correct informationñthus theinformation had a high degree of accuracy. preidentified data sources,reliable data paths, and reliable remote sensing technologies, crossedchecked with other sources for validation, are what contribute to developing data that will be believed. in contrast, information gleaned fromother sources, such as the results of web searches of various public sites,is not likely to be held in high esteem. given the rule of thumb adoptedby many crisis respondersñthat onethird of the information is accurate,onethird is wrong, and onethird might be either right or wrongñtheyare likely to be reluctant to rely too much on the outside information theyare provided.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82csynopsis of the cstb report computingand communications in the extremethe computer science and telecommunications boardõs (cstbõs) report computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and other applications1 took some initial steps in exploring therole of information technology in crisis management. discussions at theworkshops convened by the steering committee for the project spannedmany aspects of computing and communications technology research,development, deployment, and use, focusing on crisis management as theprimary application area. the workshops generated ideas about wherehighperformance technology may be helpful, where advances in performance at the leading edge would yield benefits in more mainstream systems, and how the interaction of applications in different areas (e.g., theuse of telemedicine and digital libraries in crisis response) influences thedevelopment and use of advanced computing and communications.promising computer science and engineering research topics wereidentified in discussions between crisis management experts and information technologists at the workshops and were developed further insubsequent deliberations by the authoring steering committee. researchin these areas has òthe potential to increase the ability of individuals andorganizations to make the most of important applications, to present in1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and other applications. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c83tellectually stimulating challenges for researchers, and to promote significant advances in the state of technology,ó according to the report (p. 7).research topics suggested in the report include communications resources such as rapidly deployable, selfconfiguring wireless networksfor coordinating response teams; òjudgment supportó tools to assist crisismanagers in making decisions in the absence of complete, reliable information; simulations of phenomena such as hurricanes and fires that coulddeliver useful results to crisis managers rapidly; and virtual òanchordesksó that would place networkbased resources such as simulationsand information systems at the disposal of crisis managers.the steering committee developed 11 findings based on input fromthe workshops and additional, related information. the findings have anumber of common themes. one is that some of the greatest technicalchallenges stem from the sheer scale (i.e., numbers of people and devices,diversity of resources, amount of computing power, complexity of interactions) of the requirements that must be met. another theme is that thetechnologies must be easy enough to use to complement the users ratherthan distract them from their missions.the report observes that the widespread interconnection of computing and information resources has made it feasible, and increasingly common, for resources to be called on in unforeseen ways. òcrisis management, in particular, illustrates the value of being able to integrate highlydiverse resources whose usefulness in an unusual situation could nothave been anticipated in advance. unfortunately, technologies developed to meet a specific application requirement often do not function wellin unforeseen circumstances because of complex, difficult problems ofinteroperation, performance, and scaling up,ó the report notes (p. 6).consequently, the steering committeeõs findings suggest r&d and deployment efforts that can lead to both architectural approaches for systems that function on a national scale and generalpurpose tools and services that facilitate rapid, ad hoc integration of systems and resources.in developing the findings, the steering committee identified severalcharacteristics of crisis management that place particular stress on adoption and exploitation of advanced information technologies:¥magnitude. crises can overwhelm available resources. for example, communications systems, power plants, hospital systems, andweather centers can all be saturated in a crisis. how can systems bedeveloped that have òsurge capacityó or that can respond usefully whilein a saturated state?¥urgency. rapid response in communication and information services to the special loads of crises is essential. it can lead, for example, tocommunication architectures that provide priority service for crisis mansummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84appendix cagers. there can also be a kind of òengineering urgency,ó in whichinteroperation must be established between systems in a matter of hoursto satisfy the information needs of responders.¥infrequency and uncertainty. some highmagnitude events, such asearthquakes, occur infrequently and in unpredictable locations. how canagencies manage resources to be able to respond effectively, given thereality of constrained budgets? can information systems be architected tobe usable despite the unpredictability of demand?¥special information needs. a crisis can cause unusual demands bothfor information flows to and from the crisis area and for consolidation orfusion of information to meet responder needs. for example, in the oklahoma city bombing of april 1995, information about the murrah buildingand nearby buildings was collected from many sources and then òfusedóto form a composite model that helped identify highprobability locationsto find missing people.the cstb report identifies and elaborates on research needs motivated by crisis management. in addition, the report developed a set offindings regarding the role of research in crisis management and othernationalscale applications of highperformance computing and communications technology:¥crisis management testbeds. finding 1 emphasizes the value of establishing experimental testbeds for crisis managementrelated r&d.such testbeds provide a venue for government, academic, and industrialresearchers to work with application users, such as federal, state, andlocal crisis managers, to test and validate technologies by subjecting themto realistic applications. this was the principal finding relating to theprocess of collaboration between the two communities.¥infrastructure baselining. finding 2 highlights the importance ofinvestigating the design and operation of existing nationalscale infrastructures to identify which features enable these systems to be scalable,to accommodate diverse components, and to evolve over time.¥usability and collaboration. findings 3 and 4 suggest ways to improve support for the humancomputer interface and for human activitiesmediated by computing. the findings call for research to gain a betterunderstanding of usersõ needs, capabilities, and limitations, as well asresearch to develop concepts for new, open, networkbased collaborationtools, such as virtual situation rooms.¥standards, interoperability, integration, and legacy. four findings (5,6, 7, and 8) are devoted to addressing the critical issues that affect systemcomposability and interoperability. the findings call for research to identify design principles that can yield open standards such as communicasummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c85tions protocols, and research to develop generic technology that can facilitate interconnection and semantic interoperation of diverse information resources. additional research is suggested to develop ways to predict the performance and reliability of the components used to constructsoftware systems and to develop technological and architectural methodsto maintain access to longstanding information and software assets whilealso enabling users to exploit new technologies as they become available.¥adaptivity and reliability. findings 9 and 10 deal with adaptation touncertainty and change, including onthefly adaptation to changes intopology, load, or environment. these findings call for research to increase the adaptivity of networks and applications so they can functionduring or after crises and research to enable accurate assessments of thereliability of systems composed of potentially unreliable hardware, software, and people.¥distributed systems performance. finding 11 calls for research toimprove understanding of how to reason about, measure, predict, andimprove the performance of distributed systems, given that most crisissupport systems involve highly distributed configurations operating inunanticipated ways.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82csynopsis of the cstb report computingand communications in the extremethe computer science and telecommunications boardõs (cstbõs) report computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and other applications1 took some initial steps in exploring therole of information technology in crisis management. discussions at theworkshops convened by the steering committee for the project spannedmany aspects of computing and communications technology research,development, deployment, and use, focusing on crisis management as theprimary application area. the workshops generated ideas about wherehighperformance technology may be helpful, where advances in performance at the leading edge would yield benefits in more mainstream systems, and how the interaction of applications in different areas (e.g., theuse of telemedicine and digital libraries in crisis response) influences thedevelopment and use of advanced computing and communications.promising computer science and engineering research topics wereidentified in discussions between crisis management experts and information technologists at the workshops and were developed further insubsequent deliberations by the authoring steering committee. researchin these areas has òthe potential to increase the ability of individuals andorganizations to make the most of important applications, to present in1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and other applications. national academy press, washington, d.c.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c83tellectually stimulating challenges for researchers, and to promote significant advances in the state of technology,ó according to the report (p. 7).research topics suggested in the report include communications resources such as rapidly deployable, selfconfiguring wireless networksfor coordinating response teams; òjudgment supportó tools to assist crisismanagers in making decisions in the absence of complete, reliable information; simulations of phenomena such as hurricanes and fires that coulddeliver useful results to crisis managers rapidly; and virtual òanchordesksó that would place networkbased resources such as simulationsand information systems at the disposal of crisis managers.the steering committee developed 11 findings based on input fromthe workshops and additional, related information. the findings have anumber of common themes. one is that some of the greatest technicalchallenges stem from the sheer scale (i.e., numbers of people and devices,diversity of resources, amount of computing power, complexity of interactions) of the requirements that must be met. another theme is that thetechnologies must be easy enough to use to complement the users ratherthan distract them from their missions.the report observes that the widespread interconnection of computing and information resources has made it feasible, and increasingly common, for resources to be called on in unforeseen ways. òcrisis management, in particular, illustrates the value of being able to integrate highlydiverse resources whose usefulness in an unusual situation could nothave been anticipated in advance. unfortunately, technologies developed to meet a specific application requirement often do not function wellin unforeseen circumstances because of complex, difficult problems ofinteroperation, performance, and scaling up,ó the report notes (p. 6).consequently, the steering committeeõs findings suggest r&d and deployment efforts that can lead to both architectural approaches for systems that function on a national scale and generalpurpose tools and services that facilitate rapid, ad hoc integration of systems and resources.in developing the findings, the steering committee identified severalcharacteristics of crisis management that place particular stress on adoption and exploitation of advanced information technologies:¥magnitude. crises can overwhelm available resources. for example, communications systems, power plants, hospital systems, andweather centers can all be saturated in a crisis. how can systems bedeveloped that have òsurge capacityó or that can respond usefully whilein a saturated state?¥urgency. rapid response in communication and information services to the special loads of crises is essential. it can lead, for example, tocommunication architectures that provide priority service for crisis mansummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84appendix cagers. there can also be a kind of òengineering urgency,ó in whichinteroperation must be established between systems in a matter of hoursto satisfy the information needs of responders.¥infrequency and uncertainty. some highmagnitude events, such asearthquakes, occur infrequently and in unpredictable locations. how canagencies manage resources to be able to respond effectively, given thereality of constrained budgets? can information systems be architected tobe usable despite the unpredictability of demand?¥special information needs. a crisis can cause unusual demands bothfor information flows to and from the crisis area and for consolidation orfusion of information to meet responder needs. for example, in the oklahoma city bombing of april 1995, information about the murrah buildingand nearby buildings was collected from many sources and then òfusedóto form a composite model that helped identify highprobability locationsto find missing people.the cstb report identifies and elaborates on research needs motivated by crisis management. in addition, the report developed a set offindings regarding the role of research in crisis management and othernationalscale applications of highperformance computing and communications technology:¥crisis management testbeds. finding 1 emphasizes the value of establishing experimental testbeds for crisis managementrelated r&d.such testbeds provide a venue for government, academic, and industrialresearchers to work with application users, such as federal, state, andlocal crisis managers, to test and validate technologies by subjecting themto realistic applications. this was the principal finding relating to theprocess of collaboration between the two communities.¥infrastructure baselining. finding 2 highlights the importance ofinvestigating the design and operation of existing nationalscale infrastructures to identify which features enable these systems to be scalable,to accommodate diverse components, and to evolve over time.¥usability and collaboration. findings 3 and 4 suggest ways to improve support for the humancomputer interface and for human activitiesmediated by computing. the findings call for research to gain a betterunderstanding of usersõ needs, capabilities, and limitations, as well asresearch to develop concepts for new, open, networkbased collaborationtools, such as virtual situation rooms.¥standards, interoperability, integration, and legacy. four findings (5,6, 7, and 8) are devoted to addressing the critical issues that affect systemcomposability and interoperability. the findings call for research to identify design principles that can yield open standards such as communicasummary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c85tions protocols, and research to develop generic technology that can facilitate interconnection and semantic interoperation of diverse information resources. additional research is suggested to develop ways to predict the performance and reliability of the components used to constructsoftware systems and to develop technological and architectural methodsto maintain access to longstanding information and software assets whilealso enabling users to exploit new technologies as they become available.¥adaptivity and reliability. findings 9 and 10 deal with adaptation touncertainty and change, including onthefly adaptation to changes intopology, load, or environment. these findings call for research to increase the adaptivity of networks and applications so they can functionduring or after crises and research to enable accurate assessments of thereliability of systems composed of potentially unreliable hardware, software, and people.¥distributed systems performance. finding 11 calls for research toimprove understanding of how to reason about, measure, predict, andimprove the performance of distributed systems, given that most crisissupport systems involve highly distributed configurations operating inunanticipated ways.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis managementcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.