detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9750networking health: prescriptions for the internet388 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309068437 | doi 10.17226/9750committee on enhancing the internet for health applications: technicalrequirements and implementation strategies, computer science andtelecommunications board, national research councilnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on enhancing the internet for health applications:technical requirements and implementation strategiescomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.prescriptions for the internetnetworking healthnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, nw ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of thenational academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute ofmedicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for theirspecial competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national library of medicine under task orderno. 42, sponsor award no. n01od42139. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the sponsor.library of congress cataloginginpublication datanetworking health : prescriptions for the internet / committee on enhancing the internet for health applications: technical requirements and implementation strategies, computer science and telecommunications board, commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications, national research council. p. cm. includes bibliographical references and index. isbn 0309068436 (casebound) 1. internet (computer network) in medicine. i. national research council (u.s.).committee on enhancing the internet for health applications: technicalrequirements and implementation strategies. r859.7.i58n48 2000 362.1'0285'4678ñdc21 00008698additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285washington, dc 20055(800) 6246242(202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 2000 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americanetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of itsmembers, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility foradvising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on enhancing the internet for healthapplications: technical requirementsand implementation strategiesedward h. shortliffe, columbia university, chairruss biagio altman, stanford universitypatricia flatley brennan, university of wisconsin at madisonbruce davie, cisco systems, inc.william m. detmer, university of virginiavalerie florance, association of american medical collegesandrew friede, cerner corp.mark frisse, express scripts, inc.john glaser, partners healthcare system, inc.john huffman, stentor, inc.isaac kohane, childrenõs hospital, bostoncarl e. landwehr, mitretek systemsdaniel r. masys, university of california at san diegojane e. sisk, mount sinai school of medicinethorsten von eicken, cornell universitystaffjerry r. sheehan, study directorrita gaskins, project assistantmickelle rodgers rodriguez, senior project assistantnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairjames chiddix, time warner cablejohn m. cioffi, stanford universityw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscojeffrey m. jaffe, lucent technologies, inc.anna karlin, university of washingtonbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, whizbang! labs, inc.donald norman, unext.comraymond ozzie, groove networksdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleycharles simonyi, microsoft corporationburton smith, tera computer companyterry smith, university of california at santa barbaralee sproull, new york universitystaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistjerry r. sheehan, senior program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officergail pritchard, program officerjanet d. briscoe, office managerdaniel llata, senior project assistantsuzanne ossa, senior project assistantmickelle rodgers rodriguez, senior project assistantdavid drake, project assistantmargaret marsh, project assistantbrandye williams, office assistantnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viicommission on physical sciences,mathematics, and applicationspeter m. banks, veridian erim international, inc., cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairwilliam f. ballhaus, jr., lockheed martin corporationshirley chiang, university of california at davismarshall h. cohen, california institute of technologyronald g. douglas, texas a&m universitysamuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc.jerry p. gollub, haverford collegemichael f. goodchild, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universitywesley t. huntress, jr., carnegie institutioncarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotajohn r. kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin company (retired)marsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniadusa m. mcduff, state university of new york at stony brookjanet norwood, former commissioner, u.s. bureau of laborstatisticsm. elisabeth pat…cornell, stanford universitynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryrobert j. spinrad, xerox parc (retired)myron f. uman, acting executive directornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixconsiderable attention centers on the internet and health care. thepopular press tends to focus on the growing use of the internet to supportconsumer health via healthrelated web sites that provide information onspecific diseases, contain guidance on healthy lifestyles, host chat andsupport groups, and sell a range of healthrelated products. federal programs tend to focus on using networking of various kinds to supporttelemedicine, especially for rural and underserved areas. these applications represent just a small sampling of the ways the internet can be usedto support health and health care. many other applications exist in publichealth, biomedical research, health care finance and administration, andthe maintenance of electronic health records.each of these applications demands different capabilities of its underlying networks, whether highbandwidth connections, rapid delivery ofdata, tight security, reliability, or widespread access. as a result, theexisting internet cannot support them all. nevertheless, a number ofprograms, such as the federal governmentõs next generation internet andthe privatesector internet 2 initiatives, are under way to enhance thecapabilities of the internet and to develop technologies that support highperformance networking. these programs could help the internet meetthe needs of the health and health care communities. but what capabilities must the internet provide in order to support health and health care?how do they differ from those that might be developed anyway to support other applications of the internet in sectors as diverse as commerce,entertainment, and defense?prefacenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacethe committee and its chargeto obtain preliminary answers to these questions, the national libraryof medicine (nlm) asked the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council (nrc) to conduct astudy on the technical capabilities the internet needs to support healthapplications and on ways of ensuring that these capabilities are implemented. the objectives were to (1) identify a range of health applicationsthat could reasonably gain widespread, routine use over the internet inthe foreseeable future, (2) examine the technical capabilities these applications would demand, (3) define the characteristics of the next generationinternet and an associated infrastructure that would meet these requirements, and (4) recommend an appropriate strategy for achieving thisinfrastructure in light of other activities under way to enhance currentinternet capabilities. the project was intended to address questions suchas the following:¥what characteristics of the current internet limit its utility for various types of routine health and biomedical research uses? for differenttypes of telemedicine? for plausible future healthrelated uses that willrequire high bandwidth? what would be the likely future levels of varioustypes of health traffic on the network if these limitations were overcome?¥what quality of service and security characteristics or tools will thenext generation internet require to be suitable for various types of healthrelated applications, given technical requirements and estimated trafficlevels? are the requirements of different health applications compatiblewith one another and with the requirements for other projected uses ofthe internet? to what extent are they supported by technology availablenow or already in development?¥what specific strategies are likely to ensure that the united statesattains a communications infrastructure to support the full potential rangeof routine health and biomedical research uses?to conduct the study, cstb assembled an expert committee consisting of 15 members drawn from the networking and health communities.the committee met five times between september 1998 and june 1999 tosolicit testimony from outside experts, deliberate on its findings and recommendations, and draft its final report. it met again in september 1999to discuss its plans for modifying the draft report in response to comments from many outside reviewers. the committee also conducted aseries of site visits to gather information firsthand on the ways the internetcould beñand is beingñused to support health and health care. members of the committee visited with researchers and health practitioners atnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexistanford university, nasa ames research center, the university of california at san francisco, kaiserpermanente of northern california, eastcarolina university, the university of north carolina at chapel hill, theuniversity of washington, regence blueshield, and the washington statedepartment of health. these visits provided an opportunity to directlyobserve internetbased systems that had been developed for health care,biomedicine, and other healthrelated activities. it also provided an opportunity to learn more about the kinds of applications that cannot yet beimplemented in an internetbased system.the committee used the information gathered during site visits andpresentations by other briefers to synthesize a comprehensive view of theways the internet could transform healthrelated activities. it attemptedto identify the technical and nontechnical challenges that need to be overcome in order to expand the use of the internet in health and biomedicineand to devise a set of recommendations that will help make the internet amore useful communications medium within the health sector. the sitevisits are summarized in appendix a. specific material from the visitshas been incorporated into chapter 2 of this report.acknowledgmentsthis report benefited from the combined talents of many people,including those who were directly associated with the project and manywho were not. first, thanks are due to members of the committee itself,all of whom maintained a high level of enthusiasm, energy, and dedication over the course of the project. committee members found time forproject meetings, site visits, and drafting portions of the text despite theirmany other responsibilities and commitments. approximately half of thecommittee members changed jobs and/or affiliations as the project unfoldedña living testament to the dynamic nature of the internet in healthapplicationsñyet they remained committed to this project throughout.many other people volunteered their time and expertise to help thecommittee to better understand the ways in which the internet might beused to support health objectives and the technical capabilities that healthapplications demand of the internet. special thanks are due to those whohosted, coordinated, and participated in its site visits and to those whomet with the committee at its three open meetings (see appendix d for alist of participants). the information gathered during these interactionsproved invaluable to the committeeõs deliberations and forms the backbone of this report. other people also provided useful information andadvice to the committee. mark ellisman at the university of california atsan diego and martin hadidahassan at the san diego supercomputercenter helped to clarify the discussion of telemicroscopy in chapter 2 ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiprefacethis report; stewart streimer, john parmigiani, and sandy haydock fromthe health care financing administration provided updates on theagencyõs security policy, pilot programs for electronic submission of data,and information technology strategy, respectively. grant miller andyolanda comedy, from the national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, supplied information and fundingdata on the federal governmentõs ngi initiative. kenneth birman atcornell university contributed valuable insight into security and reliability concerns associated with use of the internet in health applications.donald simborg described early efforts to network computers in healthcare organizations.the committee stands in awe of the remarkable, patient work of thecstb and nrc staff in supporting its deliberations over the course of thisstudy. staff members kept the committee on track and helped its members to put their ideas and analyses into coherent prose. the committee isfurther indebted to the reviewers of an early draft of this report, whosethoughtful comments and criticisms challenged committee members tostrengthen and refine their argumentsñand to articulate them moreclearly. this final report is considerably improved thanks to their input.it is a much more readable document thanks to laura ost, a freelanceeditor who assisted the nrcõs internal staff in editing the manuscript,and to james igoe, from the national research council library, whotracked down numerous references and helped to complete the citationsin the reference lists.finally, thanks are due to donald a.b. lindberg, director of the nlm,michael ackerman, assistant director for high performance computingat the nlm, and betsy humphreys, associate director for library operations at the nlm. their dedication to improving health, health care, andbiomedical research through internet technologies and their financial support made this project possible. the committee hopes that its findingsand recommendations will assist them in leading the health and the networking communities to achieve their vision of a òhealthieró internet.edward h. shortliffe, chaircommittee on enhancing theinternet for health applications:technical requirements andimplementation strategiesnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrcõs report review committee. the purpose of thisindependent review is to provide candid and critical comments that willassist the authors and the nrc in making the published report as soundas possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the contents of the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential toprotect the integrity of the deliberative process. the committee wishes tothank the following individuals for their participation in the review ofthis report:dixie baker, science applications international corporation,william boebert, sandia national laboratories,james bradley, abaton.com, inc.,scott bradner, harvard university,charles brownstein, crossindustry working team,paul clayton, intermountain health care,don detmer, cambridge university,mary fennell, brown university,thomas ferrin, university of california at san francisco,alan garber, stanford university,john halamka, caregroup healthcare system,michael g. kienzle, university of iowa,clement mcdonald, regenstrief institute,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivacknowledgment of reviewerssatyanarayanan mahadev, carnegie mellon university,david pryor, allina health system,thomas rindfleisch, stanford university,jay sanders, global telemedicine group,elliot stone, massachusetts health data consortium,peter szolovits, massachusetts institute of technology,elizabeth ward, foundation for health care quality, andbetsy weiner, university of cincinnati.although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests solely with the authoring committee and the nrc.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvcontentsexecutive summary11overview and introduction27a systems perspective, 29the internet and health, 33drivers of internet applications in health, 35impediments to broader adoption of the internet, 36technical considerations, 38networking alternatives, 41enhancing the internet, 45the next generation internet initiative, 46privatesector efforts: internet 2 and abilene, 50deploying enhanced internet technologies, 51organization of this report, 52references, 53notes, 552health applications of the internet57consumer health, 58consumeroriented health web sites, 59email between patients and providers, 62online health records, 64patient monitoring and home care, 66technical requirements for consumer health applications, 69networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontentsclinical care, 71remote consultation, 72medical imaging, 76clinical transactions, 80technical requirements for clinical care, 87financial and administrative transactions, 88technical requirements for financial and administrativeapplications, 93public health, 94public health surveillance, 96integrating data sources for improved decision making, 98responding to bioterrorist attacks, 99technical requirements for public health applications, 100professional education, 102graduate education, 102continuing education, 105technical requirements for health professional education, 107biomedical research, 108biomedical databases, 109linked simulations, 112remote control of experimental apparatus, 113publication on the internet, 116collaboration among researchers, 118clinical research, 120technical requirements for biomedical research, 121summary, 123bandwidth, 123latency, 124availability, 124security, 124ubiquity, 124references, 126notes, 1283technical challenges132quality of service, 133increasing bandwidth, 135differentiated services, 138integrated services, 140alternative quality of service options, 141quality of service policy, 141multicast, 143networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxviisecurity, 144elements of security, 145firewalls, 148security protocols, 150access controls, 157network availability, 160broadband technologies for the local loop, 162privacyenhancing technologies, 167anonymous email, 169protected web browsing, 170anonymous payment, 172anonymous data released from sensitive databases, 172conclusion , 173bibliography, 174notes, 1764organizational challenges to the adoptionof the internet178lessons from other industries, 179advancing the strategic interests of health care, 181impediments to adopting internet applications, 184barriers to change, 185uncertainties surrounding internet strategies, 189establishing organizational leadership forinformation technology, 197summary, 199references, 200notes, 2015issues for public policy202protection of personal health information, 203access to information infrastructure, 209intellectual property protection, 215electronic publishing, 215distance education, 217regulations affecting electronic delivery of health services, 219payment policies, 219liability and licensure, 221federal support for healthrelated information technologyresearch, 223workforce issues, 227conclusion, 230references, 230notes, 232networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiicontents6conclusions and recommendations235conclusions, 236recommendations, 249research, development, and deployment of neededtechnical capabilities, 250demonstration and evaluation of health applications of theinternet, 257addressing educational needs, 261addressing policy issues, 263a final word, 265references, 266notes, 268appendixesasite visit summaries271bnational library of medicine awards to demonstratehealth applications of the next generation internet314cbiographies of committee members334dindividuals who participated in site visits or briefed thestudy committee342index345networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking healthnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythe internet has great potential to improve americansõ health byenhancing communications and improving access to information for careproviders, patients, health plan administrators, public health officials, biomedical researchers, and other health professionals. ongoing researchand development (r&d) efforts, such as the federal governmentõs nextgeneration internet (ngi) initiative and the complementary internet 2program of the private sector, could help to realize that potential. suchefforts promote the creation and deployment of new networking technologies to enhance the internetõs capabilities, enabling a growing rangeof applications in health and other sectors. but what technical capabilitiesdo health applications demand of the internet? how do these capabilitiesdiffer from those needed by applications in other sectors, such as banking,defense, and entertainment? what types of experiments and demonstrations should be undertaken now to learn quickly about the requirementsand benefits of different health applications of the internet? and how canthe health community ensure that its needs are considered within thenetworking research community and in standards bodies that are defining future capabilities?questions of this nature prompted the national library of medicine(nlm) to request a study by the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council that would evaluate thetechnical capabilities demanded by health applications of the internet. asthe health communityõs primary representative in the ngi initiative and alongtime supporter of r&d focusing on health applications of informanetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2networking health: prescriptions for the internettion technology (it), nlm sought advice on which capabilities should bedeployed in the ngi testbed networks and, ultimately, the internet. itrecognized that the potential for health applications of the internet hadcontributed to policy discussions of information infrastructure for severalyears but that progress in realizing that potential had been slower than inother economic sectors. this report responds to the nlm request byexamining applications of the internet in six healthrelated areas: consumer health, clinical care, health care financing and administration, public health, professional education, and biomedical research. it draws on aseries of visits by members of the committee to organizations that areactively designing, developing, and in some cases operating networkedapplications. it identifies the technical capabilities that these applicationsdemand of supporting networks and makes recommendations regardingthe capabilities that need to be deployed to enable the health communityto take fuller advantage of the internet. it also identifies additional workthat is needed to develop complementary and appropriate informationtechnologies, such as tools to help consumers evaluate the quality of theinformation they find on the internet and access controls to reliably limitinternet usersõ ability to access resources such as patient medical records.but the report does not focus exclusively on networking technologies,since the capabilities needed in networks are intertwined with other technical, organizational, and policy considerations. as the committee learnedduring its site visits, an adequate communications infrastructure is not theonly prerequisite for expanded internet use within the health community.efforts are also needed to surmount organizational and policy impediments to the adoption of the internet and internetbased applications. atpresent, health care organizations are ill prepared to deploy internetbased applications, because they lack information upon which to baseinvestment decisions, face an uncertain financial environment, and havedifficulty attracting the talent needed to design, develop, and implementsuch applications. a number of public policy issues, ranging from concerns about patient privacy to the lack of payment mechanisms for somemedical consultations delivered remotely, also stand in the way of greaterdeployment of internet applications. all of these issues need to be addressed if health organizations are to take advantage of the capabilitiesoffered by an enhanced internet.health applications of the internetthe most visible examples to date of the internetõs role in healthrelated activities are in the consumer domain. tens of thousands of siteson the world wide web (the web) offer information on health topics, anda growing number of companies have established web sites to providenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3consumers with information on specific diseases, therapies, and healthylifestyles. some sites allow consumers to evaluate risks to their health,manage chronic medical conditions, purchase healthrelated products,pose questions to health professionals, or engage in discussions with otherconsumers. these systems take advantage of the internetõs broad, publicreach to engage significant portions of the online population, often withinformation that is specially tailored to their needs. an estimated 30million users searched for health information on the internet in 1999 alone,and in 1998 consumers and studentsñas opposed to practitioners andresearchersñaccounted for roughly 30 percent of the use of the nlmõsmedline system, which contains references to millions of journal articles(lindberg, 1998).although healthrelated web sites garner considerable media attention, they represent only a small sampling of the ways in which theinternet can be used in health, itself a large sector embracing health care,public health, health education, and biomedical research. because theinternet, in theory, can link all the participants in the health community, itcan be used to improve consumer access to health information and healthcare, to enhance clinical decision making and improve health outcomesby making better information available to clinicians on demand, and toreengineer the processes of care to make them more efficient. the internetcan also be used to improve the education of medical professionals,enhance public health surveillance, and facilitate biomedical research. ineach of these domains, specific applications can be envisioned in whichthe internet is used to transfer text, graphics, or video files (and evenvoice); control remote medical or experimental equipment; search forneeded information; and support collaboration, in real time, among members of the health community (table es.1). for example, the internetcould do the following:¥enable consumers to access their health records, enter data or information on symptoms, and receive computergenerated suggestions forimproving health and reducing risk;¥allow emergency room physicians to identify an unconsciouspatient and download the patientõs medical record from a hospital acrosstown;¥deliver care instructions to a traveling businessperson who beginsto feel chest pains while in a hotel room;¥enable homebound patients to consult with care providers overrealtime video connections from home, using medical devices capable oftransmitting information over the internet;¥support teams of specialists from across the country who wish tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4networking health: prescriptions for the internettable es.1 primary technical challenges and limiting technicalfactors in selected health applications of the internetclass of applicationrealtime videotransmissionstatic file transferremote controlapplicationdomainconsumer healthremote medicalaccessing personalremote control ofconsultations tohealth records online.patient monitoringthe home, office,downloadingequipment.or wherever theeducational videos.patient is located.sending periodicreports on healthconditions to acare provider.clinical careremote medicaltransfer of medicalremote and virtualconsultationsrecords and imagessurgery (a longbetween clinician(e.g., x rays, mri,term possibilityand patient orct scans).being examined bybetween twothe defense andclinicians.space communities).administrativevideoconferencingpayment of services,n/aand financialwith realtimeenrollment oftransactionssharing ofpatients, qualitydocuments.reviews, etc. largemedical records andimages may betransmitted insupport of someclaims.public healthvideoconferencingincident reporting.n/aamong publiccollection ofhealth officialsinformation fromduring emergencylocal public healthsituations, such asdepartments andchemical orlaboratories.biological attackssurveillance forby terrorists.emerging diseases orepidemics. transferof epidemiologymaps or other imagefiles for monitoringthe spread of adisease.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5information searchrealtimeand retrievalcollaborationprimary technical challengesonline searching forcollaboration withprotection of sensitive patienthealth information orcare providers.information from breaches ofselfassessment guides.participation in chatconfidentiality and fromlooking for a doctorgroups and supportcorruption. ubiquity of access soor hospital.groups.that all health care consumers canbe reached at the location atwhich care is needed. tools andpolicies for validating the qualityof online information.practice guidelines.consultation amongaccess to sustained bandwidthsearches ofcare providers, suchand low latency for remoteprofessional medicalas for surgicalconsultations and collaboration.literature.planning, which maysecurity of clinical records.involve manipulationnetwork reliability. ubiquity ofof digital images.access for care providers.consumer access ton/asecurity to ensure confidentialityinformation aboutand integrity of records. networkhealth plans,reliability sufficient to supportparticipatingregular use for businesspractitioners, eligibilitytransactions. standards for datafor procedures,exchange and definitions of datacovered drugs inelements.formulary.access to publishedvideoconferencingsecurity to ensure confidentialityliterature and researchamong publicand integrity of laboratory reportsresults as well ashealth officialsand other public healthepidemiological data.during emergencyinformation that may containdelivery of alerts andsituations, such aspersonal identifying information.other information tochemical ornetwork reliability. security frompractitioners or otherbiological attacksinformation warfare or attacks onhealth workers.by terrorists.the networkõs physicalinfrastructure.continuednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6networking health: prescriptions for the internettable es.1 continuedclass of applicationrealtime videotransmissionstatic file transferremote controlprofessionaldistance education:accessing electronicsimulations ofeducationeither realtimemedical records fromsurgical procedures.transmission ofremote clinics.virtuallectures or ondownloading sets ofenvironments fordemand streamingreference images orexploration ofvideo withprerecorded videosthreedimensionalintegrated graphics.of lectures.environments.realtimeconsultations withexperts aboutdifficult cases.biomedicalvisual feedbacktransferring largecontrollingresearchfrom remotedata sets betweenexperimentalinstrumentation.computers for highequipment, suchonline conferences.speed computationas electroncollaborationand comparisons.microscopes.among distantreviewing results ofresearchers.remote experiments.searching archives ofthreedimensionalmedical images.limitingtechnical factorsavailability ofauthentication ofnetwork latencysustained,source and recipientand bandwidth.predictable,of information.ability to obtainhighbandwidthsecurity of personallyguaranteedconnections toidentifiablebandwidth formany locations,information in transitpredictable periodsincluding ruralacross the networkof time.health clinics andand in storage atpatientsõ homeseither end of the(to support remotenetwork. availabilityconsultations).of sustainedhighbandwidthconnections fortransfer of large,timecritical files.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7information searchrealtimeand retrievalcollaborationprimary technical challengesaccessing referencevirtual classrooms.sufficient bandwidth tomaterials and coursedistributedaccommodate large numbers ofmaterials.collaborativetransactions from a singleprojects.educational institution or todistributedsupport access to remote scientificdiscussions.and clinical simulations. ubiquityof access for students in remoteclinical rotations and to supporteducational applications in thehome.searching remotecollaboration amongsufficient bandwidth to supportdatabases andresearchers. peerrapid transfers of large sets ofprofessional literature.review. interactivedata for distributed simulations.virtual conferences.low latency to accommodateremote control of equipment.tools for locatingsustained access toinformation of interesthighbandwidth,and for determininglowlatency networksthe quality of retrievedfor collaborationsinformation. means ofinvolving realtimeallowing anonymousvideo or manipulationsearches.of images. multicastprotocols to makemore efficient use ofnetworking resources.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8networking health: prescriptions for the internetplan particularly challenging surgical procedures by manipulating sharedthreedimensional images and simulating different operative approaches;¥allow a health plan to provide instantaneous approval for a referral to a specialist and to schedule an appointment electronically;¥enable public health officials to detect potential contamination ofthe public water supply by analyzing data on nonprescription sales ofantidiarrheal remedies in local pharmacies;¥help medical students and practitioners access, from the examiningroom, clinical information regarding symptoms they have never beforeencountered; and¥permit biomedical researchers at a local university to create threedimensional images of a biological structure using an electron microscopea thousand miles away.a number of these applications have been demonstrated in localizedsettings, such as individual hospitals or health care delivery systems. forreasons of technology, organizational capabilities, and public policy,many of them have yet to be deployed more broadly across the internet oron private networks that rely on dedicated communications links. as aresult, little is known about their costs and benefitsñwhether they wouldimprove health or research capabilities, how much they would cost toimplement, or whether they would reduce health costs if deployed on alarger scale. that kind of knowledge will require continued explorationand evaluation, as well as an understanding of how the economics of thelarge but decentralized health sector can influence the development of theinternet, driving decisions about which capabilities will be deployed, andwhen.this report addresses a broad spectrum of health applications in anattempt to demonstrate the diversity of needs and the degree of commonality in the technical capabilities they require. it is intended to guide afaster realization of the internetõs potential for health, a potential that haseluded the health sector for too long. the report recognizes that theapplications themselvesñand the technical capabilities they demandñare moving targets with uncertain trajectories. while todayõs demonstration programs hint at the kinds of capabilities that will be needed in thefuture, the evolutionary path of health applications of the internet isunclear. will, for instance, remote medical consultations become viablebetween any patient and any care provider connected to the internet, orwill this capability remain more localized in its reach and limited topatients and providers in the same health plan? the answer depends ontechnical, economic, social, and policy considerations that are difficult topredict, and different answers could drive the need for significantly different technical capabilities, as well as a different scale and scope ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9deployment. the report attempts to recognize these uncertainties and toderive conclusions that are reflective and cognizant of them.technical considerationsthe technical capabilities needed to support healthrelated use of theinternet vary considerably from one application to another. the relativeimportance of bandwidth, latency, availability, security, and ubiquity insix different classes of health application is shown in table es.2 (see boxes.1 for a definition of the technical terms used in this report). for themost part, these considerations are common to internet applications inother sectors, and that broader base increases the likelihood of affordablesolutions. but in communicating with internet researchers and technology developers, the health community (i.e., all those active in healthrelated activities, such as provision of care, public health, professionaleducation, and biomedical research) can call attention to its need for particular attributes, and it can point out the characteristics of the healthsector that differentiate its needs from those of sectors such as entertainment, defense, or finance.for example, security is a primary concern in virtually all healthapplications of the internet because the extreme sensitivity of personalhealth information demands high levels of confidentiality. furthermore,the paramountcy of safetyñindividualsõ health and lives are at stake,after allñrequires that information not be corrupted before, during, orafter transmission across the network from one party to another.although security is also important in many other internet applications,including electronic commerce (ecommerce, itself a player in the evolvtable es.2 technical demands of healthrelated applications of theinternetapplication areabandwidthlatencyavailabilitysecurityubiquityconsumer health+++++++++++++clinical care+++++++++++++++++financial and+++++++++++administrativetransactionspublic health++++++++++professional education+++++++++++biomedical research+++++++++++++note: plus signs (+) denote the relative importance of the technical feature within thedesignated application area. a single plus sign denotes minimal importance; four plussigns signify great importance.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox es.1glossary of technical termsa range of technical capabilities must be considered in determining the suitability of different networking technologies for particular applications. among the moreimportant are five that are emphasized throughout this report:1.bandwidth is the datacarrying capacity of a network, usually expressed asthe number of bits per second that can be transmitted across a particular link or thenetwork as a whole.2.latency is the time required for an individual packet of data to be transmittedbetween communicating entities on a network. a related concept is response time,which refers to the time required for an entire message or file to be transferredacross the internet and acknowledged.3.availability is the likelihood that the network is available for service andfunctioning properly. availability can be compromised by the failure of individualcomponents or network links, by hostile attacks that overload the system, or othercauses discussed in chapter 3.4.security, as used in this report, refers to the capability of a network to ensurethe confidentiality and integrity of information transmitted across it. an importantpart of ensuring confidentiality is authenticating the identity of participants in anetworkbased transaction.5.ubiquity is the degree of access to a network. the telephone system ishighly ubiquitous because access can be achieved by almost anyone in the unitedstates from almost any location. access to private networks is, by design, lessubiquitous because it is constrained to a limited number of people and/or a limitednumber of geographic locations.related to the first two of these terms is quality of service (qos), which refersto the capability of a network to provide a range of guarantees about its performance, measured in terms of sustained bandwidth, latency, and/or packet lossrates. the current internet contains no provisions for qos, offering only besteffort delivery of packets of data, although several protocols have been developedfor implementing qos.ing health environment), health applications pose special challenges, thesolutions to which may lie in the computers attached to the networkrather than in the network itself. for example, the exchange of electronicmedical records, payment data, or prescription information demands thatthe identities of both the sender and recipient of the data be validated(authenticated) with high levels of assurance. mechanisms for authenticating individuals that are more secure than passwords are not in widespread use across the internet. this situation has not, however, impededconsumeroriented ecommerce applications, because online vendorsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11have robust means of authenticating themselves to their customersõ webbrowsers (using electronic certificates provided by a handful of certificateauthorities, as described in chapter 3). moreover, the vendors do notnecessarily require strong authentication of users who present a validcredit card number: credit card companies and vendors who accept creditcards expect to incur some costs from fraud, and consumer losses aregenerally capped at nominal levels. by contrast, health has a low tolerancefor losses and other kinds of mistakes: before an electronic prescriptioncan be filled or a copy of an electronic medical record sent, the identity ofthe requester must be verified as rigorously as the identity of the supplier.the constantly shifting relationships among health organizations furthercomplicate security considerations. other aspects of security also presentchallenges in health applications, as outlined in chapters 2 and 3 of thisreport.1network availability is also important in health applications of theinternet. high levels of availability are needed in missioncritical applications in many industries, and similar needs obtain in health: if insurancecompanies and managed care organizations are to rely on the internet forclaims processing, referrals to specialists, or checks on eligibility for particular services, they must be sure the network will be running whenneeded and that data will not be corrupted. but the health sectorõs needfor high levels of network availability to and from a large number ofpossible locations can also be greater than in other sectors, because health,wellbeing, and even life may be at stake. if care providers are to use theinternet to access electronic patient records when treating patients in theemergency room, they must know that the network and the applicationsare operational 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. accordingly, health applications add to the call for the internet to be made resistant to maliciousattacks and resilient in the face of failures of hardware, software, or humanoperators.many of the applications that can be envisioned in the health domaindemand high levels of bandwidth or timely delivery of data, often for anextended period of time.2 consider the case of remote medical consultations, which could make expert care more equitably available across thecountry, regardless of the location of the patient. video consultationsdemand highbandwidth connections (roughly 384 kilobits per second) inboth directions between two communicating sites for the duration of thesessionñas long as 30 minutes in some casesñeven if one of the sites is asmall medical practice or a patientõs home. although the backbone networks that make up the internet have sufficient capacity to accommodatesuch needs, they cannot currently guarantee that adequate bandwidthand latency will be available whenever needed, because other traffic withunknowable bandwidth needs will also be traversing the network. thesenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12networking health: prescriptions for the internettypes of applications therefore demand mechanisms for ensuring qualityof service (qos) across the internet, whether by allowing users to subscribe to higherend services (referred to as differentiated services, or diffserv) or allowing them to reserve capacity on an asneeded basis (referredto as integrated services, or intserv).the internet engineering task force (ietf) has codified standards forboth diffserv and intserv, but neither has yet been deployed across theinternet. moreover, it is not clear that internet service providers (isps)will deploy them in the near futureñor in ways that support the healthindustry. for example, the highly decentralized nature of the healthindustry implies that health organizations will obtain their internet servicefrom many different isps rather than from a single provider. to provideqos between the many different sets of communicating parties that arepossible, qos mechanisms would need to be deployed through the entireinternet, not just across a single ispõs network. however, mechanisms donot yet exist for supporting qos (either diffserv or intserv) betweenisps, precluding the possibility of endtoend qos guarantees any timesoon. furthermore, the protocols for supporting intserv will not necessarily scale sufficiently to allow their use across the internet. the decentralized structure of the health industry makes it hard for health organizations to come up with viable business models whereby they can pay ispsto deploy the kinds of qos they need. almost any solution to this problem will require the participation of the insurance companies and otherthirdparty payers who finance health care in the united states.ubiquity of access is particularly important in health applications ofthe internet because people in need of health care and related services canbe almost anywhere. indeed, the most significant advance in health carebrought about by the internet may prove to be better access for careproviders, consumers, and administrators operating in relatively isolatedenvironments. although many nearterm applications that extend to individual consumers do not require highbandwidth connections, futureapplicationsñwhether remote medical consultations or the downloadingof educational videosñcould easily drive a need for ubiquitous, broadband access technologies. of particular interest could be broadband technologies for residential access that provide sufficient bandwidth bothupstream (from the end user to the internet) and downstream (from theinternet to the end user). most existing residential broadband technologiesñsuch as cable modems and digital subscriber line service using thetelephone networkñallocate much more bandwidth downstream thanupstream, consistent with a view of the internet as a mechanism for distributing content from a centralized source (such as an entertainmentcompany) rather than facilitating collaboration and interaction amongmultiple participants.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13organizational barriers to the adoption ofinternet applicationsa handful of pioneering health organizations are developing anddeploying innovative applications of the internet, but such capabilitiesare diffusing slowly throughout the sectorñin traditional care providerorganizations, in particular. a number of factors have impeded thebroader deployment of internetbased systems within the health sector,including the structure of the sector itself. despite some consolidationover the past decade, the sector is very diverse and decentralized andmarked by local solutions to problemsñit has been characterized as aòtrilliondollar cottage industry.ó as a result, effecting widescale changecan be difficult, as is achieving a unified voice on issues of technology andits application.further slowing adoption is a paucity of reliable information on thecosts and benefits of internetbased applications in operational settings.how much will internetbased systems cost to deploy, operate, and maintain? how will they improve care and/or reduce costs? how well caninternetbased systems be integrated with legacy databases in large healthcare organizations? health care professionals tend to be cautious in adopting unproven technologies because of the overwhelming need to ensurepatient safety and positive health outcomes. organizations that pay forhealth care (including traditional insurance companies and the healthcare financing administration, or hcfa, which processes medicare andmedicaid payments) also want evidence of cost savings or medical effectiveness if they are to pay for services based on the new technology.although internet applications have been demonstrated to improve efficiency in some applications run across enterprises, internet technology isstill fairly new and untested in health care applications, making evaluations and comparisons difficult and prompting caution in the pursuit ofinternet strategies.evaluating the costs and benefits of health applications of the internetis made more difficult by the uncertainties surrounding the effects ofinternetbased communications on relationships among the numerousentities involved in health care. for example, little is known about theways in which the internet will alter the traditional relationships amongpatients, primary care physicians (pcps), medical specialists, and hospitals. will the internet change the way consumers seek care, enablingthem to learn enough about their health to bypass pcps and go directly tospecialists, or will they be confused by all the information and need toconsult their pcp more often? will internetbased care improve management of the chronically ill, and if so, how will it affect the cost structure ofhealth care organizations? restructuring may also be needed within indinetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14networking health: prescriptions for the internetvidual organizations. as has happened with other applications of information technology, internet applications have been shown to alter workpatterns within organizations in unanticipated ways. what types of skillswill information systems staffs need to develop and implement internetbased systems for health care? what types of skills will administrativestaff and health professionals need to work with internetbased healthcare systems? what type of training do intended system users need?answers to these questions will come only after additional experimentation and evaluation.internet applications also tend to demand new (or modified) organizational policies and procedures. for example, when should electronicmail (email) be used between patients and care providers? what types ofliability does an organization assume for the quality of the informationthat is relayed in the online discussion groups it hosts? how can patientprivacy be protected in electronic transactions, and what balance betweensecurity and access is acceptable to consumers who want online access totheir health records? progress is being made on a number of these issues(e.g., the american medical informatics association has developed a setof guidelines for clinical uses of email, and the department of health andhuman services has promulgated draft regulations governing the privacy and security of electronic health information), but new issues continue to arise and managers of health organizations are struggling to keepup, at times slowing the broader deployment of new applications.public policy issuespublic policy influences the ways in which health organizations canuse the internet to achieve their goals. for example, statebased practicesfor licensing health care professionals and resolving malpractice suitshamper efforts to provide remote medical consultations across state lines.uncertainties over evolving federal regulations for the privacy and security of electronic health information continue to deter organizations fromimplementing systems for sharing health records or administrative andfinancial information across the internet. other issues, such as the protection of intellectual property contained in materials developed for educational purposes, affect a broad base of constituents, including some in thehealth community. so does the issue of unequal access to the informationinfrastructure, the socalled digital divide. reports show that people indifferent geographic regions and socioeconomic classes and with different levels of educational attainment have considerably different degreesof access to the internet (ntia, 1999). such differences are alarming in anumber of contextsñthe delivery of government services and educationalopportunities among themñbut take on added significance in a healthnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary15care setting, where limited access to the information infrastructure couldexacerbate the existing differences in access to quality health care.furthermore, many of the nearterm remedies proposed for enhancinginternet access for the general publicñsuch as the wiring of schools, libraries, and community centersñdo not necessarily translate well tohealth care, because consumers may be reluctant to conduct transactionsin public settings and may need access outside normal business hours.policy issues such as these have to be resolved if health applications of theinternet are to become more pervasive and more effective. their resolution will require the health community to become more actively engagedin the policymaking process to ensure that healthrelated interests areaddressed.evolving the internet to meet health needsbefore internet use can become widespread throughout the healthcommunity, action is needed in four areas: (1) research on, and the development and deployment of, technologies suitable for health applicationsof the internet, (2) continued demonstration and evaluation of healthapplications of the internet, (3) educational needs of health care organizations and their workers, and (4) resolution of policy issues that impedethe use of the internet in health applications. the committeeõs recommendations are intended to guide efforts in each of these areas, and progressis needed in all of them. as a group, the recommendations recognize thatwhat differentiates health from other sectors is the juxtaposition of exacting technical requirements with a vast geographic expanse and a highlydecentralized industrial structure and economic base. this combinationexacerbates the difficulties arising from the failure to articulate technology needs or to devise means to ensure that needed services are provided.by advocating the needs of a broad constituency, nlm can provide timelyleadership in enhancing the internet for health.research, development, and deployment of technical capabilitiesbroadening the utility of the internet for health applications demandsthat the internet possesses the necessary technical capabilities. this canbe done by deploying the technologies that will soon be available forimproving security, availability, qos, and ubiquity across the internetand by continuing to research and develop improved capabilities over thelong term. efforts must also be made to ensure that the health communityõs needs are relayed to the networking research community and thatadvances are made in complementary technologies that will enable healthorganizations to take advantage of the networking infrastructure. thesenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16networking health: prescriptions for the internetefforts need to reflect the many uncertainties surrounding health applications of the internet and their technical needs.recommendation 1.1. the health community should ensure thattechnical capabilities suitable for health and biomedical applications are incorporated into the testbed networks being deployedunder the next generation internet initiative and eventuallyinto the internet.as a first step toward enhancing the internet to support health applications, the health community should push to have the capabilities describedbelow deployed in the testbed networks being constructed under the federal governmentõs ngi initiative. without these capabilities, future healthapplications could be thwarted or delayed and the opportunities theinternet offers could be lost. while the entire nation has a stake in ensuring that these capabilities are deployed, it is the health community itselfthat is in the best position to identify the capabilities it needs, to communicate them to the network research and development community, and tohelp shape the business case that will impel their deployment. the networks being deployed under ngi will support a range of experimentalhealth applications, such as remote medical consultations, collaborationamong practitioners and researchers, and access to online repositories ofinformation (see appendix b for a listing and brief description of ongoingnlm projects). the testing of technical capabilities in these testbed networks will provide an opportunity for evaluations and refinements thatwill be incorporated into the demonstration projects, enabling the healthcommunity to better assess the capabilities its applications demand. thosethat prove effective should be deployed in the public internet as theybecome more stable. these technologies are described in more detail inchapters 3 and 6 of the report.¥quality of service. qos protocols should be deployed across thengi testbed networks so that users are guaranteed access to needed capabilities (e.g., bandwidth and latency). a number of academic medicalcenters will have access to the ngi via their universities and have receivedfunding for projects to demonstrate a variety of applications that demandhigh bandwidthñfrom remote medical consultations to realtime transmission of highresolution radiological or biological images. the deployment of differentiated services would allow users to experiment withpremium services that could eventually be offered across the internet.the deployment of integrated services would allow further experimentation with protocols for reserving capacity as needed for particular eventsand would allow further evaluation of the scalability of existing protonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary17cols. by experimenting with these protocols, users may be able to betterunderstand the specific capabilities required and devise business modelsthat will support the deployment and effective use of the new protocolsacross the public internet.¥security. both secure socket layer (ssl) encryption and ipsecurity(ipsec) should be deployed in the ngi testbed networks to allow thecontinued evaluation of different modes of securing transactions acrossthe internet. although ssl is already in widespread use across theinternet, the broader deployment of ipsec would provide a complementary means of protecting information exchanges among organizations,and it might prove effective for financial and administrative exchangesamong affiliated organizations. before either of these protocols (especially ssl) can be used successfully in health applications, a public keyinfrastructure must be established, along with the technical mechanismsneeded to support stronger authentication of all parties involved in transactions across the internet. such mechanisms are generally lacking acrossthe internet, although there are enclaves where they are used in the private sector and within the federal government. more research is neededto develop means of authenticating large numbers of users, many ofwhom need to communicate securely despite having no established relationships.recommendation 1.2. to ensure that the internet evolves inways supportive of health needs over the long term, the healthcommunity should work with the networking community todevelop improved network technologies that are of particularimportance to health applications of the internet.continued research will be needed to make the internet even morecapable of supporting healthñand otherñapplications in the long term.the technologies of most interest to the health community include thefollowing:¥more readily scalable techniques to guarantee bandwidth on demand.existing protocols for providing qos on demand across the internet,such as the integrated services model, may not scale sufficiently to allowwidespread use. to enable applications such as remote consultation, newprotocols will be needed.¥stronger forms of authentication. continued effort will be needed tofind ways of identifying participants in internet transactions, includingparticipants who have not previously communicated with each other.the new techniques will need to scale to cover all internet users and besimple to administer. work on smart cards, tokenbased authentication,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18networking health: prescriptions for the internetand biometric authentication devices should be pursued. this kind ofr&d may fall under two headingsñhighconfidence systems and ngiresearchñwithin the federal governmentõs portfolio of information technology research programs.¥symmetric or dynamically reconfigurable broadband technologies for thelast mile. users of residentialgrade access technologies (e.g., cable modemsand digital subscriber lines) will need either access to a more balancedallocation of bandwidth into and out of their homes or the capability toreconfigure the allocation as needed to support applications such asremote medical consultations, which could extend to many small healthclinics, places of employment, and patientsõ homes.¥hardened qualityofservice guarantees. mechanisms will be neededto ensure that critical applications in health (and other sectors) do not loseqos guarantees except in extreme circumstances, such as a major network outage. one area of interest is techniques for rapid reconvergenceafter link failures to ensure that new paths across the internet are foundquickly in the event that a particular link fails. many parties and sectorswant qos guarantees, and many internet users are responding to offersby large isps who make such guarantees within their own large networks. the challenge for health (which serves a dispersed national population) is finding a way to improve qos and availability of service acrossmultiple isps.¥disaster operations. techniques are needed for delivering missioncritical, healthrelated traffic even in a major natural or manmade disaster.recommendation 1.3. the national library of medicine shouldforge stronger links between the health and networkingresearch communities to ensure that the needs of the healthcommunity are better understood and addressed in networkresearch, development, and deployment.the diverse and decentralized nature of the health sector impedes thedevelopment of a unified voice through which it can express its needs tothose involved in networking research, development of internet standards (e.g., by the ietf), and deployment of internet services. the nlm,by virtue of its leadership in health informatics, could play a more pronounced role in this area, actively forging links between the health andnetworking communities, which have historically had limited interaction.this could be done in several ways, perhaps by providing special fundingto recipients of nlm grants and contracts that would support their participation in conferences and meetings of the networking community orby funding projects that explicitly involve researchers from the healthand networking communities. additional activities would undoubtedlynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary19be needed to help the health community find ways to more effectivelyidentify and communicate its needs to the networking community. an adhoc task force could be set up to explore additional ways to accomplishthis goal. the nlm itself could work more closely with the networkingcommunity, leveraging its longstanding attention to information technology development and speaking for the health sector as a whole. itcould also serve as a focal point for contact with isps, the business entitiesresponsible for deploying the capabilities that would benefit health. itcould advance the perspective that health is a leading example of a peertopeer application (as opposed to the more asymmetric application associated with many other kinds of content distribution) that requiresadvanced networking services from the internet, helping create a moreunified voice for the decentralized health sector.recommendation 1.4. the national institutes of health and itscomponent agencies should fund information technologyresearch that will develop the complementary technologies thatare needed if the health community is to take advantage of theimproved networking technologies that can be expected in thefuture.health applications of the internet pose a number of challenges forinformation technology research on topics other than networking. thenational institutes of health and its constituent centers and agenciesshould pursue research in those areas that are of particular importance tothe health community, such as (1) validation of information retrievedfrom the internet, (2) tools for protecting the anonymity of internet users,(3) access controls governing the ability of many different types of usersto access different resources on the network, (4) controls on the secondarydistribution of information, (5) improved capabilities for auditing the logsof accesses to databases and information, (6) qos policies that are suitable for health and health care applications, and (7) applications that arealert to qos offerings and that use them appropriately. other technicalneeds will undoubtedly emerge as new applications are developed andgain acceptance within the health community. the constantly changingcontext of the internet implies that the set of applications will evolve andthat the need for research will remain.demonstration and evaluation of health applicationscontinued experimentation and evaluation will be key to the development of a better understanding of the types of health applications thatmay become popular on the internet and of the technical capabilities theynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20networking health: prescriptions for the internetdemand. through demonstrations of applications such as remote consultation, remote control of experimental equipment, and online access toelectronic medical records, members of the health community will gainan opportunity to examine the relative costs and benefits of these applications, the business models needed to support them, and the organizational policies needed to govern their use. a number of public and privateorganizations have supported programs to allow these types of demonstrations. such efforts need to continue as new internet technologiesbecome available and new applications are envisioned. demonstrationswill serve as venues for continued identification of technical needs thatthe networking community can address and other problems and issuesfor the health community to resolve. the process will be increasinglyimportant to the health community if it is to establish a dialog with theinternet community about evolving needs and technical requirementsand if it is to leverage that dialog to grow capabilities from the confines ofa demonstration to widespread deployment. to provide information thatwill inform this dialog, a number of parallel efforts will be needed, asrecommended below:recommendation 2.1. the department of health and humanservices should fund pilot projects and larger demonstrationprograms to develop and demonstrate interoperable, scalableinternet applications for linking multiple health organizations.pilot projects are needed to explore the full range of health uses of thepublic internet, particularly projects that link multiple distinct organizations in an operational context. they could include projects to allow thepatients of one organization to obtain remote consultations with specialists at other organizations or to allow the transmission of financial andadministrative information among organizations that provide, pay for,and manage health care. few health care organizations have a strongincentive to implement such systems on their own, given the significantuncertainties surrounding the effectiveness of different internetbasedsystems in health care, the fragmented and proprietary nature of theindustry, and the scale at which such systems would need to be built.federal funding could play an important role in stimulating such work,especially if it focused on applications that link multiple organizations.recommendation 2.2. federal agencies such as the departmentof veterans affairs, the department of defense, the health carefinancing administration, the national institutes of health,and the indian health service should serve as role models andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary21testbeds for the health industry by deploying internetbasedapplications for their own purposes.federal agencies that operate largescale health care programs should,whenever possible, attempt to be leadingedge users of internet technologies. by doing so, they could not only demonstrate the feasibility ofdeploying different health applications but also provide a testbed fordeveloping needed standards and supporting technologies. the department of defense already has a sizeable program under way for deliveringhealth care at a distance (i.e., telemedicine), the department of veteransaffairs has a network of hospitals that share patient information asneeded, and the hcfa processes medicare and medicaid claims. each ofthese programs, as well as those of the indian health service, could serveas a testbed for internet applications while helping to fulfill importantgovernment missions. additional support might come from other ongoing efforts to reengineer federal activities.recommendation 2.3. health organizations in industry andacademia should continue to work with the department of healthand human services to evaluate various health applications ofthe internet in order to improve understanding of their effects,the business models that might support them, and impedimentsto their expansion.work is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of different forms ofinternetbased health care and to compare their effectiveness against applications run across different network infrastructures. health care organizations have little evidence or data on which to base their decisions aboutinternet strategies. because such evaluations would benefit a wide rangeof healthrelated organizations, not just those directly involved in thestudies, active federal support would be justified.recommendation 2.4. public and private health organizationsshould experiment with networks based on internet protocolsand should incorporate the internet into their future plans fornew networked applications and into their overall strategicplanning.by using networks that incorporate internet protocolsñwhether theinternet protocol suite per se or those associated with the webñhealthorganizations could gain a better understanding of the capabilities andtradeoffs inherent in the use of the internet for health applications without exposing themselves to the associated risks and uncertainties. usingnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22networking health: prescriptions for the internetthese protocols locally would also prepare health organizations to takebetter advantage of the internetñand the continued advances in its abilitiesñonce technical tools are in place to make it safer and reliable enoughfor health applications.addressing educational needswider deployment of internetbased applications in health care willrequire that organizations in the health sector adopt, adapt, and extendinternet technologies to fit their missions and develop the internal capabilities to do so. the internet promises to radically transform the provisionof health care and the education of health professionals, and organizations that fail to take steps now may find themselves ill prepared whenimproved internet technologies become available. to make better use ofthe internet, health care organizations will also have to learn how toevaluate the benefits of internet technologies and develop effective policies for guiding their use, just as they had to learn how to use earlier andmore localized forms of information technology, an effort in which thehealth care system is still lagging. efforts are recommended in three areas:recommendation 3.1. professional associations with expertisein health issues and information technology should work withhealth care organizations to develop and promulgate guidelinesfor safe, effective use of the internet in clinical settings.part of the challenge of internet use in health care is the developmentof suitable policies, practices, and procedures to guide its use. for example, how should providers handle email from patients to ensure timelyresponses, maintenance of patient confidentiality, and the incorporationof necessary information into the medical record? how can care providersbe sure of the identity of a patient to whom they are sending email?what is the role of a health care organization in monitoring discussiongroups that operate under its initiative or that of affiliated care providers?health care organizations have little experience upon which to base suchpolicies, but they can learn from each otherõs experiences. professionalassociations have a significant role to play in helping define industrywideguidelines for safe, effective use of the internet. the american medicalinformatics association has developed guidelines for clinical uses ofemail (kane and sands, 1998). similar guidelines on other topics wouldsupport industry efforts to develop internetbased systems.recommendation 3.2. government, industry, and academiashould work together and with professional associations withnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary23experience in health and information technology to educate thebroader health and health care communities about the ways theinternet can benefit them.one obstacle to the greater use of the internet in health care is thathealth workers at all levels (care providers, administrators, and information systems staff) do not fully appreciate the ways in which the internetcan improve the provision and administration of health care. the growing amount of publicity for ecommerce and even consumerhealthinformation web sites does not translate into the kinds of institutional andprocedural changes that would make the most of internet capabilities inhealth care. educational outreach programs would create a more receptive audience for new technologies. academic health centers and professional associations have unique capabilities to educate members of thehealth community.recommendation 3.3. the department of health and humanservices should commission a study of the health informationtechnology workforce to determine whether the supply of suchworkers balances the demand for them, to identify the kinds oftraining and education that workers at different levels willneed, and to develop recommendations for ensuring an adequatesupply of people with training at the intersection of information technology and health.the process of developing, deploying, and evaluating health applications of the internet demands workers with a solid understanding of theinternet, of other information technologies, and of the processes involvedin health care. the policy community has already expressed concernabout a perceived shortage of skilled information technology workers.3anecdotal evidence indicates that similar concerns may apply to the fieldof health informatics, and in june 1999 dhhs announced its biomedicalinformation science and technology initiative, which would boost thepipeline of people educated as computational biologists. however, thereis little documentation with which to evaluate these concerns or to projectthe types of it skills that workers at different levels within a health organization will need. additional study would be required to determine theextent of the problem and the best way of solving it.resolving the policy issuespublic policy issues that impede internetbased activities in health,health care, and biomedical research need to be addressed. these includenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24networking health: prescriptions for the internetissues specific to the provision of health care services over the internet,such as payment for services, professional licensure, and liability, as wellas issues of patient/consumer privacy, intellectual property protection,and equitable access that extend far beyond the health domain. suchissues could stand in the way of use of the internet in health care and inthe education of health professionals. accordingly, although the committee was not constituted with the range of expertise needed to makerecommendations for solving these problems, the report offers the following recommendation for advancing the debate on these policy issues:recommendation 4.1. the department of health and humanservices should more aggressively address the broad set ofpolicy issues that influence the development, deployment, andadoption of internetbased applications in the health sector.ensuring that the internet evolves in ways that meet the needs of thehealth care community and enabling the health sector to better take advantage of these capabilities will require the continuous coordination ofmany independent activities and stakeholders in the public and privatesectors. the concerns and needs of the health community must be reflectedin efforts to resolve national policy issues such as intellectual propertyprotection, privacy, and access to information infrastructure, and specificefforts are needed to ensure that policy issues of concern only to thehealth community, such as licensure of care providers, payment policies,federal funding for health informatics research, and the supply of healthinformation technology workers, are addressed. while many of theseissues are being addressed by various elements of the federal governmentñincluding agencies within dhhsñother issues have seen littleinput from the health community. the constituent agencies of dhhsvary in the importance they attach to these policy issues and in theirapproaches to resolving them. strong, stable leadership is essential tokeep these policyrelated activities focused and sustained.dhhs should assert itself more aggressively in this arena. privatesector organizations also have significant leadership roles to play, but theireffectiveness in bringing about industrywide change can be limited becausethe private sector is so highly decentralized. dhhs is not the only federalagency with responsibilities in health (the department of veterans affairs,the department of defense, the indian health service, and the nationalaeronautics and space administration all have healthrelated programs),but the breadth of its programs and its mission argues for it to play thelead role within government for coordinating internetrelated activities,especially as they relate to the health community.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary25the establishment of a data council within dhhs and the realignment of the national committee on vital and health statistics into anadvisory committee on health data, statistics, and national health information policy are positive steps that should be built upon. they haveenabled dhhs to make significant strides in policy areas such as thedevelopment of regulations for protecting electronic health information.there are other roles for dhhs to play in this effort: (1) providing strategic leadership for internetrelated efforts within the department and itsconstituent agencies (this would include the use of the internet in supportof department and agency missions) and coordinating them with those ofother federal agencies, (2) convening public and private bodies to identify, examine, and propose mechanisms for addressing issues related tothe internet and health care, (3) exploring crosscutting issues that affectmany health agencies and developing programs for addressing them (e.g.,implementing a public key infrastructure that would support a range offederal health activities), (4) encouraging federal health agencies to shareinformation and perspectives on their many responsibilities and interests,including the provision of care, payment for care, monitoring of care,healthrelated research, and public health, (5) advancing national debateabout key information technology issues that affect health care, includingthe technical, organizational, and policy issues identified in this report,and (6) creating the organizational structures needed to ensure that issuesat the nexus of health and information technology are identified andaddressed promptly and efficiently. although these activities will not bythemselves resolve the issues, they will set in motion processes that canlead to a resolution.looking forwardthese recommendations are intended to help the nation move forward on technical, organizational, and policy fronts so that it can reap thebenefits of the internet for health applications. additional work will beneeded to identify other networking technologies of interest to the healthcommunity and to ensure that related information technology needs aremet. this report prescribes the actions needed now to develop a trulyhealthy internet in the future.referenceskane, beverley, and daniel z. sands. 1998. òguidelines for the clinical use of electronicmail with patients,ó report for the amia internet working group, task force onguidelines for the use of clinicpatient electronic mail, journal of the american medicalinformatics association 5(1). available online at <http://www.amia.org/pubs/pospaper/positio2.htm>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26networking health: prescriptions for the internetlindberg, donald a.b. 1998. fiscal year 1999 presidentõs budget request for the nationallibrary of medicine. national library of medicine, bethesda, md., march 18. available online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/staffpubs/od/budget99.html>.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1999. fallingthrough the net: defining the digital divide. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.notes1.as an example, a large number of individuals may have legitimate needs to review apatientõs medical records, making the determination of access rules extremely complicated.in an emergency room situation, information may have to be accessed by a care providerwith whom the patient has had no prior relationship, perhaps even at a hospital the patienthas never visited.2.timeliness is not critical in many health care functions, such as when information istransmitted for review at a later time. but in some cases, such as acute trauma and remoteconsultation, timeliness can be important.3.cstb has a project under way to examine issues related to the information technology workforce. information is available online at <www.cstb.org>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.271overview and introductionthe internet is rapidly and radically transforming many aspects ofsociety, reshaping industries from aircraft manufacturing to retailing byenabling the widespread sharing of information and creating new relationships between buyers and sellers of goods and services. businessesnow sell goods and services over the internet, often dealing directly withcustomers rather than working through traditional distribution channelsand intermediaries, tailoring products to match more closely the preferences of individual customers. governments disseminate public information on world wide web sites, and consumers use the internet to findinformation, communicate with friends and family, plan trips, shop, andpursue hobbies. both the scope of applications and the number of internetusers will undoubtedly continue to grow as technologies improve andinnovators continue to experiment with new online applications.healthrelated activities stand to benefit enormously from theinternet. as a highly informationintensive set of functions characterizedby complex interactions among a large number of stakeholdersñprimarycare physicians, specialists, nurses, patients, health plan administrators,public health officials, medical librarians, researchers, and othersñhealthrelated activities can take advantage of the nearly ubiquitous reach of theinternet and its capability to support communication between users whomay not have interacted with each other before. already the internet isbeginning to influence the health sector by forging new relationshipsamong stakeholders and improving access to health information. itsapplication in the delivery of health care, maintenance of public health,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28networking health: prescriptions for the internetpayment for health care services, education of health professionals, andconduct of health sciences research could improve the quality of care andaccess to it as well as reduce its cost.despite its promise, the internetõs future in supporting health andhealth care is far from assured. a number of technical, organizational,and policy barriers stand in the way of its adoption by health organizations and consumers. furthermore, although much can be done with theinternet in its present form, some health applications demand greatertechnical capabilities than the internet can now provide, especially in theareas of security, reliability, and timely transmission of information. as aresult, some health applications cannot be implemented across the internetand used in operational settings without potentially threatening the privacy and optimal care of patients.health applications have helped motivate a number of efforts toimprove the nationõs information infrastructure.1 ongoing research anddevelopment (r&d) efforts, such as those being pursued under the federalgovernmentõs next generation internet (ngi) initiative and the privatesectorõs internet 2 initiative, also hope to foster technologies that couldenhance the internetõs ability to meet the needs of the health sector. theseefforts will also provide testbeds for improved evaluations of the benefitsof different health applications of the internet and their technical andnontechnical requirements. but these testbedsñand ultimately the internetitselfñwill not adequately support health applications unless a betterunderstanding is developed of the technical capabilities that these applications demand.this report explores the use of the internet in healthrelated applications and attempts to delineate the technical capabilities that such applications demand. taking a broad view of health applications, it considersuses of the internet in consumer health, clinical care, public health, medical education, health care financing and administration, and biomedicalresearch.2 it does not, however, attempt to predict which applications aremost likely to catch on or to estimate levels of use; rather, it attempts toillustrate the types of applications that are possible and to assess thetechnical capabilities required for their safe, effective deployment in anoperational setting.the report also addresses organizational and policy issues that standin the way of broader adoption of internet technologies for health applications.3 it became increasingly apparent during the course of the studythat health applications of the internet involve systems that combine network infrastructure with other computing technologies (both hardwareand software) and with end users who operate in multiple organizationalcontexts and are influenced by the policy environment. the close couplingamong these levels makes it impossible to focus on any one level to thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction29exclusion of the others. tradeoffs are often made between the capabilitiesembedded in different levels of the system,4 and networking can makeissues associated with other levels more important. security, for example,takes on wholly new dimensions in a networked environment in whichinformation can be readily transferred among entities and stored in computers that are attached to a public network. yet, many of the mechanisms for addressing security concerns will be implemented not in thenetwork itself but in the devices or computers attached to the network.an individualõs access to health information in such an environment, andthe circumstances under which such access is allowed, will be determinedby a confluence of organizational and national policies for protectinghealth information.the strong interrelationships between the network, other technology,and organizational and national policy introduce great uncertainties intothe evolutionary path of the internet with respect to health applications.for example, although many would agree that the internet will enhancethe role of the consumer in health care, the future of specific applications,such as remote medical consultations or online access to patientsõ medicalrecords, is more difficult to discern because of the range of technical,organizational, and policy issues to be resolved (as detailed in later chapters of this report). further research and experimentation are needed tounderstand these issues more fully and develop workable solutions. consistent with the charge to the committee, this report does not attempt toresolve these policy issues, but by highlighting their significance in enabling effective and safe applications of the internet for health care it mayhasten their resolution. in the end, the report recommends ways of helping the internet better serve a range of health interests. it identifies bothlongterm needs that will require r&d and steps that must quickly betaken to help people and organizations adopt and adapt to the next generation of internet technologies. this chapter provides a broad overviewof past and present uses of the internet in health care; technical terms andconsiderations; and current r&d efforts that may advance the applications of the internet and so improve health care.a systems perspectivean example may help to demonstrate both the potential value of theinternet in health care and the close linkages between networking technology, other information technology, and nontechnical issues. considerthe following hypothetical scenario:alice and bob are recovering from a particularly virulent fluthat kept them both out of work for the past week. they awakennetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30networking health: prescriptions for the internetone snowy february night to hear their 6yearold daughter,charlotte, coughing, wheezing, and crying. she seems warm andwill not be comforted. alice and bob are worried, but they haverecently joined a plan that offers them the option of an inhomeconsultation. because packing up their daughter and driving tothe emergency room of the nearest hospital would take at leasthalf an hour, they telephone the oncall pediatrician. afterhearing the symptoms, the pediatrician decides to ask for basicmeasurements and have a quick look at charlotte right away todecide whether she needs to be brought to the emergency room.alice turns on their internet access device (a settop box) andtheir television, while bob sets up the home health assessmentpack, including a digital thermometer, heart rate monitor, stethoscope, and video camera. alice uses the keyboard to navigate tothe health planõs web site and inserts a smart card into the boxthat authenticates them to the health plan server. while theywait a few moments, their access device exchanges digital certificates authenticating both the server and their device and establishes an encrypted session with the server. because videoconferencing will be used, the device also reserves a suitable levelof bandwidth from bob and aliceõs internet service provider tocarry the quality of video needed for the consultation (a fewhundred kilobits per second).once connected to the health plan web site, a menu ofoptions appears, and the couple make a video call to the pediatrician. a live image of the pediatrician appears in a video window.alice transmits an authorization code to the pediatrician enablingher to access charlotteõs medical record from the online repositoryin which alice and bob maintain all their family medical records.the pediatrician asks them to take charlotteõs temperature andpulse and to position the microphone so that she can hear thechildõs breathing. alice first uses the thermometer and heart ratemonitor, which transmit results to the settop box over wirelesslinks. guided by the pediatrician, alice then places the stethoscope around various landmarks on charlotteõs chest and backto listen to the childõs respirations. the pediatrician can see animage of charlotte beamed to the settop box from bobõs videocamera. alice and bob can see a splitscreen image on their television showing the pediatrician on one side and the image fromtheir video camera on the other.the pediatrician determines that charlotteõs condition doesnot require her to come in to the emergency room. from herremote observations, she concludes that the most likely diagnosisnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction31is acute asthma. charlotte has had two previous episodes ofasthma during the past year, and in both cases she respondedwell to inhalants. the pediatrician asks the parents to administera dose of the inhalant. because it is possible to determine within10 minutes whether the inhalant will work, the pediatrician optsto keep the video call running. bob makes charlotte comfortable, seating her within range of the video camera. during theensuing 10 minutes, the pediatrician engages the parents in abrief review of the events leading up to the evening, exploringsuch things as exposure to dust and toxins as well as stress eventsin the family. recalling that charlotteõs school has some majorrenovations under way, alice asks the pediatrician about a possible connection between dust from the renovation and charlotteõsasthma flareup.the pediatrician guides alice to the american lung associationõs web site, and together they review the information aboutasthma in children. a checklist of environmental risk factorsappears simultaneously on the screen, and the pediatrician andalice review these together. next they listen to an audio clip ofvarious breath sounds, with the pediatrician coaching alice onhow to identify the distinctive sound of wheezing.the pediatrician notes that charlotteõs breathing is easing,and the little girl is no longer crying. the pediatrician asks tospeak to charlotte and asks a few questions about how she feels.charlotte points to her chest and says it feels tight. noting thatshe is able to pronounce common words and that the audiblewheezing has stopped, the pediatrician judges the situation to beunder control and advises the family that charlotte should behelped back to sleep.the oncall pediatrician also recommends that an appointment be made for charlotte to be seen by her own pediatricianthe following afternoon. bob navigates to the health planõs scheduling program and sets up the appointment. the site provides amap to the clinic that can be printed. the next day, as soon asshe arrives at the clinic, charlotte is welcomed and escorted intothe examination room. while her doctor is finishing up anotherappointment, the nurse takes charlotteõs vital signs and adds theinformation to her electronic medical record, which is accessedfrom the computer in the examination room. shortly thereafter,the doctor enters the room, reviews charlotteõs vital signs, examines her, and provides a diagnosis. once the diagnosis and aprescription for a new inhaler are entered into the electronicrecord, a claim for payment is automatically filed with charlotteõsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32networking health: prescriptions for the internethealth plan and an electronic prescription is sent to the pharmacynear her house. the medication will be waiting when bob andcharlotte stop by on their way home.this scenario identifies a number of benefits that internetbased communications could bring to health care and related activities. it allows thepatient (and her family) to avoid a potentially hazardous auto trip on acold and snowy night and it eliminates waiting in an emergency room,during which time charlotte could have been exposed to other infectiouspatients. in addition, the remote consultation allows rapid examinationof the patient and preliminary evaluation (or triaging) of needs usingseveral data sources (e.g., sound, vision, and instrumented sensors). hadcharlotteõs condition been more serious, her parents could have beendirected to take her directly to an emergency room; had her conditionbeen less serious, the system could have enabled the family to avoid anoffice visit altogether. although telephonebased services can producesimilar benefits, they do not enable the clinician to examine the patientvisually or with medical devices. similarly, they are not as effective atallowing care providers to teach patients and their families to distinguishamong various symptoms and at providing expert educational materialsfor understanding a particular condition. the electronic system alsosupports paperless billing, which could speed payment for services andreduce error and loss as information proceeds through the system ofreviews and approvals. the system also allows easy, but protected, accessto the patientõs medical record to give the care provider more completeinformation when making a diagnosis and plan of treatment. the recordcan be updated easily in real time as new information is collected and canbe made available to any care provider who needs it.of course, considerable effort would be required to transform such ascenario into a reality on a broad scale. a number of technical advances,related to both the networking infrastructure itself and the devicesattached to it, would be required. for example, communication links intoand out of homes would be needed that are sufficient to support colorvideo of adequate resolution, and there must be suitable assurance thatthe video service will be available without significant interruption for theduration of the call. smart cards would need to be issued to consumers toauthenticate them to a health care site and support encryption for a session. this type of health care would also depend on electronic patientrecords, to which patients can grant providers access as needed and whichcan be updated during the course of a consultation. the equipment usedwould have to be reliable enough to create and sustain a connectionbetween a family and a care provider for the duration of a consultationand to provide valid measurements of vital signs. internetcompatiblenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction33medical devices would be needed to capture vital signs and transmitthem to a remote physician. nontechnical issues would need to beaddressed as well. families would have to be trained to properly use thesystem and the home medical equipment, such that care providers couldbe assured of receiving valid information remotely. health plans wouldneed policies on payment for remote consultations and on care providersõaccess to the electronic patient record. if any one of these capabilities waslacking, the system would fail.the internet and healththe health sector has a threedecadelong history of linking computers together to improve heath care and administration. the nationallibrary of medicine (nlm) made its medical literature analysis andretrieval system (medlars) available online to regional libraries over atimeshared network in the early 1970s. the resulting medline (formedlars online) system made the libraryõs repository of biomedicalreferences more widely available to support clinical decision making.5shortly thereafter, the first local area networks (lans) were introduced atthe university of vermont hospital to support clinical and administrativeprocesses (box 1.1).since these beginnings, the health care industry has gradually cometo rely heavily on information technology (it). in 1996, it constituted56percent of the industryõs total net capital stockñthe fourth highestpercentage out of 53 industries examined by the u.s. department of commerce (1999). only the telephone and telegraph, radio and television, andsecurities and commodities brokerage industries were more itintensive.nevertheless, health care expenditures on it are relatively small in relation to the size of its labor force. the industry overall spent just $543 perworker on it in 1996, compared to $12,666 for securities brokers and$29,236 for telephone and telegraph industry workers; on this scale, healthcare ranked only 38 out of the 53 industries in the commerce departmentsample.6health is already a bustling area of activity on the internet. recentsurveys indicate that more than 22 million americans used the internet toretrieve healthrelated information in 1998ña figure that was expected togrow to 33 million in 1999 (davis and miller, 1999). other estimates placethe number as high at 70 million (morrison, 1999). since it was madeavailable to the public via the internet in 1997, nlmõs medline database, which contains more than 15 million abstracts and references frommore than 3,900 medical journals, has experienced a surge in activity to300,000 searches per day (benton foundation, 1999). health is one of themore popular topics on the internet, with estimates of the number ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34networking health: prescriptions for the internethealthrelated web sites running as high as 10,000 or more (benton foundation, 1999). healthrelated web sites allow consumers to search forinformation on specific diseases or treatments, pose questions to careproviders, manage chronic diseases, participate in discussion groups,assess existing health risks, and purchase healthrelated products. by oneestimate, the online consumer market will grow to $1.7 billion by 2003,box 1.1early efforts in networking healththe first attempts to deploy communications networks in support of clinicalrecords involved the use of local area networks at the university of vermonthospital in 1976 and at walter reed army hospital in 1977. these systemsallowed users to log on to many computers from the same terminal, eliminating theneed for multiple terminals at nursing stations, each connected to a different computer for a different function. both projects used a technology pioneered by themitre corporation called broadband, which at the time referred to coaxial cablesimilar to that used for cable television, by which multiple communication channelswere carried across a single cable.1 the system made use of frequencydivisionmultiplexing to squeeze multiple channels onto a single cable.subsequent efforts at the university of california at san francisco (ucsf)medical centerñunder the direction of donald w. simborg, who worked withsteve tolchin of the johns hopkins university applied physics laboratoryñled tothe development in 1979 of the first true backend network. four minicomputerswere connected to the network to exchange transactions between the admittingoffice, the clinical laboratory, the pharmacy, and the radiology departments. thecomputers exchanged several core messages, including the synchronization ofpatient admissiondischargetransfer information, orders from clinical areas, andthe display of results to the clinical areas. unlike the earlier frontend networks,these networks did not require a user to be involved in the transaction; instead, theexchange of messages was handled by the computer applications themselves,using a protocol developed specifically for the system. the result was the creationof the first applicationlevel data interchange protocol in health care.dr. simborg left ucsf in 1984 to create the simborg systems corporation,and a similar data interchange protocol was developed for his product. this commercial protocol was later placed in the public domain and became the core of thefirst version of the health level 7 (hl7) protocol, which today is the most widelyused data interchange protocol in health care.1today, the term òbroadbandó is used to refer to a range of technologies that offer highbandwidth (i.e., highdatarate) communications across telephone wires, coaxial cable,optical fiber, or wireless communications channels.source: donald simborg, knowmed systems, inc., personal communication datedoctober 31, 1999.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction35fueled largely by online sales of products such as prescription and nonprescription medicines and vitamin supplements (nash, 1999).beyond its popularity with consumers, the internet is also used byhealth care professionals, biomedical researchers, and health care administrators. web sites geared to health care professionals allow them toaccess the professional literature, consult with colleagues electronically,order medical supplies, or communicate with insurance companies.7 biomedical researchers use the internet to access online databases of journalarticles and scientific information. organizations involved in the provision of health care, whether individual hospitals, managed care plans,8 orintegrated delivery networks (idns),9 have begun to use the internet toreach out to consumers. their web sites provide information on availableservices and may allow consumers to change their enrollment status,select physicians, and schedule appointments electronically.drivers of internet applications in healththe health applications available on the internet today take advantage of the internetõs expansive reach to enable health care organizationsto interact with a growing number of online consumers (miller and reents,1998). whereas just 17percent of u.s. households had internet access in1997, roughly onethird did by 1998 (ntia, 1999), and analysts predictthat 90 percent of u.s. households will have internet access by 2005 to2010 (rosenberg, 1999). as people become accustomed to using theinternet for routine activities, from electronic commerce (ecommerce) tohomework, they are likely to use the internet for healthrelated activities.consumer experiences in other areas of internet activity, such as ecommerce and electronic mail (email), will influence the expectations theybring to online health applications (mittman and cain, 1999).care provider organizations face a number of pressures to integratethe internet more effectively into their operations. recent trends towardconsolidation in the health care industry and the expansion of managedcare have erased some of the impediments to sharing information amongcompeting organizations. as they attempt to link individual practices,clinics, and hospitals into single entities, idns have a greater need toshare information with affiliated institutions. as purchasers, accreditingbodies, and the general public increasingly hold managed care plansaccountable for the quality of health care, plans have developed schemesfor the electronic sharing of data on facilitiesõ utilization rates and healthrelated outcomes. with such data, managed care plans can compile statistics on qualityofcare indicators and monitor the quality and costs of theindividual care providers. as care provider networks grow and consumersbecome more mobile, the electronic transmission of patient informationnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36networking health: prescriptions for the internetamong providers could improve care and reduce costs to the provider,the patient, and the managed care plan.10impediments to broader adoption of the internetdespite the flurry of internet activity within and around health care,many potential applications have yet to be realized. many organizationsin the health sector continue to rely on private networks (e.g., leased lines)rather than the internet for many data communications tasks, and somehealthrelated applications have not yet been deployed across any type ofcommunications network, public or private (box 1.2). few health careorganizations, for example, have integrated the internet directly into theprovision of care. remote medical consultations remain a novelty practiced by a few institutions, typically over dedicated networks, for a smallsubset of their patients and with support from external financial grants.most public health offices remain unconnected to the internet and therebox 1.2representative applications conducted over the internet andprivate networksfunctions commonly performed today over the internet¥search for consumer health information¥participate in chat/support groups¥exchange electronic mail between patients and care providers (limited)¥access biomedical databases and medical literature¥find information about health plans, select physicians (limited)¥purchase pharmaceuticals and other healthrelated productsfunctions performed today over private networks¥transfer medical records among affiliated health organizations¥transfer claims data to insurers and other payer organizations¥conduct remote medical consultations (limited)¥send medical images (x rays, etc.) to remote site for interpretation (verylimited)¥broadcast medical school classes over campus networks (limited)functions not commonly performed today over either the internet or privatenetworks¥videoconferencing among public health officials¥remote surgery or guidance of other procedures¥public health surveillance/incident reporting¥homebased remote medical consultations¥inhome monitoring of patientsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction37fore are unable to accept electronic reports from testing laboratories orcommunicate health information over the internet to neighboring jurisdictions. private insurers have in general not adopted the internet forfinancial and administrative transactions but instead continue to seekpayment through paperbased claims or electronic data sent over directconnections via modems.the reasons for the limited adoption of the internet in healthrelatedactivities are manifold, but the underlying reason is a lack of demonstrated value in different applications. the internet has been widelyadopted by the public as a tool for gaining insight into issues of illnessand health because it is perceived to deliver value. many (but not all) careproviders use the web frequently for searching online databases (such asmedline), also because it is perceived to deliver value. a small, butgrowing, number of care providers engage in email discussions withtheir patients about health problems. care providers do not use theinternet more broadly in the process of treating patients because the valuable, usable, affordable, and practical internetbased solution has yet tobe built. the process of determining which applications add value inhealth applicationsñand which specific capabilities and attributes provide that valueñrequires continued experimentation and analysis of dataon the benefits and costs of the internet relative to those of other media.to date, little information is available with which to gauge the contributions of the internet to the provision of health careñnot to mention itspotential to improve public health, biomedical research, and professionaleducation. emerging evidence of the benefits to health care of information systems generally bodes well for the internet; a growing number ofstudies demonstrate, for example, reductions in adverse drug interactionsand improved diagnoses stemming from the use of computerbaseddecision support tools in clinical environments.11 research has also demonstrated the positive effect of information technology applications inseveral other areas of health care.12 however, the ability of the internet(as opposed to private networks) to improve the quality of health care orexpand access to it has not been demonstrated. on the contrary, there hasbeen considerable concern about the quality of health information available on the internet and its potential to harm consumers (mittman andcain, 1999; scipich, 1999). in an industry already facing serious fiscaland organizational upheaval, health care organizations may remain skeptical of a range of internet applications until there is greater evidence oftheir benefits, along with more information about the policies and procedures needed to avoid the potential harms.the benefits of the internet in health applications may prove difficultto measure because the most notable benefits may be indirect and mayvary across segments of the health sector. for example, the advantages ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38networking health: prescriptions for the internetconsumeroriented web sites to care provider organizations such as hospitals might include marketing, possibly advertising, and the collection ofvaluable data about interested consumers. the direct and indirect revenues from many of these activities, however, may be insufficient to support the development and maintenance of the applications themselves.furthermore, the use of the internet could stimulate changes in industrystructure that are difficult to foresee at present. for example, the internetcould enable large provider organizations to extend their reach moredirectly into local communities, working with local care providers toprovide greater continuity and consistency of care. or, it could allowconsumers to better triage their own health needs using online modulescreated by their health plans. these changes could improve health anddisease management among local populations, but the benefits mayaccrue most directly to consumers. the benefits to care providers may bemore difficult to measure, especially if healthy patients demand fewerhealth services in the long run.further slowing adoption of the internet by health organizations areuncertainties about the technical capabilities needed to support healthapplications. managers of many health organizations say that securityconcerns prevent them from using the internet to transfer patient medicalrecords among affiliated organizations or from allowing care providers toaccess such records remotely (siwicki, 1999). at the same time, they arenot certain what types of security technology are needed to adequatelyprotect patient information in such applications. with respect to otherapplications, such as remote medical consultations, practitioners note thatthey cannot obtain sustained access to the bandwidth they might need forrealtime video. it is appropriate to question whether todayõs internetprovides a sufficiently strong infrastructure to support applications suchas criticalcare monitoring and automated delivery of medication. ifdeployed in health care settings without proper attention to these capabilities, the internet could have an adverse effect by eroding patient privacy and preventing care providers from accessing needed information.technical considerationswhether the internet will become more widely adopted in health carewill depend, in part, on the technical capabilities it can provide and howthese capabilities compare with those provided by other networking alternatives available to health organizations and consumers. a number oftechnical factors need to be considered in such evaluations. the fiveprimary factors considered in this report are bandwidth, latency, availability, security, and ubiquity.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction391.bandwidth is the rate at which information is transmitted through anetwork, measured in bits (or kilobits or megabits) per second. the bandwidth a network can provide is a property of the transmission medium(e.g., fiber optics, coaxial cable, telephone wire, radio waves), the networktopology, and the switching or routing devices used to guide trafficthrough the network. the amount of bandwidth a particular applicationdemands is determined by the amount of data to be transmitted and thetime in which that transmission must be completed. applications thatmust transfer large amounts of data quickly demand much greater bandwidth than do applications that transfer smaller amounts of data (such asemail) or transfer data more slowly (e.g., if a response is not neededquickly). from the point of view of an individual user (e.g., a consumer,a doctor, or a nurse), the demand for bandwidth is a demand not so muchfor a uniform increase in the bandwidth of the entire network but foraccess to sufficient bandwidth when needed.2.latency is the time required to transmit data across the network(i.e., the delay between a sender transmitting a message and a recipientreceiving it). the minimum latency a network can provide is influencedby the speed of its switches and routers and the physical distance acrosswhich the message is sent. data communications traverse different mediaat the speed of light, which places a lower limit on the time it takes for amessage to travel between two points on the network. the latency anapplication demands can vary tremendously. realtime, interactive applications demand low latency so that users can interact with each othereasily. many interactions, such as telephone conversations or control ofremote devices, become unwieldy if roundtrip latencies (i.e., across thenetwork and back) exceed 300 milliseconds. applications that do notdemand realtime interactions between usersñsocalled asynchronousapplications such as email and storeandforward messaging systemsñhave only weak demands on latency requirements. closely related tolatency is jitter, the variation in latency over time. high levels of jitterimply unpredictable degrees of latency across the network, althoughseveral techniques, including temporary buffering of information, canremove jitter at the receiverõs end of the network. in some applications,the related notion of response time is more important than latency per se.response time refers to the length of time needed to transmit a full message (such as a service request or an image) rather than an individualpacket across the network and receive a response. messages can consistof many packets, and successful transmission can depend far more onnetwork reliability on a packetbypacket basis than on the actual latency.the transmission control protocol (tcp) used on the internet, for example, may transmit more than one packet before it receives an acknowledgement that the first packet has been received, but if a packet is not received,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40networking health: prescriptions for the internettcp has to wait for a certain period of time before transmitting that packetagain. thus, both response time and latency can be affected by the loadon a network at a given point in time.3.availability refers to the continuous availability of the network, theindividual links of which it is composed, and the services it offers. availability can be measured in terms of the percentage of the time the network(or a particular link) is operational or by the average time between failures. a number of factors can render networks unavailable, includingphysical damage to network links or nodes, hardware or software failures(i.e., component reliability problems), operator error, software errors, anddeliberate malicious attacks against the system. steps can be taken toharden systems against these sorts of failures, and procedures can bedeveloped for restoring some level of network services in the event offailures. nevertheless, some applications cannot function properly if theperformance of the network is degraded; and many timecritical applications cannot tolerate network failures, even if very brief.4.security, in the computer science community, generally encompasses three elements: system availability, confidentiality, and integrity.the first of these is addressed above. confidentiality refers to the abilityto prevent communications from being disclosed to unauthorized partiesin violation of disclosure rules. integrity refers to the ability to preventmalicious or accidental alteration of data. these two capabilities can beprovided by a variety of technical mechanisms that support authentication of user identities, encryption of communications, and different formsof access control. the need for confidentiality and integrity varies greatlyacross applications. both are important concerns in applications involving exchanges of personal health information. integrity is of paramountimportance for some applications, such as setting levels on dosimetryequipment that delivers drugs to patients and preserving the authenticityof medical images.5.ubiquity refers to the relative accessibility of a network. the ubiquity of a network is influenced by the networkõs geographic scope (i.e.,whether it can be accessed from many places) and by rules regulatingparticipation (i.e., whether it is open to the general public or to membersonly). the telephone network, for example, is highly accessible becauseroughly 94 percent of u.s. homes have telephone connections, and anyone is allowed to subscribe to the service. cable television is almost asubiquitous because it passes most homes and is also available to all whopay for service. however, cable modem service (to support data communications as opposed to television) is not yet available to all locations inthe united states. such systems stand in contrast to private networks,such as those used by financial institutions, which may have broad geographic reach but strict rules regarding membership. applications thatnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction41serve the general public usually demand high levels of accessibility (ubiquity), whereas those that serve limited populations do not, although theremay be interest in allowing access by members from multiple locations.another term that is important in describing network performance isòquality of serviceó (qos). network engineers use this term to refer tothe ability of a network to provide a range of assured levels of performance. performance is characterized by metrics such as the bandwidthobtained between two points in the network (which may be dramaticallyless than the bandwidths of the individual communications links involved,either because of other traffic on the network or because of the need toretransmit packets of information dropped during transmission); latencyand jitter (defined above); and the packet loss rate, the percentage oftransmitted packets that are dropped inside the network and not delivered to their intended destinations.13the need for qos stems from a design characteristic of networkswhereby resources (e.g., especially backbone links) are generally sharedamong many users who are running applications simultaneously. thus,even if the bandwidth of the system is measured in megabits or gigabitsper second, any single user might gain access to only a small fraction ofthat bandwidth. how much bandwidth a single user obtains depends onthe level of activity of the other users. when using the internet, for example, a user often obtains high bandwidth and low latency over certainpaths and at certain times of day, but it is not currently possible to ensurethat such conditions will be available on a given path at a given time.hence, although some users may succeed in making telephone calls ofacceptable quality over the internet, they cannot depend on this mediumto make calls to any location at any time. quality of service guaranteesrequire mechanisms that enable applications with specific requirementsto negotiate to receive appropriate treatment in the network. those mechanisms must be able to deal with requests from huge numbers of applications running simultaneously.14networking alternativesthe internet differs from other communications networks in all thedimensions outlined above. many of these differences stem from thepublic character of the internet (box 1.3), which carries aggregated trafficfrom numerous parties, whereas private networks interconnect a limitednumber of sites using dedicated transmission links that are not sharedwith any other users. two private networks are completely isolated fromeach other in the sense that no data can òleakó from one into the other, auser of one network cannot access resources on the other, and the level ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 1.3defining the internetthe internet is commonly defined as a network of networks. although it is oftenconsidered a single, uniform network, the internet is actually composed of a large(and growing) set of independent networks that are connected to each other usinga set of common standards and protocols, such as the transmission control protocol (tcp) and the internet protocol (ip). the internet is based on a technologycalled packet switching, which breaks down messages (electronic mail, data files,digital images, etc.) into smaller pieces called packets and sends them across thenetwork in a series of hops from one routing device (or router) to another.1routers determine dynamically which route to send each packet along, with theend result that the packets constituting a single message may be sent alongdifferent routes, depending on relative levels of congestion and other factors. thepackets are reconstituted at the recipientõs computer and assembled in the properorder.the underlying networks that make up the internet can assume many forms,ranging from access networks to backbone networks. access networks connectcustomers (whether individuals or entire organizations with their own internal localarea networks) to an internet service provider (isp). these access networksconnect to backbone networks with wider geographic scope, providing regional,national, and international connectivity. thousands of isps offer connectivity inthe united states, but the major internet backbone networks are operated by asmall number of independent companies that interconnect with each other atnumerous points, some of which are private (typically a connection between onlytwo providers) and others of which are public. the public interconnection pointsare used not only by backbone providers but also by local providers to gain accessto the backbone. backbone networks connect to access networks and to eachother at points of presence, where service providers house switching hardwareand transmission equipment.this topology has two important consequences. one is that a packet traversingthe internet will normally cross networks owned and operated by many differentproviders en route to its eventual destination, with implications for overall performance and security. the second is that backbone networks carry highly aggregatedtraffic, representing the combined traffic flows of millions of customers connectedto access networks. although individual users have some control over the capacityof access lines and the flows of information across those lines, they have virtuallyno control over data flows across the rest of the networkñmeaning they have littleassurance of the speed at which their messages will transit the net. they have asimilar lack of control over the other organizations and individual users that mayjoin the network. the internet is a public network that interconnects other networks running ip and any user with an internet account. the public nature of theinternet therefore introduces a number of security risks not seen on private networks (see chapter 3).1packet switching differs from circuit switching used in the telephone system in that itdoes not establish a dedicated circuit between sender and recipient for the duration of atransmission. rather, packets pertaining to many different messages may be routedover the same links to use communications channels most efficiently.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction43usage on one network has no effect on the availability of resources in theother.15 thus, users have greater control over qos (i.e., the bandwidththat will be available at a given time) and confront fewer security risksthan do users of the internet. for these reasons, the defense and energydepartments, the banking industry, and other sectors have developedcommunications networks that are separate from the internet.and yet, the distinction between public networks such as the internetand private networks is blurred by a number of factors. for example,many private networks used for internal communications among elements of a single corporation can be connected to the internet in a controlled way that limits the messaging traffic that can transit the interface(indeed, many of the networks attached to the internet are private). similarly, many organizations develop private intranets that are based oninternet technologies and protocols to facilitate data sharing within anenterprise. other networks, called extranets, use internet standards andtechnologies to support secure exchanges of information among tradingpartners. many of these private networksñwhether intranets or extranetsñcould be made accessible to valid users over the public internet throughthe use of appropriate security and authentication technologies. the distinction between private and public networks is further blurred by technologies such as virtual private networks (vpns), which provide many ofthe same properties of private networks while using shared network facilities (including possibly the internet itself) to provide connectivity. inthis way, vpns (discussed in greater detail in chapter 3) create the illusion of private, dedicated pointtopoint connections, but many vpnsmay be supported on the same physical network. they provide almostthe same level of security as true private networks because there is noconnectivity among the vpns, but messages on one virtual circuit mustcontend with those on other circuits for network resources (e.g., bandwidth).whether a network is truly or virtually private, it differs in a veryimportant way from the internet. in a private network, connectivity isdeliberately constrained to a limited number of sites, and these sites areknown a priori. every time a new site is added to the network, someadministrative overhead is involved, whether ordering and awaiting theinstallation of a new circuit or provisioning a new virtual circuit. thus,private networks are ideally suited to an environment in which the necessary connectivity is known and remains stable over time. a classic application is interconnection of the different geographic locations of a singlecorporation. another application is the connection of a number of companies that have a longstanding business relationship, such as a largemanufacturer and its parts suppliers. however, private networks arefundamentally unsuited to environments in which arbitrary connectivitynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44networking health: prescriptions for the internetis required. the internet, by contrast, enables users to connect to eachother without a prior arrangement. in a business setting, this enablesconsumers to find suppliers readily, and vice versa.because of the range of technical capabilities available across differenttypes of networks, organizations can tailor their network architectures totheir specific needs. when security and qos are important and the relationships between communicating parties are sufficiently well known inadvance, private networks are likely to be chosen. accordingly, healthorganizations continue to use dedicated networks to transmit sensitivepatient information, share large image files, and submit claims for reimbursement. when the overriding goal is maximum connectivity withouta priori knowledge of the communicating parties, as in the case of makinga product or service available to a wide set of consumers, the internet islikely to be chosen. in some cases, the most judicious choice might be anetwork that uses a combination of private or dedicated lines that areconnected in appropriate ways to the internet to allow broader access, butwith suitable security capabilities in place. what may be most importantis the use of consistent, interoperable protocols for all communications sothat various networks can be connected as needed with appropriate gateways. the architectures chosen by various organizations depend on therequirements and costbenefit analyses of technical alternatives.the value of open (i.e., public) networks in health care is rooted in thenature of the industry, which remains highly decentralized and involvesa range of individuals and organizations in providing care, paying bills,analyzing health data, conducting health services research, and monitoring public health. as recently as 1995, the united states had 1.2 millionhealth care providersñhalf of whom work in private practicesñand morethan 3,000 private insurance payers.16 the patterns of data sharing amongthese organizations are complex and can change frequently. internet usecould enable idns, for example, not only to exchange patient recordsamong affiliated hospitals and clinics, but also to send records to otherhospitals to assist in the treatment of patients who are injured or becomeill while traveling. it could enable any rural care provider to arrangeremote medical consultations with any remote specialist connected to theinternet who has the expertise needed to handle a particular patientõscase. it could lead to much more rapid reporting of diseases, enablingstate public health officials to accept reports directly from physicians andtesting laboratories throughout the state.furthermore, internet connections promise to be less expensive toinstall and maintain than private networks. individual lines do not needto be leased from telephone companies to connect the various partners inthe network. internet connections entail some costs, especially if highbandwidth connections are needed, but they tend to be lower than thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction45costs of leased lines and can be spread among a wider range of applications and users. finally, the internet has been the catalyst for the integration of many applications and systems of applications. the existence of acommunication infrastructure built on a common set of protocols makesit more difficult to justify, both economically and technically, the use ofseparate, specialpurpose networks for different applications; the common infrastructure also facilitates interactions between separately developed systems. when separate information systems are integrated on thefoundation provided by the internet, the investments frequently are justified on the basis of both savings in communication costs and improvedfunctions. with improved security and qos, the internet might becomepreferable to private networks in almost all cases.the internet may prove to be an ideal technology for use by willinghealth care organizations to simplify and standardize processes and collaborate more effectively with one another. the value of this commoncommunications infrastructure in other sectors, from entertainment tobanking to retail sales, could extend to health care if technical obstacles,organizational uncertainties, and policy barriers can be overcome. organizations that adopt the internet could reap significant benefits, includingcost savings from support of a wide range of applications and the abilityto leverage the technology investments of other communities. an analogy to the telephone system may be illuminating. there is no separateu.s. telephone system for health applications. despite the distinct set ofpriorities and tradeoffs associated with health applications, the healthcommunity uses òplain old telephone serviceó (pots) for most of itsvoice communications, leveraging the telephone companiesõ investmentsin r&d as well as infrastructure deployment and accepting inconveniences such as busy signals that might not be desirable in emergencies.features such as 911 have been added to pots to support emergencyneeds (whether related to health or public safety), but even this featureleverages the existing network. some specialized voice communicationsnetworks, such as communications between emergency rescue vehiclesand hospital emergency rooms, have also been established for healthneeds not well served by pots.enhancing the interneta number of efforts are under way to improve the ability of theinternet to provide qos, security, and availability, which would enableits broader use within the health domain. these efforts include attemptsby individual companies to increase the capabilities of internet routersand deploy highspeed data services on demand, as well as attempts bythe internet engineering task force (ietf) to develop new standards andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46networking health: prescriptions for the internetprotocols for improved services (see chapter 3). in addition, two majorcollaborative efforts are under way to develop and demonstrate advancednetworking technologies that promise to improve the qos, availability,and security across the internet. the governmentõs next generationinternet initiative and projects sponsored by the privatesector universityconsortium for advanced internet development (ucaid) are attempting to develop advanced networking technologies and applications anddeploy them in testbed networks that link a limited number of sites andallow early experimentation with advanced applications. the technologies and applications to be developed under these programs, which aredescribed below, could diffuse onto the internet as they are demonstratedand proven.the next generation internet initiativeformally initiated in october 1997, the ngi initiative is a multiyearprogram, funded at approximately $100 million per year, that involves anumber of federal agencies: the defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa), the national science foundation (nsf), the department of energy (doe), the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), the national institute of standards and technology (nist),and the national institutes of health (nih) (table 1.1). the initiative ismanaged by individual agencies, with coordination provided by the largescale networking working group of the white house national scienceand technology councilõs committee on technology, subcommittee oncomputing, information, and communications r&d.17the ngi initiative has three components: r&d on advanced networking technologies for improved performance and functionality; thedeployment of highspeed testbed networks that emphasize endtoendperformance; and the development and demonstration of revolutionaryapplications that demand advanced networking and are not possible ontodayõs internet.18 the first component involves r&d projects in areassuch as highspeed routing, security, qos, and network managementand modeling. this work will be funded primarily by darpa but alsoby nsf, nasa, and nist.the second component will be achieved by developing and demonstrating applications of two types: (1) disciplinespecific applications ofinterest to participating agencies, including health care, basic science, education, and environment and (2) their enabling technologies, includingcollaboration technologies, digital libraries, distributed computing, privacy and security, and remote operation and simulation (national scienceand technology council, 1999). the nih is actively involved in thiseffort through the nlm, which awarded 24 contracts totaling $2.3 millionnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction47in october 1998 to investigate and develop health care applications of thengi. these projects make up the first phase of a threephase program.several of the projects received phase ii awards in late 1999 and early 2000to allow their implementation in local testbed settings (see appendix bfor a list of all nlm project awards as of january 2000). phase iii willsupport scaleup to the regional or national level of successful phase iitestbed projects. these projects are intended to improve the healthcommunityõs understanding of the ways in which the ngi can affecthealth care, health education, and health research systems with respect tocost, quality, usability, efficacy, and security. supported projects includeefforts to (1) build a virtual human cadaver for educational purposes,(2)develop telemedicine technologies to support health care in ruralareas,19 (3) demonstrate the feasibility of a national breast imaging archiveand networking infrastructure to support telemammography, and(4) create a personal health record that can be integrated with more traditional sources of clinical information for patient use in the home, at work,or at school (see box 1.4 for examples of these projects and appendix afor a complete listing of nlm project awards).other federal agencies, including nasa and the nsf, have alsofunded projects that will demonstrate healthrelated applications of thetable 1.1 agency funding for the next generation internet initiative,19982000 (in millions of dollars)199819992000agencyaresearchtestbedsapplicationstotaltotaltotaldarpa20202425040nsf5108232525doe0000150nasa23510108nist005555nih/nlm005555total2733258511083note: breakouts for 1999 and 2000 funding into categories of research, testbeds, andapplications are not available.adarpa, defense advanced research projects agency; nsf, national science foundation;doe, department of energy; nasa, national aeronautics and space administration; nist,national institute of standards and technology; nih, national institutes of health; nlm,national library of medicine.source: grant miller, national coordination office for computing, information, andcommunications, 1999, personal communication.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48networking health: prescriptions for the internetngi. researchers at nasaõs ames research center, for example, aredeveloping a system for sharing highresolution, threedimensionalmedical images in real time for purposes of collaborative diagnosis andsurgical planning.20 nsf is supporting work to provide psychologicalservices over a distance to deaf patients, to develop digital video resourcesfor teaching and learning the life sciences (using materials that reside atbox 1.4examples of projects funded by thenational library of medicine¥networked threedimensional virtual human anatomy. the university ofcolorado health sciences center plans to build a virtual human cadaver based onthe national library of medicineõs visible human data set, which provides detailedinformation on human anatomical structures. an online virtual cadaver would beavailable over the internet to a wide range of students, who could explore thevirtual cadaver with a variety of tools. highend applications will have a haptic(tactile) interface.¥ngiaware, scalable, secure, and adaptive technology for rural telemedicine. west virginia university research corporation will develop a plan todemonstrate telemedicine applications that will use the next generation internet(ngi) infrastructure. telemedicine scenarios include nomadic clinics, public healthstations, and a consulting health station in rural clinics and hospitals. thesesystems will be configured with a set of videoconferencing, diagnostic, and patientmonitoring equipment.¥telemammography using the ngi. the university of pennsylvania will planand implement a test bed to demonstrate the feasibility of a national breast imaging archive and network infrastructure to support telemammography using ngitechnologies. the proposed infrastructure would support traditional breast screening; provide the opportunity to maintain and apply standard image processing andcomputeraided diagnosis software; permit access to breast imaging experts forprimary and secondary interpretations; and provide an opportunity to study andunderstand epidemiological issues in breast cancer.¥personal internetworked notary and guardian (childrenõs hospital, boston).the personal internetworked notary and guardian (ping) project is designed toaddress the control of a personal record that can be integrated with more traditionalsources of clinical information for patient use in the home, at work, and at school.in particular, ping is focused on (1) the reconstitution via the internet of patientlongitudinal records from both providerbased information systems and portable,personal record systems, (2) providing simple and secure authentication mechanisms, and (3) evaluation of the impact of ping on the health care process.source: derived from information provided on the national library of medicineõs webpage, available online at <www.nlm.nih.gov>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction49the nlm), and to allow webbased control of a remote electron microscope for biological research, among other projects. such efforts reflectthe importance of healthrelated applications in motivating largescaleinformation infrastructure programs such as the ngi.the third component of the ngi initiative will be carried out by constructing two types of testbed networks, one of which will link approximately 130 participating universities and federal agencies at speeds 100times faster than those available across the internet in 199721 and theother of which will link about 10 sites at speeds 1,000 times faster than the1997 internet. the first testbed will be built on several existing federalnetworks: the nsfõs veryhighperformance backbone network service(vbns),22 nasaõs research and education network, dodõs defenseresearch and education network, and doeõs energy sciences network.the vbns, for example, operated at 622 megabits per second (mbps) in1998 but is expected to be upgraded to 2.4 gigabits per second (gbps) bythe year 2000. universities connecting to the vbns at 45 mbps will beupgraded to 155 mbps to help them take greater advantage of theincreased backbone capacity.the ngi initiativeõs other testbed will be built on darpaõssupernet, a network composed of a variety of highspeed technologiesand testbeds, enabling researchers to collaborate and experiment withadvanced networking technologies and applications in a diverse, highcapacity, widearea environment. it will use wavedivision multiplexingtechnology (wdm) to allow multiple frequencies of light (and hence multiple communications channels) to share a single fiberoptic cable (seechapter 3). darpa demonstrated a 5node network at 2.5 gbps perchannel in 1999 and plans to establish a 10node network with 160 gbpsfacilities in 2002. the nsf, nasa, and dod networks will connect to thisnetwork.the goal of these networks is to provide a cuttingedge but stablenetwork that will support the development of revolutionary applicationsand serve as a testbed for new technologies and protocols. according tothe 1998 ngi implementation plan, the testbed networks will be initiallydeployed with besteffort services using ip version 4 (ipv4) (large scalenetworking next generation implementation team, 1998). new versionsof ip (including ipv6), qos technologies, multicast protocols (for facilitating group interactions), security protocols, and network managementtools will be deployed in the networks as soon as they become stable.feedback from application developers to network researchers, operators,and implementers will help ensure that the testbeds evolve in a mannersuitable to the types of applications that are expected to be run on them.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50networking health: prescriptions for the internetprivatesector efforts: internet 2 and abilenethe ucaid, which was incorporated in 1998, has two related networking projects under way that promise to enhance the capabilities ofthe internet. the first is the internet 2 project, which will link more than100 member universities and partners to an advanced academic network.research supported by internet 2 is attempting to enable applications thatare not possible with the technology underlying todayõs internet (someexamples are telemedicine, digital libraries, and virtual laboratories). theprogram is intended to demonstrate new applications for improvingresearch and enhancing the delivery of education and other services,including health care. it will facilitate the development, deployment, andoperation of an affordable communications infrastructure capable of supporting differentiated qos based on the applications requirements of theresearch and education community, and it will promote experimentationwith the next generation of communications technologies.23biomedical applications play a significant role in the internet 2 initiative. the first demonstration of the network, in october 1999, consisted ofan online broadcast of a gall bladder operation. the surgery team insertedlight, camera lenses, and surgical tools inside the patientõs body, creatinginternal views of the operation. audio and video were transmitted overthe network in real time, requiring network bandwith that would supporta consistent data transmission rate of 2 mbps. only a small audience wasable to view the demonstration, but it enabled a doctor based in washington, d.c., to assist in the surgery, which took place at ohio stateuniversity.24a related ucaid project, abilene, is seen as a second internet 2 backbone. abilene is based on a partnership with qwest, cisco systems,nortel, and indiana university. the goals are to provide a highavailabilitybackbone network to support the demands of the advanced researchapplications being developed by ucaid members; a separate network toenable the testing of advanced network capabilities (for example, qos,multicasting, and security and authentication protocols) prior to theirintroduction into the application development network; and a separatenetwork capability to conduct networking research, including the designof an alternative network capable of advancing both the abilene networkand the general state of the art.25 internet 2 member universities havecommitted more than $70 million per year in new investment on theirown campuses for the internet 2 project, and corporate members havecommitted more than $30 million over the life of the project.although programmatically distinct from the ngi initiative, theucaidõs efforts are related to federal networking activities. more than 90internet 2 universities have received grants under nsfõs high perfornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction51mance connections program to support links to advanced backbone networks such as abilene and the vbns. internet 2 is also participating inthe ngi joint engineering task force to ensure the cohesiveness andinteroperability of the technologies that internet 2 is developing. internet2 member institutions may receive funding in the form of competitivelyawarded grants from the nsf and other federal agencies participating inthe federal ngi initiative. additional cooperative relationships are beingplanned as part of ngi implementation.deploying enhanced internet technologiesalthough they are structured as programs with a limited number ofparticipants, the ngi and internet 2 initiatives are intended to serve aslaunching points for enhancement of the public internet. both programshave a stated interest in transferring new technical capabilities to thepublic internet once the technologies are developed and demonstrated tobe robust. just as early darpa support for the arpanet and subsequent nsf support for nsfnet laid the groundwork for todayõs internetby funding networking research and applications development anddeploying network infrastructure,26 so too, it is hoped, will the ngi andinternet 2 initiatives plant the seeds for an improved internet that canserve the public at large. they intend to accomplish this by developingand demonstrating technologies that can later be deployed in networksmaintained and operated by private companies.whether the public internet will evolve into a network capable ofsupporting a full range of health applications will depend on many factors other than technology. of particular importance will be economicincentives for network providers to deploy the levels of bandwidth, qos,security, availability, and ubiquity that health applications demand.these incentives will be derived from the combined demands of manyapplications in different sectors, including health. the history of internetdevelopment is one of innovation and experimentation, not planneddevelopment. the forces that drive its continuing evolution are increasingly economic, and these forces alone may not yield an infrastructurethat can support the integration of critical and noncritical functions of thehealth community. in the end, some capabilities may prove too expensiveto deploy throughout the internet, leaving health organizations to operatewith a mixture of different networking infrastructures to meet their various needs.only by making its needs explicit and working with organizationsinvolved in the deployment of internet capabilities can the health community hope to ensure that an enhanced internet infrastructure meetshealth needs. this report respresents the first step in that effort. bynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52networking health: prescriptions for the internetevaluating the technical capabilities that the internet must provide tosupport different health applications, the report offers the health community information that it can use to shape the networks being deployed aspart of the ngi and internet 2 initiatives and, ultimately, as part of theinternet. clearly, ongoing evaluation and experimentation will be needed.the many uncertainties inherent in the process of developing and deploying internetbased applications make any attempt to predict the longterm evolution of the internet within the health community foolhardy.sustained interaction will be needed to ensure that the emerging needs ofthe health community continue to be met by the evolving capabilities ofthe internet.organization of this reportthe remainder of this report outlines the technical and nontechnicalchallenges that must be overcome if the internet is to support a wideningrange of health applications. chapter 2 examines specific applications ofthe internet across this domain. the first part of the chapter focuses onapplications of the internet in the provision of health care, addressingtopics such as consumer health, remote consultation, and the transfer ofmedical images for diagnostic purposes. the next parts of the chapterexplore internet applications in areas such as public health, health carefinance and administration, and biomedical research. the chapter drawson a series of site visits by the committee that provided insight into thetypes of internet applications being developed today and the networkingchallenges that cannot currently be ported to the internet. the chapterreviews the technical capabilities that each application demands in termsof qos (combining bandwidth and latency requirements), security, availability, and ubiquity. the applications examined are intended to illustrate the range of ways in which the internet might be used rather than toidentify them as likely paths.chapter 3 reviews the technical challenges posed by applications ofthe internet in health, health care, and biomedical research. it examinesongoing efforts to enhance the capabilities of the internet and identifiesareas in which health care needs might not be addressed if they are notexplicitly considered during the research process. chapter 4 examinesorganizational barriers to the deployment of the internet for health andhealth care. it describes ways in which the internet can serve the strategicinterests of health care organizations and identifies the range of uncertainties surrounding the internetõs use that hamper efforts to deploy it morebroadly in such organizations. chapter 5 discusses elements of publicpolicy that stand in the way of greater use of the internet in the healthcommunity. these barriers range from issues of payment for services andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction53licensure that have stymied previous attempts at telemedicine, to broadissues of intellectual property protection and privacy that have specialsignificance in the health domain.finally, chapter 6 summarizes the committeeõs conclusions and offersa series of recommendations for facilitating the more widespread use ofinternet technologies in health care and biomedical research. the recommendations suggest ways in which technical and nontechnical barrierscan be overcome to enable the design of an internet that will more fullysupport the needs of the health sector.referencesat&t. 1999. òat&t and m.d. online, inc. to promote at&t worldnet internet connectivity to healthcare providers,ó news release. february 8. available online at <http://www.att.com/press/item/0,1193,339,00.html>.barry, m.j., j.j. fowler, jr., a.g. mulley, jr., j.v. henderson, jr., and j.e. wennberg. 1995.òpatient reactions to a program designed to facilitate patient participation in treatment decisions for benign prostatic hyperplasia,ó medical care 33:771782.benton foundation. 1999. networking for better care: health care in the information age.benton foundation, washington, d.c., march.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. national academy press, washington, d.c.davis, robert, and leslie miller. 1999. òmillions comb the web for medical info,óusa today, july 15. available online at <www.usatoday.com/life/health/online/lhon1012.htm>.gillespie, greg. 2000. òonline clinical guidelines help trim costs,ó health data management 8(1):3945.greenfield, s., s. kaplan, and j. ware, jr. 1985. òexpanding patient involvement in care,óannals of internal medicine 102:520528.gustafson, david h., r.p. hawkins, e.w. boberg, and e. bricker. 1992. òchess: a computerbased system for providing information, referrals, decision support, and socialsupport to people facing medical and other healthrelated crises,ó pp. 161165 inproceedings of the annual symposium on computer applications in medical care. mcgrawhill, health professional division, new york.gustafson, david h., m. wise, f. mctavish, j.o. taylor, w. wolberg, and j. stewart. 1993.òdevelopment and pilot evaluation of a computerbased support system for womenwith breast cancer,ó journal of psychosocial oncology 11:6993.gustafson, david h., r.p. hawkins, e.w. boberg, and e. bricker. 1994. the impact ofcomputer support on hiv infected individuals. final report to the agency for healthcare policy and research, washington, d.c.halamka, j., and m. hughes. 1998. òa paradigm shift in health care information systems:clinical infrastructures for the 21st century,ó pp. 401405 in proceedings of the americanmedical informatics association fall symposium, c. chute, ed. hanley & belfus, philadelphia.information infrastructure task force (iitf), committee on applications and technology.1994. putting the information infrastructure to work. national institute of standards andtechnology, gaithersburg, md.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54networking health: prescriptions for the internetinstitute of medicine. 1996. telemedicine: a guide to assessing telecommunications in healthcare, marilyn j. field, ed. national academy press, washington, d.c.large scale networking next generation implementation team. 1998. next generationinternet implementation plan, second printing. national coordination office for computing, information, and communications, arlington, va., february.lindberg, donald a.b., and betsy l. humphreys. 1998. òmedicine and health on theinternet: the good, the bad, and the ugly,ó journal of the american medical association280(15):13031304.miller, thomas e., and scott reents. 1998. the health care industry in transition: the onlinemandate to change. internet strategies group, cyber dialog, inc., new york.mittman, robert, and mary cain. 1999. the future of the internet in health care: five yearforecast. institute for the future, menlo park, calif., january.morgan, m.w., r.b. deber, h.a. llewellynthomas, p. gladstone, r.j. cusimano, and k.oõrourke. 1997. òa randomized trial of the ischemic heart disease shared decisionmaking program: an evaluation of a decision aid,ó journal of general internalmedicine 12(1):62.morrison, j. ian. 1999. òhealthcare in the new millenium: the promise of the internet,ópresentation at internet health day ii: health care in transitionpreparing for aninteractive future. new york, october 12.nash, sharon. 1999. òthe doctor is online,ó pc magazine online, july 14. available onlineat <www.zdnet.com>.national science and technology council, committee on technology, subcommittee oncomputing, information, and communications r&d. 1999. information technologyfrontiers for a new millennium. supplement to the presidentõs fy 2000 budget, nationalcoordination office for computing, information, and communications, arlington,va., april.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). 1999. fallingthrough the net: defining the digital divide. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c.rosenberg, matt. 1999. òpopularity of internet wonõt peak for years, ó puget sound businessjournal, may 24. available online at <http://www.amcity.com/seattle/stories/1999/05/24/focus.html>.science panel on interactive communication and health (scipich). 1999. wired for healthand wellbeing: the emergence of interactive health communication, thomas r. eng anddavid h. gustafson, eds. office of disease prevention and health promotion, u.s.department of health and human services, washington, d.c., april. available onlineat <http://www.scipich.org>.siwicki, bill. 1999. òapplying the internet in health care,ó health data management 6(3):3848.smith, k.a., and r.b. mehnert. 1986. òthe national library of medicine: from medlarsto the sesquicentennial and beyond,ó bulletin of the medical libraries association74(4):32532.u.s. department of commerce, economic statistics administration. 1999. the emergingdigital economy ii. washington, d.c., june.vickery, d.m., t.j. golaszewski, e.c. wright, and h. kalmer. 1988. òthe effect of selfcareinterventions on the use of medical service within a medicare population,ó medicalcare 26:580588.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview and introduction55notes1.for an illustration of the role of health applications in motivating federal programsto develop national information infrastructure, see iitf (1994).2.the internet also has applications in support of clinical research (e.g., clinical trials),but these applications are not investigated in great detail in the report.3.others have also noted the importance of organizational and policy issues in influencing the rate of adoption of internet technologies in health applications. for example, seelindberg and humphreys (1998).4.for example, systems to transfer large medical image files between sites can be designed in different ways. some systems demand high network bandwidth because there islittle preprocessing of images and little attention to representative workflows; others relymore on preprocessing, which reduces network bandwidth requirements.5.for a more detailed history of medlars and medline, see smith and mehnert(1986).6.these data are from the bureau of economic analysis as presented in u.s. department of commerce (1999), the appendix to chapter iii.7.for an example of a web site enabling communications with insurers, see at&t(1999).8.managed care plans integrate insurance and delivery of careñfunctions otherwiseprovided by separate entities. most managed care plans now pay care providers someform of discounted fee for services rendered, although some still pay a fixed fee based onthe number of patients enrolled in their care.9.integrated delivery systems combine entities related to the provision of health careand may have relationships with health insurance plans. such organizations typically include a range of different facilities, from major hospitals to local clinics, so they can providea continuum of care.10.for an example of internetbased quality indicators and managed care data exchange,see halamka and hughes, 1998.11.for example, researchers at intermountain health care in salt lake city, utah, havedeveloped a system that provides clinical guidelines in real time to physicians who use theelectronic medical record system. one study indicated that use of the system improvedfrom 30 to 70 percent the percentage of diabetic patients with safe bloodsugar levels. it isestimated that the clinical guidelines have saved the organization $10 million, or $2,000 perpatient, through improved clinical decision making (see gillespie, 2000).12.as noted by the science panel on interactive communications and health (1999),selfcare books provided to members of health maintenance organizations and medicarebeneficiaries have been shown to reduce office visits and specialty referrals (vickery et al.,1988); systems to help patients prepare for office visits have been shown to improve treatment outcomes for chronic diseases (greenfield et al., 1985); computer access to supportgroups and decision guidance has been shown to help women with breast cancer andpatients with aids (gufstafson et al., 1992, 1993, 1994); and shared decisionmaking toolshave been shown to improve health outcomes while reducing the use of surgery and otherhighcost medical procedures (barry et al., 1995; morgan et al., 1997).13.these metrics are not independent of each other. for example, a high packet lossrate is likely to lead to low throughput because lost packets must be retransmitted, and thecomplete message cannot be reassembled until all packets are received.14.quality of service is distinct from reliability, which refers to the likelihood that aservice remains available at all times. a network may be highly reliable in the sense that itis always possible to obtain connectivity to a given destination, but the same network maylack any assurance of performance (qos, as defined here).15.this level of isolation can be achieved even if there is some physical sharing at thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56networking health: prescriptions for the internetvery lowest layer of the protocol stack; for example, the transmission links of the twodifferent networks might share a physical fiber. at the same time, the separation is only asgood as the trust of the user in the service provider. a simple misconfiguration of a routercould connect a thirdparty link to a private network. in addition, the service provider hasfull access to the data carried over a private network.16.as a result of recent consolidation in the insurance industry, for example, care providers now work with policies established in large corporate headquarters that are greaterdistances away, and standards for reducing the administrative burden on providers can nolonger be set at the state level.17.for more information, see <http://www.ccic.gov>.18.the formal specification of the ngi program reverses the second and third items inthe list above. the order of presentation is changed herein for stylistic purposes and tohighlight that the development of testbed networks is just one element of a much broaderbased program.19.the term òtelemedicineó refers to the delivery of health services when distance separates the care provider and patient (see institute of medicine, 1996). this constructionrecognizes that a range of different interactions are possible, from videoconferencing at theone extreme to the use of the telephone or text email at the other. indeed, the most prevalent uses of telemedicine today are not videobased but involve the use of asynchronousstoreandforward systems to exchange still images across networks. other applicationsinclude telephone or internetbased systems for monitoring patients in their homes.20.the study committee visited with the researchers at nasa ames research center aspart of this project. a summary of that visit is contained in appendix a of this report.21.it is expected that 25 more sites will be added to this testbed in fy00.22.the vbns is a nationwide network that supports highperformance, highbandwidthresearch applications. launched in 1995, it is the product of a 5year cooperative agreementbetween nsf and mci worldcom. approximately 100 research institutions, chosen througha peerreview process, will be connected to the network. it currently connects 92 institutions.23.for additional information on internet 2 and ucaid, see <www.ucaid.org>.24.belfast telegraph online 10/26/99 as summarized in òinternet 2 gets ready to operate,ó edupage, november 1, 1999.25.this information was obtained from the abilene web site at <http://www.ucaid.edu/abilene/>.26.for additional information on these networks and the evolution of the internet moregenerally, see chapter 7 in computer science and telecommunications board (1999).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.572health applications of the internetmany healthrelated processes stand to be reshaped by the internet.in clinical settings, the internet enables care providers to gain rapid accessto information that can aid in the diagnosis of health conditions or thedevelopment of suitable treatment plans. it can make patient records, testresults, and practice guidelines accessible from the examination room. itcan also allow care providers to consult with each other electronically todiscuss treatment plans or operative procedures. at the same time, theinternet supports a shift toward more patientcentered care, enabling consumers to gather healthrelated information themselves; to communicatewith care providers, health plan administrators, and other consumerselectronically; and even to receive care in the home. the internet can alsosupport numerous healthrelated activities beyond the direct provision ofcare. by supporting financial and administrative transactions, publichealth surveillance, professional education, and biomedical research, theinternet can streamline the administrative overhead associated withhealth care, improve the health of the nationõs population, better trainhealth care providers, and lead to new insights into the nature of disease.the capability of the internet to support these applications dependson whether the relevant technical needs are met and whether the operational aspects of the systems involved are understood and manageable.as with any information technology system, the technical requirementsdepend heavily on the specific characteristics of the individual systemsñthe number of anticipated users, degree of realtime interaction desired,number of simultaneous sessions that must be supported, and so on.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58networking health: prescriptions for the internetmany of these factors, in turn, are influenced by considerations other thannetwork performance. these include organizational competencies, changing preferences and expectations of consumers and care providers,reimbursement policies for different health services, availability of complementary technologies, and laws. the confluence of so many factorsconfounds attempts to predict viable future applications of the internet inthe health sector.this chapter presents a broad overview of the types of applicationsthat the internet can support in consumer health, clinical care, financialand administrative transactions, public health, health professional education, and biomedical research. it draws on a series of site visits by thecommittee (these visits are summarized in appendix a) and other briefings to the committee to examine applications that have been deployedand that are still in the early stages of conceptualization. the chapterattempts to assess the technical capabilities demanded of the internet interms of bandwidth, latency, security, availability, and ubiquity (as definedin chapter 1). specific technical information is presented where possible,but because of the nascent nature of many internet applications in thehealth sector, often the most that can be offered is a qualitative assessment. accordingly, a ranking scale is used to assess the importance ofeach technical dimension to each class of applications. these dimensionsare ranked on a scale of one to four, with one plus sign (+) indicating littleimportance relative to the other dimensions and four plus signs (++++)signifying the most importance. the chapter also identifies organizational and policylevel issues that will influence the way the internet isdeployed in different health applications and notes, where applicable,other technologies that must be developed to make certain applicationsfeasible. specific technical, organizational, and policy issues are addressedin subsequent chapters of the report.consumer healthconsumer health is one of the areas that could be most dramaticallyreshaped by the internet. consumer health refers to a set of activitiesaimed at giving consumers a more pronounced role in their own healthand health care, ranging from the development of tools for selfassessmentof health risks and management of chronic diseases, to homebased monitoring of health status and delivery of care. this area is similar to publichealth (discussed later in this chapter) in that it aims to provide consumerswith the information and tools needed to improve their health, but it isless concerned with the detection of regional outbreaks of disease and isnot part of governmentbased reporting structures. the internet couldbecome a significant enabler of consumer health initiatives in that it pronetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet59vides an increasingly accessible communications channel for a growingsegment of the population. moreover, in comparison to televisionñalso awidely available medium for reaching consumersñthe internet offersgreater interactivity and better tailoring of information to individualneeds. these capabilities may lead to significant changes in consumerbehavior (e.g., cessation of smoking, changes in diet) that could greatlyimprove health.ongoing trends in health care are likely to reinforce the shift towardconsumeroriented health information. since the mid1960s, patients havebeen encouraged to take a more active role in their own health care, andcare providers have recognized the value of engaging patients to participate more meaningfully in their own care. furthermore, attempts by careproviders and managed care plans to streamline services and cut costshave shortened hospital stays, increasing the need for patients and theirfamilies to understand how to provide care themselves. greater emphasis is being placed on preventive care, which requires consumers to understand health risks and the effects of different behaviors (such as smokingand dietary habits) on their health. these trends heighten the need forconsumers to have access to reliable health information and open channels of communication to care providers and other health professionals.consumer health initiatives that rely on the internet reflect, and couldeven drive, significant changes in the structure of the health care industry.concurrent with changes in the economics of the health care deliverysystem, the duration of a medical consultation is steadily declining, andthe availability of practitioners for substantive discussions between visitsis decreasing. continuity of care is increasingly disrupted as patientschange care providers in response to changes in their health insuranceplans. these trends favor consumers who are well informed and autonomous. consumer health initiatives attempt to involve patients moreactively in carerelated decision making and enable them to exercise greatercontrol over their health. indeed, the internet could change the culture ofhealth care from one in which patients are viewed as recipients of care toone in which they are partners in care. eventually, they may be able touse the internet to access and update their personal medical records orreceive care in their homes.consumeroriented health web sitesover the past few years, leading providers of health information haveidentified the internet as an effective medium for reaching large numbersof health consumers. the most visible aspect of this recognition is theexplosion of web sites geared to consumer health issues (table 2.1). thesesites are dedicated to the diagnosis and management of diseases, thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60networking health: prescriptions for the internetpromotion of various healthy lifestyles, and interventions to prevent theonset of disease. the formats range from mailing lists to interactive websites, chat sessions, or compilations of online resources. one recent survey suggested that consumers use these sites to gather information ondiseases, medications, and nutrition, as well as to find care providers orparticipate in support groups (table 2.2).table 2.1 examples of commercial healthrelated web sitessitecontentamericasdoctor.comoffers free, private chats with physicians. also sellshealthrelated items.betterhealth.comcovers various aspects of physical and emotional health.includes expert advice, feature articles, and support groups.discoveryhealth.comin conjunction with intelihealth, offers diseaserelatedinformation, health news, online prescription ordering,and riskassessment services.drkoop.comoffers health information and more than 120 chat groupswith advice from a physician. also allows consumers tocheck for drug interactions. plans to add capabilities forconsumers to keep track of their medical histories andmedical expenses.healtheon/webmd.comstarted as a subscription service for doctors but has a freeconsumer site that offers health news and information, aphysician directory, and conditionspecific support groups.intelihealth.coma joint venture between johns hopkins universityhospital and health system and aetna u.s. healthcarethat offers health news; access to the johns hopkins healthlibrary, drug databases, and journal abstracts; and catalogitems for sale.mediconsult.comfocuses on patients with chronic ailments, offeringinformation on 60 common conditions. for a fee,consumers can pose questions for a physician.medscape.comoffers original, peerreviewed reports and journal articlesorganized by specialty and intended for both healthprofessionals and consumers. a dedicated consumer siteis under development.onhealth.comaimed primarily at women, has an alliance withdrugstore.com for pharmaceutical purchases and offersguides that rate the health quotient of communitiesnationally.thebody.coman aids and hiv information web site aimed primarilyat the homosexual community.thriveonline.comfeatures alternative medicines, diet, and exercise tips.sources: carns (1999); nash (1999).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet61table 2.2 primary health activities for consumers to conduct onlineactivitypercent of respondentsresearch an illness or disease62.1look for nutrition and fitness information20.0research drugs and their interactions11.6look for a doctor or hospital3.7look for online medical support groups2.3source: usa today (1998).the network capabilities required by consumer health web sites arenot especially demanding today, but the requirements could grow overtime. most sites offer text and limited graphics, which do not requiresignificant bandwidth, but the availability of greater bandwidthñespecially in the local loopñcould enable the design of more sophisticatedsites offering educational videos for downloading over the internet. securityrequirements are also minimal because personal health information isgenerally not exchanged on these sites. protection is needed for financialtransactions related to the purchase of health products, but this requirement is no different than that for other ecommerce applications. similarly, consumer health web sites do not demand exceptional reliabilitybecause they are unlikely to be used for applications in which lives are atstake. however, consumer health web sites may drive the need forimproved privacyenhancing technologies. the information sought byconsumers on the internet, and the purchases they make, can reveal muchabout personal health concerns and problems. to prevent organizationsfrom compiling profiles of their health concerns, consumers may demandgreater anonymity in their web browsing and purchasing and tighterrestrictions on the ways in which organizations can use information abouttheir habits.a larger issue is the need for tools to help consumers find informationof interest and evaluate its quality. the sheer volume of health information available on the internet can be overwhelming. for example, a simpleweb search for òdiabetes mellitusó can return more than 40,000 webpages,1 and some 61,000 web sites contain information on breast cancer(boodman, 1999). to sort through this volume of material, consumersneed effective searching and filtering tools that can identify and rankinformation according to their needs and capabilities and present it in aform that they can understand, regardless of educational and culturalbackground. consumers also need a way to judge the quality, authoritativeness, and provenance of the information. the internet enables anyonenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62networking health: prescriptions for the internetto publish information, so filtering and credentialing become moreimportant. a recent study found that 6 percent of the 400 sites containinginformation on a form of cancer called ewingõs sarcoma contained erroneous information, and many more were misleading. sites containeddifferent (and often incorrect) estimates of basic information such as survival rates (biermann et al., 1999).several initiatives are already under way to evaluate the quality ofhealth information on the internet. the department of health and humanservicesõ scientific panel on interactive health communication calls fordisclosure statements on web sites to make it easy for consumers toevaluate the source and authority of information resources (scipich,1999). other efforts focus on systems for classifying health web sitesaccording to metrics such as accuracy, timeliness, completeness, andclarity.2 with these evaluations, standard search engines could provideconsumers with a measure of trust in the information they are retrievingñat least to the degree that they trust the organization performing thecontent labeling. the world wide web consortium, for example, hascreated a system called the platform for internet content selection (pics),which can help users control the types of information retrieved from theinternet.3 to accommodate different perspectives on health and healthcare (e.g., alternative as opposed to traditional medicine), a wide varietyof organizations could rate health web sites. additional research maysuggest ways of automating the evaluation process, perhaps using metricssuch as the number of pointers to, or users of, a given site as indicators ofthe siteõs effectiveness (as some search and referral engines are currentlydoing). technology could also be used to help prevent alterations of thesiteõs rating to assure consumers that an evaluation was indeed performedby the stated third party. this function requires cryptographic authentication technologies that are currently available but have not yet beenwidely deployed for this purpose.email between patients and providersthe internet can also be used to facilitate electronic communicationsbetween patients and care providers, typically in the form of electronicmail (email). to date, email has been used only sporadically betweenpatients and providers, but it is of growing interest. it could prove to bean effective mechanism for improving care and lowering costs becausemore frequent communications might enable better tracking of a patientõsprogress or eliminate the need for an office visit. this premise has yet tobe tested rigorously in clinical settings, and a number of technical andnontechnical issues need to be resolved (mandl et al., 1998).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet63bandwidth and availability are not issues in the near term becausemost messages currently consist of text only and are not used for timecritical communications. the most pressing technical issue is security.most email exchanges between patient and provider involve discussionsof personal health information, which must be suitably protected frombreaches of confidentiality and, to a lesser extent, alteration. most emailis not encrypted during either transmission or storage, and its point oforigin is not authenticated. it is therefore much easier to forge an emailmessage than a clinicianõs note or telephone call.several approaches are available for improving the security of emailexchanges. secure sockets layer (ssl) encryption, which is commonlyused to encrypt ecommerce transactions (see chapter 3 for a descriptionof the technology), can be used to protect communications between auserõs personal computer and the electronic mail server. other protocols,such as pretty good privacy (also described in chapter 3), can be used toprotect communications as they move across the network between thesender and recipient. user authentication can be enhanced through theuse of nontrivial user names and passwords or more secure forms ofauthentication, such as those based on public key encryption (alsodescribed in chapter 3).the more daunting barriers to patientprovider email are institutional policies for confidentiality and for integrating email into workflows. most email systems are without even the most basic protection ofthe confidentiality of message contents. mail received at the place ofwork is, by law, fully accessible to the employer. one study showed thatpatients are hesitant to use email from work to communicate about theirhealth for fear that employers or insurance companies might use the information in ways that affect them personally (fridsma et al., 1994). toavoid the risk of having messages discoverable at a place of work or othersensitive locations, individuals can store their email files on the server ofa trusted third party and/or encrypt messages for storage, but rulesregarding disclosure still need to be developed.health care organizations are also concerned that email might overload care providers with yet another task in the context of increasedclinical and administrative burdens. there are related concerns about theliability of providers if, for example, they miss a subtle but (in retrospect)irrefutable and important question or comment in a patientõs electronicnote. many organizations have yet to establish policies regarding thequality of service, such as a maximum time to respond or even acknowledge receipt, that patients can expect from email with providers. anotherimportant concern is economic: there are currently no mechanisms forpaying providers for what could be as taxing or timeconsuming a clinicalnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64networking health: prescriptions for the internetactivity as any inperson clinical visit. furthermore, no policies and procedures have been developed for incorporating email into electronicpatient records. as a consequence, decisions made on the basis of emailinformation are at risk of having no documented basis in the record.safe and effective use of email for clinical discussions betweenpatients and providers will require the development of policies to governits use. these policies will need to address issues of confidentiality, dataintegrity, authentication, timeliness, and the appropriateness of the use ofemail for different kinds of discussions. in some cases, telephone or facetoface conversations may be considered a more appropriate form of communication. these policies will need to be articulated to all consumersand also embodied in the email user interfaces so that health care consumers can have realistic expectations about the use and safety of clinicalemail.online health recordsthe internet is emerging as a medium for giving consumers directaccess to their personal health records. historically, care providers havemaintained voluminous records of patient encounters within their organizations, documenting dates and times of consultations, diagnoses, labresults, prescriptions, and more. these records are maintained and largelycontrolled by care providers, although patients have the right, in somestates, to review their records and propose amendments as necessary. inthe past two years, however, a number of new web sites have begun toallow consumers to store their own health records online.4 the potentialbenefits of these sites are many. with them, consumers can create comprehensive, longitudinal records that capture information about the carereceived from different organizations over an extended period of time.consumers can use these records to help monitor and evaluate their healthstatus, and they can grant access, if they wish, to different providers forpurposes of care. many sites provide some sort of override feature thatenables care providers to gain access to a patientõs records in an emergency situationñsomething that is much more difficult to do if the recordsare not stored online.5like email used for clinical purposes, webbased medical recordsrequire considerable attention to security to minimize the risks of inappropriate disclosure. personal medical records must be protected againstinappropriate disclosure, both to outsiders who attempt to break into thesystem and to those who operate and maintain the web sites. most existing services use ssl encryption to protect data communications betweenusers and the host web site and a combination of user names and passwords (transmitted securely over the internet) to authenticate end users.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet65systems operating with user identification and passwords can providereasonablyñbut not fullyñsecure access to many types of applications.if online records become more widely used in the provision of care, thenit may be advisable to enhance the robustness of user authentication,perhaps with public key encryption systems and user certificates (seechapter 3). the pcasso system being developed by science applications international corp. (saic) and the university of california at sandiego, for example, uses public key encryption and a challengeresponsetoken, as well as a password, to protect patient information at a far higherlevel than is possible with ssl.6other technical requirements will be modest in the near future unlessonline patient records become more complex and more widely used inthe provision of care. at present, most online medical records consistprimarily of text and demand little bandwidth for fairly rapid downloading. if such records begin to include medical images (e.g., x rays, computed tomography (ct) scans, and mammograms), then much higherbandwidth would be needed for timely downloading (see the section onmedical images below). similarly, reliability requirements are not highbecause online records are still supplements to, as opposed to replacements for, the records maintained by provider organizations; an inabilityto access an online record is unlikely to interfere with the provision ofcare. if online records become more widely used and more complete thanprovidersõ records, then reliability could become more of a concern.scalability is not an issue, either, because records are not needed simultaneously by multiple users.ubiquity of access to the internet is a significant consideration in thedevelopment of online medical records because it would ensure that allconsumers could keep such records and that those records could be accessible from a large number of unpredictable locations, such as a consumerõshome or office, a care providerõs office, or an ambulance responding to anemergency. a number of business and policy issues need to be resolvedas well. organizations that store online health records will need todevelop policies that balance the need for privacy and security against theneed for ready access to records by patients and eventually by care providers and perhaps insurance companies, researchers, and others. rulesmay also be needed to govern organizationsõ use of the online recordsthey maintain. under what conditions will they be able to provide consumers with recommendations about necessary medical tests or possibledrug interactions? to what extent should they be allowed to mine patientrecords for information that might lead to direct marketing efforts? underwhat circumstances should records be made available to public healthagencies and researchers?networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66networking health: prescriptions for the internetpatient monitoring and home carethe internet offers the opportunity for improved monitoring of consumer health and, potentially, provision of inhome care through videobased consultations with care providers (discussed in the clinical caresection, below) and control of medical equipment (e.g., pacemakers anddosimeters) deployed in the home. the goals of such activities are toassist in the early detection of potential health problems, ranging fromheart attacks to congestive heart failure and diabetes, and to reduce theneed for clinical intervention and costly hospital stays.7 remote consultations to the home may be most useful for monitoring patients withailments such as congestive heart failure and endstage liver disease.these applications do not require video imagery; the provider simplylistens to heart and lungs, taking vital signs and pulse oximetry. inhomecare is consistent with existing trends in the health care industry. since1975, the number of home health agencies has grown from 2,300 to almost8,500, while the number of hospital beds per 1,000 enrollees has declinedfrom 51 to 28.8 similarly, the number of patients receiving home carenearly tripled between 1982 and 1994. these trends reflect, in part,attempts by health insurers and health management organizations toreduce the costs of care associated with long hospital stays.9to date, few attempts have been made to monitor patients at home.most efforts have focused on chronic conditions, such as diabetes, asthma,and congestive heart failure, for which wellestablished protocols existfor home care. the devices used for monitoring are minimally modifiedcopies of devices used in hospitals. little effort has been made to developor distribute small devices that mimic the functionality of much largerhospital counterparts with automated quality control and calibration andremote polling and configuration by authorized care providers. almostnone of these devices is as portable or easy to use as a standard pager. inpart because of these limitations, home monitoring has not grown asmuch in popularity as have consumer information on the web andpatientprovider email.in january 2000, however, medtronic inc. announced plans to workwith ibm corp. and microsoft corp. to develop a system that will enableheart patients with implanted pacemakers, defibrillators, and experimental cardiacpacing and monitoring devices to transmit cardiac data overthe internet to their cardiologists. eventually, care providers may be ableprogram the devices over a secure internet connection without requiringpatients to visit their offices. developers of the system posit that it willresult in fewer office visits and hospitalizations, thereby lowering costswhile improving patient monitoring and care, but a means of charging forthe monitoring service has not yet been devised. medtronic hopes that itsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet67secure internet system will find utility beyond cardiac patients, perhapsallowing patients with implanted drug pumps to have their doctorschange the drug regimen remotely over the internet (burton, 2000).continued advances in computing and communications technologiescould enable more widespread deployment of homebased health monitoring systems. for more than two decades, the feasible density oftransistors on an integrated circuit has been increasing by a factor of 10every 7 years. memory densities have increased even faster, gaining anorder of magnitude every 6 years. as a result, medical devices such asstethoscopes, glucometers, and electrocardiogram monitors already canbe equipped to support internet connections and deployed to consumersat low cost. over time, computing and communications capabilities willprobably be incorporated into a number of other devices that could serveas sources of health information, whether bathroom scales or exerciseequipment. if a house is networked, then it would be possible to use apersonal computer to connect and control a number of medical monitoring devices. although the number of homes with conventional local areanetworks (lans) is small (mainly because of the high cost of wiring ahouse appropriately and the disruption involved), ethernetlike connectivity can be provided to any room in a house through devices that areeither wireless or attached to the existing telephone or electric wiring.indeed, advances in microelectromechanical systems (mems) devices,combined with those forecast in microelectronics, biosensors, and biomaterials, could lead to revolutionary changes in therapies, delivery ofmedication, and monitoring and alerting systems for the elderly and thosewith chronic conditions. devices already on the market, such as pacemakers, wireless stethoscopes, and blood sugar monitors, could beaugmented with networking capabilities. highresolution digital videocameras that are acquired by consumers for recreational or other purposesmight become useful in health care applications.homebased monitoring is unlikely to require highbandwidth connections from homes to the internet because individual messages tend tobe small. in demonstration projects, however, investigators have had towork hard to ensure that all participating patients had uninterruptedaccess to even modest bandwidth, often contracting with the local cableor telephone company to hook up a specific home. the installations,connectivity, and subsequent support costs have accounted for a largeportion of the cost of the monitoring efforts. bandwidth is a more significant issue for provider organizations, which will need to ensure that theirfacilities can handle the aggregate load of monitoring numerous devices(e.g., if hundreds of thousands of patients with congestive heart failureare monitored at home). at this point, it is difficult to estimate the aggregate bandwidth needed by providers of monitoring services because it isnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68networking health: prescriptions for the internetnot clear how many patients would be monitored simultaneously or bythe same server. the load on the network might be reduced if monitoringhardware reported only summary data and any anomalies detected,unless detailed raw data were requested. homebased monitoring wouldrequire high reliability to ensure that data can be regularly and routinelytransmitted and high levels of security to prevent alteration of data asthey transit the network.other factors are equally or more important to the evolution of homebased monitoring. even modest monitoring efforts will not be effectiveunless mechanisms are deployed to enable care providers to review themonitored data, identify worrisome outliers, and respond in a timelyway. the need for oversight of such large numbers of patients at homecould result in the emergence of a new category of ancillary health professionals. furthermore, the effective use of such large amounts of monitored data will require automated data reduction and intelligent dataanalysis techniques. for some populations (e.g., patients with diabetes orcongestive heart failure), this approach could enable finegrained medicaloversight that could result in improved short and longterm outcomes.but, if used inappropriately, it could also afford vast opportunities forunnecessary and unwanted intrusions into the privacy of all health careconsumers.the benefits of home monitoring cannot be fully realized unless reimbursement is provided for virtual home visits and remote monitoring. inaddition, policies for protecting the confidentiality of data gathered inthis way will have to acquire the force of law if abuses are to be prevented. even the strongest cryptographic methods cannot prevent thesubversion of a system by parties with strong financial interests in breaching patient data confidentiality. the challenges that must be overcome toprovide this level of surveillance appear to be more nontechnical thantechnical, and they include issues of organizational structure and reimbursement rather than networking capabilities.beyond the use of the internet for home monitoring is the possibilityof using it to modify home medical devices remotely. after a remoteconsultation or review of home monitoring data, a care provider might,for example, want to change the setting of a threshold on a patientõspacemaker, alter the parameters for a programmable insulin pump, orincrease the dose delivered by an infusion pump for an oncology patient.such capabilities are already used to control spacecraft and other remoteequipment and could have a large impact on health care, especially inrural environments. although remote control of such equipment will beunnecessary (or unnecessarily paternalistic) for some patients, it might beappealing in cases involving disabilities or simply for the sake of convenience.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet69the control of remote medical equipment would pose a number ofchallenges for the internetñor any other control network. althoughbandwidth requirements would be minimal because the commandswould likely consist of short messages, the requirements for security andavailability would be extremely high. data would need to be protectedfrom intentional and unintentional corruption to ensure that commandsare transmitted as intended. high levels of authentication would beneeded on both ends of the connection to ensure that the appropriateequipment is being manipulated and that only authorized personnel sendmodifications. the network would have to be protected from denialofservice attacks that could prevent the receipt of update information.technical requirements for consumer health applicationsthe technical capabilities needed to support consumer health applications of the internet are modest, largely because the systems developedto date have had to rely on the existing internet infrastructure. earlyexperimentation with more advanced systems that provide realtimevideo connections between care providers and patients (or their parents)at home demonstrates the increased demands that consumer health couldplace on networking resources. the discussion below reviews the technical needs for consumer health applications with respect to bandwidth,latency, availability, security, and degree of access. as noted at the beginning of this chapter, the importance of each capability is indicated on afourpoint scale, with one plus sign (+) indicating limited needs and fourplus signs (++++) signifying an important need.bandwidth ++consumer health applications vary considerably in the bandwidththey demand. the retrieval of information from healthrelated web sitesdemands little bandwidth on the consumer end, but the potentially largevolume of requests made of any particular site could drive up the aggregate bandwidth requirement on the information providerõs side. accessto patient health records could demand somewhat greater bandwidththan is typically available today or significantly greater if records includeenhanced content, such as medical images or videotapes of telemedicineconsultations.latency +in general, applications that support consumer health do not requirethe instantaneous delivery of information, so the latency requirements ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70networking health: prescriptions for the internetthe internet are not great. in some patientmonitoring applications, timeliness is a concern, but delays of a few seconds would not threaten apatientõs wellbeing. latency could become more of an issue if onlinemedical records became the norm and care provider organizations neededtimely access to them for purposes of treating patients. in many instances,however, records could be uploaded from remote sites in advance ofscheduled appointments, and latency would be a significant issue only inemergency situations.availability ++the need for network availability differs significantly among consumer health applications. the internet is already sufficiently availablefor the distribution of health information to consumers and for exchangesof email between patients and providers. somewhat greater availabilitywould be needed for remote monitoring and remote control operations,although most home monitoring devices and medical equipment couldbe designed to buffer enough data to overcome short lapses of connectivity. home monitoring and control will not become commonplace, however, until providers (and consumers) of such services receive guaranteesthat lengthy network outages will occur very infrequently.security ++++many consumer health applications demand high levels of security.although this is generally not an issue with respect to the downloading ofhealth information from consumer web sites, access to online patientrecords demands confidentiality because such records contain personalinformation. the same is true for email messages between patients andproviders that contain personal health information. data from remotepatient monitoring devices also require security to prevent corruption(intentional or unintentional) during transit across the network or afterstorage. as described in greater detail in chapter 3, both technologicaland administrative solutions are required to secure these types of consumer health information. for example, authentication technologies areneeded to validate the identities of those requesting and transmittingdata. effective controls are needed to prevent users from accessing information about other consumers. encryption technologies are needed toprotect the confidentiality of data transmitted across the network andensure its integrity. policies will be needed to determine who can haveaccess to consumer health information and under what conditions.security requirements will grow as consumers use the internet to store,retrieve, and update their personal health records.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet71consumer health applications also raise the issue of online anonymity.searches for online information can reveal a lot about consumersõ healthconcerns, as can their online purchases of prescription and nonprescription pharmaceuticals. given the sensitivity of some of these conditions, the demand for anonymous web browsing and even anonymousecommerce could grow. consumers may also demand greater anonymityin email to online physician services offered by some consumer websites. whether anonymity is desirable from a social perspectiveñandunder what circumstances (e.g., anonymous web browsing may be moreplausible than anonymous ecommerce)ñis an issue for continued debateand discussion.ubiquity ++++key to the success of consumer health applications is widespreadaccess to the internet. as noted above, many consumer applications currently demand only moderate bandwidth and latency, meaning that standard modem access to the internet, at 28.8 to 56 kilobits per second (kbps),may suffice. additional bandwidth could be needed if online access tohealth records and downloading of educational videos become morepopular and widespread and if online health records grow to include notjust text but medical images and perhaps even videos. as discussed inthe next section (clinical care), remote medical consultations to the homeover the internet could require bandwidth of 128 kbps or more in bothdirectionsñif such applications prove technically feasible and economically viable. the larger issue may be that of ensuring equitable access tohealth resources by different demographic groups. there are alreadyconsiderable differences in access to health care in the united states;ensuring that differential access to the internet along demographic linesdoes not exacerbate this imbalance could become an increasingly important issue, especially if the provision of health care moves online.clinical carethe internet offers several avenues for augmenting the health careservices in clinical settings. remote video consultation, for example, couldgive consumers greater access to skilled health professionals regardless ofgeographic proximity. the use of the internet to transfer medical imagesto expert interpreters could accelerate and improve the diagnostic processas well as reduce costs. virtual reality tools could help surgeons planmedical procedures and improve their use of information during procedures. the use of the internet to access and assemble health records couldgive a provider improved information for treatment purposes, regardlessnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72networking health: prescriptions for the internetof whether the patient is a regular client or a stranger. each of theseapplications poses a range of technical challenges for networking researchers and other information technologists. in most cases, the applicationshave not yet been demonstrated on a scale sufficient to determine theirmedical efficacy or influence on costs of care. as the discussion belowdemonstrates, the use of the internet in clinical care will be influenced bya range of technical, organizational, and policy issues.remote consultationremote medical consultation has long been pursued as a means ofovercoming the unequal distribution of clinical expertise. it is a methodof offering expert consultations to patients in remote rural areas, for example, or underserved urban areas or prisons. even where clinical expertiseis available, but inconvenient for either the patient or the provider, remotemedical consultations may be a costeffective alternative to staffing multiple clinics with subspecialists. remote consultations may also be usefulto specialized service organizations that attempt to establish economies ofscale for particular types of clinical service, such as the interpretation ofradiological images (e.g., ct and magnetic resonance images), while alsodeveloping more effective bargaining units for health care contracting.these organizations, which are becoming more numerous, can benefitinsofar as their reach is extended beyond their immediate geographicalarea, allowing them to serve a broader pool of consumers.the network performance required for remote consultation is variable and depends on a number of factors, including (1) the resolutionrequired in the transmitted signal or image to support diagnosis, (2) thetimeliness with which data must be received and interpreted (e.g.,whether the system is used for realtime consultation or asynchronousreview), (3) the degree to which the data may be compressed, (4) whetherthe entire data set must be transferred or applicationspecific decisionscan be made about which subsets to transmit, and (5) whether the transmission can be considered only on a pointtopoint basis or as part ofaggregate traffic. these factors vary significantly across different applications and operating modes. for example, psychiatric evaluations may beviable with video that has lower resolution than a cineoangiogram, butthe application needs to operate in real time rather than in a storeandforward mode for review at a later time.no conclusive studies have been done regarding the bandwidthneeded for different applications; the results of research on this issuegenerally depend on the provider involved and the study structure. however, reasonable guidelines can be gleaned from experiments conductedto date. practitioners at east carolina university (ecu) in greenville,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet73north carolina, for example, have considerable experience with remoteconsultations, having conducted about 3,000 realtime consultations in 31different specialties since establishing a telemedicine program in 1991(see appendix a for more information on the ecu program). the fivemost active specialty areas have been dermatology; cardiology; neurology;gastroenterology; and allergy, asthma, and immunology. practitionershave found that the bandwidth needed for most realtime, videobasedconsultations varies from 128 kbps to 384 kbps, depending on the degreeof resolution needed for diagnosis and the rate of motion in the video(table 2.3).10for some procedures, such as cineoangiograms, echocardiograms,and gait analysis (box 2.1), more bandwidth can be advantageous. cineoangiograms, for example, can be transmitted at 384 kbps, but 768 kbpsproduces better results. cineoangiograms are generally not performedin real time (because the source is film); therefore, they can be done in astoreandforward mode, with bandwidth needs determined by the number of cases to be examined on a given day and the desired turnaroundtime. adult echocardiograms are often done in real time and can be readadequately at 384 kbps, but pediatric cardiograms may require 768 kbpsbecause the area being observed is so small. extensive testing withechocardiography indicates that data rates in excess of 1.5 megabits persecond (mbps) probably do not contribute to an increase in clinical efficacy, but further investigation is under way.11 for remote analysis of atable 2.3 nominal bandwidth requirements for differenttelemedicine applicationstype of telemedicineneeded bandwidthaexampleshigh resolution,storeandforwardradiology, dermatology, pathologyno motionmedium resolution,128 kbpsstethoscope, visual exams, psychiatriclow motionconsultations, gastroenterologymedium resolution,384 kbpscardiology, neurology, andhigh motionemergency room consultationshigh resolution,768 kbpscineoangiography andhigh motionechocardiogramsvery high resolution,up to 2.5 mbpsgait analysishigh motion»kbps, kilobits per second; mbps, megabits per second.source: david balch, east carolina university, personal communication, february 2,1999.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 2.1examples of video images used in medical diagnosescineoangiograms are movies made from x rays taken in rapid succession whiledye is injected into the blood vessels of the heart. the motion picture shows bloodflowing through the heart and reveals blockages of the arteries of the heart andany abnormalities of the motion of the heartõs pumping chambers.echocardiograms use highfrequency sound waves to generate images of theheart in motionñlike pictures of submerged objects obtained with sonar. echocardiograms reveal the size of the heartõs chambers, images of the heart musclecontracting and relaxing, and information about heart valve function.gait analysis is the measurement and interpretation of how a person walks. it isuseful in diagnosing problems affecting both nerves and muscles. although oftentaken for granted, the act of walking is a remarkably complex sequence of balanceand motion. neurological problems such as parkinsonõs disease and stroke mayaffect gait in distinctive and treatable ways. muscle diseases such as musculardystrophy and autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosis maylead to walking difficulties that can be diagnosed and treated with the help of gaitanalysis.patientõs gait, bandwidth of up to 2.5 mbps may be necessary, but thisapplication has not been extensively evaluated.12for the most part, remote consultation programs rely on dedicatednetworksñnot the internetñto provide connectivity between remote clinicsand a centralized consulting facility. the ecu program, for example,uses an amalgam of microwave links, t1 lines, telephone lines, and integrated services digital networks (isdn; see chapter 3) for a variety ofapplications. the ecu program and other experimental programs, suchas the national laboratory for the study of rural telemedicine at theuniversity of iowa, also make use of statewide fiberoptic networks forconnectivity between some sites.13 although costly, dedicated lines havebeen viewed as the most effective means of guaranteeing access toadequate bandwidth as needed. the internet does not yet offer the qualityof service needed for realtime video consultations. some organizations,including ecu, have begun to shift their systems to the ip in anticipationof connections to the next generation internet, but they will continue torely on dedicated links until a more viable internetbased infrastructure isavailable.continued advances in telecommunications infrastructure could causenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet75remote consultations to become less the province of a few sites equippedwith specialized telemedicine rooms and more a routine component ofthe services offered by health plans. a number of integrated health caredelivery systems have begun to experiment with remote consultations(typically over leased lines) to provide specialty services in outlying areas.if the internet could support such capabilities, then remote consultationcould become more common, perhaps even extending beyond regionalboundaries. indeed, an enhanced internet could help extend teleconferencing to the home, enabling consumers to ask for videoconferences withcare providers whenever health problems require immediate attention.such capabilities could dramatically transform health care by eliminatingmany office visits.regardless of whether the patient is at home or somewhere else,remote consultations require sustained bandwidth in two directionsñfrom the patient to the provider and vice versa. this stands in contrast tomany highbandwidth applications, such as entertainment, education, orscientific visualization, in which sustained access to high bandwidth isneeded in one direction only, from a centralized distributor of content toa recipient. clearly, the need for high bandwidth in two directions is notunique to health care; many businesses need bidirectional bandwidth tosupport collaborations between workers in different locations. however,remote medical consultations to the home demand that such capabilitiesbe available from many locations, not just from corporate offices thatmight already lease a highbandwidth access line to the internet or aprivate, corporate network. the most likely users of remote medical consultations would be primary care providers and patients living in rural orremote areas, many of whom have limited access to highbandwidthinternet connections (see chapter 3).the future of remote consultations will be influenced by a number offactors beyond network technology. other technical challenges arise fromthe need for appropriate data acquisition devices to digitize the observations involved in the consultation. although many medical devices havebeen instrumented to allow for remote control and data acquisition, fewof them have achieved mass market acceptance. as a result, such devicestend to be confined to a few specially equipped rooms in institutionssupporting remote medical consultation. many more of the devices usedas part of routine physical exams could be modified for data acquisitionand control. they could then be deployed in patientsõ homes to facilitatehomebased consultations with patients whose diseases require intensivemonitoring and oversight. in the near term, these devices might be individually configured to work with a home computer and to relay information to a remote care provider over the internet. remote care providersmight even be able to exercise some control over these devices, whethernetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76networking health: prescriptions for the internetadjusting their sensitivity or other operating parameters. eventually, thedevices could be designed to connect automatically to the internet and beconfigured by a remote web browser. initially, this might be costeffectivefor only small, highrisk populations, but remote consultations to thehome could become more popular as the technology continues to evolveand costs decline.beyond technical challenges, a number of organizational and policyissues need to be resolved if remote consultations are to become moreviable in the future. health care organizations need to develop viablebusiness models for remote consultations that meet the needs of differentusers. will remote consultations bring in income directly, or will theygenerate revenues indirectly by channeling patients into a providerõshealth care system? east carolina university, for example, has developedat least five different business models for its services, but only oneñproviding services to prison inmatesñhas proved profitable. the otherstypically operate with grants from federal agencies or are seen as experiments to broaden the reach of local provider organizations. profitabilityis currently constrained by the fact that many health plans, includingmedicare, do not yet routinely pay for remote consultations, althoughexperiments are under way to examine alternative repayment schemes(see chapter 5). other issues, such as statebased licensure of healthprofessionals, impede attempts to deliver remote consultations acrossstate lines.medical imagingclosely related to the provision of remote medical consultations is theuse of communications networks to transfer still medical images. thiscapability could enable care providers to retrieve digital images from anonline repository (often referred to as a picture archiving and communications system, or pacs), send images to specialists for interpretation (aform of remote consultation), or receive information from emergencyvehicles responding to a call. the potential benefits of such systems couldinclude the following:¥improved management and use of medical images (i.e., reduced probabilitythat images will be lost or incorrectly filed). physicians at the university ofcalifornia at san francisco (ucsf), for example, noted during thecommitteeõs site visit (see appendix a) that before establishing theirpacs, 15 to 20 percent of radiographic images were lost and hundredswent unread.¥improved quality of care through expert interpretation. five universitymedical centers, including ucsf, have established an expert radiographicnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet77interpretation center, telequest, which accepts images from a variety ofclients, including rural clinics, and provides transcribed diagnoses. thisexperimental program makes expert interpretation more widely availablethroughout the country.¥reductions in the cost of radiological interpretation. centralization ofexpertise could reduce health care costs by obviating the need for individual provider organizations to maintain more expert radiologists thanthey can keep busy.from a networking perspective, the challenge in remote imaging(sometimes called teleimaging) is the size of medical images. typicaluncompressed radiographic files range from about 25 kilobytes (kb) for anuclear medicine image to 50 megabytes (mb) for digitized mammograms,but multiple images often are needed, either to provide a complete viewof the object of interest from different angles or to compare variousimages. hence, the size of an uncompressed radiographic study can rangefrom 1 to 2 mb for a nuclear medicine study to almost 200 mb for digitized mammograms (table 2.4). the size of these studies is expected togrow as imaging technology advances; image resolution is expected toimprove by a factor of 10 or more in cases such as cineoangiography. asof early 1999 researchers at ucsf were working with digitized cineoangiograms that were 60 mb in size and with intravascular ultrasoundimages that were 50 mb.14 highresolution electron microscopes canproduce individual images that are 2 mb in size, but such instruments areavailable only at a small number of research centers.15table 2.4 nominal file sizes of common medical imagesimagessize of one examimage typeimage size (bits)per exam(mb)nuclear medicine128  128  16306012magnetic resonance imaging256  256  12606ultrasound (color)512  512  242023016180digital angiography512  512  81540410digitized electron microscopy512  512  810.26digitized color microscopy512  512  2410.79computed tomography512  512  124020computed radiograph2,048  2,048  12216digitized x rays2,048  2,048  12216digitized mammography4,096  5,625  164184source: huang (1996, 1999).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78networking health: prescriptions for the internetthe bandwidth required to transmit these images is determined byseveral factors, including the amount of time in which the image must betransmitted and the degree of compression that is allowable withoutdegrading the image so much as to impair interpretation and diagnosis.lossless compression techniques can reduce image size by a factor of 3 or4; lossy compression techniques can reduce images by a factor of 10 to 20without sacrificing diagnostic quality in some applications (lou et al.,1997). acceptable compression levels vary by application domain (e.g.,teleconferencing versus radiology) and by intended user (e.g., radiologistversus primary care physician). with digital mammography, the maximum degree of acceptable compression is controversial because of concerns over the loss of detail.in many applications, images can be sent, often as email attachments,to a remote site for interpretation and diagnosis within 1 or 2 days. thistechnique does not place extreme demands on the network and has beenused successfully by several organizations, even at low bandwidth. severalyears ago, for example, massachusetts general hospital in boston usedregular voice lines at 9.6 kbps to receive radiographs and ct images fromsaudi arabia. the images were compressed at ratios of 20 to 1 and 10 to1, respectively, so that exams could be transmitted in 20 minutes to 1 hourand interpretations could be provided in 1 to 2 days (huang, 1996; k.j.dreyer, partners healthcare system, personal communication, 1999). increased use of this technique could demand greater bandwidth, however.a busy mammography center may perform 80 to 100 examinations perday. if all these images were sent out for interpretation, an averagesustained throughput of almost 1 mbps would be required without compression and almost 100 kbps with 10 to 1 compression. this admittedlyhighend application is within the average performance capabilities of theinternet backbones but not of all internet service providers.a desire for faster turnaround in the interpretation of medical imagescould increase demands on networking resources, even if the volume ofexaminations transferred across the network is small. faster networkswould enable various types of service improvements. for instance, theycould enable remote experts to provide faster diagnoses or second opinions to help referring physicians plan followup treatments while theirpatients are still in the office, or they could enable the remote experts toprovide realtime advice, such as suggesting a need for additional imagesto aid in diagnosis before a patient leaves the mammography center. inthe first example, sometimes referred to as teleconsultation, a responsemay be desired within 30 minutes or so; in the second example, sometimes referred to as telemanagement, a response may be desired in nearreal time. given the size of the images to be transmitted and the possibleneed for reference sets, the bandwidth demands could be tremendous.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet79with lossless compression of 4 to 1, an entire mammography study wouldrequire 1.7 mbps to be transmitted in 2 minutes to allow nearrealtimeinterpretation. such a capability would not be a necessity in most cases;expert reading of mammograms in real time is not needed for regularscreenings, but it can be useful if potential abnormalities are discovered.in some imaging applications, highspeed networks become lessimportant if the data can be intelligently processed prior to transmission.for example, during the development of pacs for integrated health caredelivery systems, users often specify that several care providers need tobe able to simultaneously access uncompressed medical images from anylocation in the system within 2 seconds. such characteristics can translateinto a requirement for network bandwidths of 100 mbps (typically a lan)and specialized highresolution monitors, which can make such systemscostly (in the $2 million to $3 million range). with some attention tophysicianõs schedules, however, systems can be developed that storeimages locally on a computer that the physician is likely to use, therebyreducing the strain on the network. furthermore, systems can be developed that operate efficiently on 10 mbps lans and standard computermonitors. for example, most computer monitors cannot display a fullscreen medical image at full resolution; if the maximum resolution of aclinicianõs video screen is 1,024 768 pixels  12 bits of gray scale (or 1.2mb), then there is no use in sending all 128 mb of a digital mammogramstudy. instead, a lower resolution image could be sent and additionaldetail could be requested on smaller portions of the image as the radiologist identifies areas of interest. a variety of commercial solutions are nowavailable that enable the design of teleimaging systems that appear highlyresponsive without greatly increasing network performance requirements(box 2.2). such systems tend to transmit only portions of a completeimage at any one time and therefore place less stringent demands onnetwork capabilities than fullscreen, fullresolution systems. continuedevaluation will be needed to determine the relative effectiveness of thesealternative designs in diagnosis medical conditions.16data security is also important to teleradiology applications. bothpatient confidentiality and data integrity must be maintained during imagetransmission and storage. confidentiality can be maintained through theuse of a host of technologies for authenticating users, controlling theiraccess to images, and encrypting transmissions (see chapter 3). dataintegrity can be maintainedñan especially important function given theease with which a digital image can be alteredñthrough the use oftechnologies such as digital signatures, which are used in a number ofecommerce applications. nevertheless, tradeoffs need to be madebetween the level of protection of digital images and other considerations,including cost and ease of use (huang, 1996).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 2.2a picture archiving and communications system forpersonal computersthe typical picture archiving and communications system (pacs) providesmultiple users with rapid access to imaging studies (e.g., computed tomography,magnetic resonance, and xray images). imaging studies are typically 40 to 300megabytes in size, and users want access in 2 seconds or less. assuming 10simultaneous users, the system must provide more than 100 mbps of bandwidth.although compression can reduce the bandwidth requirement, it can also result inthe loss of subtle features that may be important to proper diagnosis. all theserequirements can lead to costly systems that cannot take advantage of existinglocal area networks (lans) in many health care organizations.an alternative that has been pursued by stentor, inc., is a system that relievespressure on network bandwidth by sending a lowerresolution image to a pcbased workstation and allowing the user to zoom in on particular areas. imagesare represented as wavelet transformations (a mathematical encoding of an imagebased on wavelet functions). as the user zooms in on the image, the clientmachine asks the server for a block of wavelet coefficients, which, when receivedby the client, are transformed into an image that allows additional details to beseen. the update time depends on the size of the window being used, not on thelevel of resolution; a pcbased computer can transform a 2,500 by 2,000 pixelimage in just 1.3 seconds. the system preserves network performance because itsends packets of 4 to 32 kilobytes rather than relying on dedicated network connectivity between the client computer and the image server. as a result, it canoperate across slower lans than is typical for pacs, allowing users to access fullresolution images from virtually any location within a health care facility.source: based on a presentation by john huffman, chief technology officer, stentorinc., to the study committee, march 2, 1999, washington, d.c.clinical transactionsseveral transactions form essential components of clinical care:(1)administrative functions such as referrals, practice management, andbilling (addressed in the section below on financial and administrativetransactions), (2) distribution of medical supplies and purchasing andinventory control, and (3) clinical functions, such as reporting of resultsfrom testing laboratories and interinstitutional communication of healthinformation. while some progress has been made in the first two of theseareas, progress in the third has been limited. some health care organizations use a webbased infrastructure for reporting laboratory resultswithin an institution, but few integrate the laboratory data into the clininetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet81cal information system containing patient records. fewer still use theinternet for exchanging patient records among affiliated or unaffiliatedhealth care organizations. as a result, when patients arrive at a healthcare organization for the first time (perhaps after a referral or changinghealth plans) or visit the emergency room of a hospital they have notvisited before, their medical records are either inaccessible or reduced to aphotocopied or faxed subset of the paper record in another institution.this is often true of communications between departments even withinthe same institution because only a small minority of health care institutions have at least some form of enterprisewide clinical informationsystem.greater use of the internet to facilitate exchanges of clinical information could improve the quality of care by making better and more complete information available to care providers. a recent report from theinstitute of medicine identified medical errors as the source of muchunnecessary morbidity and mortality (iom, 1999). by integrating theclinical transactions of all parties to health care delivery (hospitals, pharmacies, clinicians, insurance) across the internet, there is a significantopportunity to detect and prevent such errors.17 use of the internet fortransferring medical records would enable care providers to better treatpatients who become ill or are injured while traveling or who have notpreviously been under their care.despite the lack of effort in this arena to date, the internet appears toprovide a viable medium for use by hospitals to share patient healthrecords for the purpose of improving care. this capability was exploredthrough the world wide web electronic medical record system (w3emrs),developed by researchers at bostonõs childrenõs hospital, beth israelhospital, massachusetts general hospital, and the massachusetts institute of technology. the original purpose of the system was to allow thesharing of clinical information across the internet among emergency roomclinicians at the three participating hospitals. the system was subsequently deployed for the sharing of birth data and perinatal maternaldata among brigham & womenõs hospital, beth israel deaconess medical center, and childrenõs hospital for the management of newborninfants with jaundice at childrenõs hospital or one of its affiliated practices. it was also adapted for use within the seven affiliated hospitals ofthe bostonarea caregroup; the system is accessible to all authorizedclinicians and saves an estimated $1 million annually by reducing thetime spent searching for records, time needed to admit a patient, numberof admitted patients, length of hospital stays, and time spent in training.the impact on patient retention and member attraction is projected toincrease revenues by $3 million to $4 million per year (see box 2.3 fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82networking health: prescriptions for the internetadditional information about the w3emrs system and its implementation within caregroup).the bandwidth needs for exchanges of clinical information vary withthe size of the records to be exchanged, the number of records that aretransmitted in a given period of time, and the timeliness with whichrecords must be accessed. the size of a medical record transmitted electronically between sites can vary considerably, from as little as 1 kb to asmuch as several gigabytes if the record contains several medical images.in general, older and sicker patients have the largest records. paper charts3 to 4 inches thick and divided into several volumes are not unusual inhospitals, like those in caregroup, that serve large numbers of suchpatients. the number of records transmitted also varies considerably.box 2.3linking medical records via the webthe world wide web electronic medical record system (w3emrs), developed by several bostonarea health care organizations, demonstrates the capabilities of the internet in supporting exchanges of medical records. the systemenables participating organizations to request clinical information about patientsunder their care from other local hospitals that may have provided treatment in thepast.the main challenges in developing the system were (1) determining how bestto integrate information from disparate, heterogeneous data sources at the varioushospitals using different database management systems, data models, and vocabularies, (2) linking records from patients who receive care from a variety of facilities,often under slightly different names, (3) overcoming organizational obstacles tothe sharing of clinical data, and (4) developing ways of working with longstandinglegacy systems. instead of developing a centralized data depository containingrecords from all participating hospitals, the system designers instead chose to pullinformation from each of the hospitalsõ clinical information systems. physiciansuse a web browser to query the databases of participating hospitals so as toretrieve information about patients under their care. responses from the individual hospitals are consolidated into a unified presentation that contains webpages with information on demographics, problems, medications, allergies, notes,and visits. a key to the technical success of the w3emrs architecture was theagreement by all participants on how to represent a core set of data (dubbed theòcommon medical recordó) in the same form within the hl7 data model.another major challenge in designing the system was addressing threats tosecurity and confidentiality. system developers had difficulty identifying realisticthreats to the system but realized that as long as some form of encryption wasused across the communications links, it would be easier and cheaper for anattacker to break into the source sites to obtain patient information than to interceptnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet83and decrypt patient information as it traveled across the internet. as a result, theydecided that most of the security effort should be devoted to protecting the sourcecomputers from which the clinical data were extracted and the socalled agglutinatorñwhich compiles records from multiple sites into a single fileñrather than thecommunications links themselves.system designers settled on a combination of organizational policies and technical solutions to protect data, establishing common confidentiality agreementsamong participating institutions and deploying technologies for authenticating system users, patients, and the source site.1 the technical solutions recommendedincluded secure (encrypted) communications and tokenbased authentication (inwhich the identity of users is validated by something they know, such as a password, and something they have, such as a physical device similar to a bank card).for example, in the careweb system, which is based on w3emrs, authenticationof the requestorõs identity is verified by a user name, a personal identificationnumber, and a code number generated by a hardware device that generates newcodes every 60 seconds (the securid system from security dynamics, cambridge,massachusetts). data transmissions across the internet are encrypted, and digitalsignatures are used to confirm the veracity of the request. audit trails are availableat all participating institutions so that all accesses to health records can be investigated. to address privacy concerns, patients at each hospital are allowed torequest that their health records not be shared with other institutions.1for information on the confidentiality agreements, see rind et al. (1997).sources: kohane et al. (1996); isaac s. kohane, director, informatics program,boston childrenõs hospital, presentation to the committee, september 13, 1998; andjohn halamka, òthe value of implementing a secure webbased medical recordsretrieval system,ó unpublished paper provided to the committee on december 17, 1999.the average person will see a doctor as an outpatient three to four times ayear, with medicare patients making five to six visits a year and healthyadults making approximately two visits per year. children visit doctorsat the same rates as the elderly, but their records are smaller. overall, 116hospitalizations occur per year per 1,000 people, with 332 hospitalizationsper year per 1,000 people for those 65 and older. overall, 380 emergencyroom visits occur per year per 1,000 people. the timeliness requireddepends on whether access is needed in an emergency room situation orwhether the record is to be transmitted to a specialist for an appointmentat a later date.of greater concern is security. at issue are the confidentiality ofclinical transactionsñwhich tend to contain personal information andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84networking health: prescriptions for the internetidentitiesñand the integrity of the data transmitted. confidentiality ofthe transmitted record can be addressed with encryption, as long as it isaccompanied by strong methods for authenticating both the sender andreceiver of the record. in preinternet (i.e., telephone or fax) communications, authentication is handled by the participants, who have somenotions of how to verify that they have reached the correct party. thesealready shaky notions are ineffective in internet communications. internetprotocols such as the hypertext transfer protocol (http), which handleswebbased transactions, do have provisions for encrypting communications and validating usersõ identities, but effective mechanisms have yetto be deployed for distributing the tokens, certificates, or other technologies needed for authentication to all potential users of a system. feworganizations have adopted basic security procedures for protecting dataintegrity and data stored on computers that are accessible over theinternet.system reliability is also an issue in clinical transactions. if healthcare organizations are to rely on internetbased systems for access topatient records, then they must be assured that the systems will functionproperly 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. system outages of limited duration may be tolerable if records are being transmitted to a specialist oranother institution in advance of a scheduled appointment, but they cannot be tolerated if access is needed on demand, such as for emergencyroom treatments.a number of other challenges stand in the way of internet use forclinical transactions. perhaps the most daunting is the lack of agreementon data interchange standards and standardized vocabularies, or nomenclature, to describe clinical entities. considerable support exists for thehealth level seven (hl7) standards, which were developed for clinicaltransactions (box 2.4),18 and the hl7 organization continues to improvethe completeness of its hl7 data model to encompass more possible medical transactions (e.g., the current standard does not cover all drugs, xraystudies, or nursing interventions or problems). nevertheless, proprietaryconcerns and institutional inertia have led many vendors of clinical information systems and health care organizations to develop commercial applications and homegrown systems that are not compliant with the hl7standard or idiosyncratically compliant with it. furthermore, health careorganizations have not been able to agree on a standardized vocabularyto use in describing different sets of clinical entitiesñdespite significantsupport by the national library of medicine for multiple standardizationefforts, including the construction and maintenance of a metathesaurus aspart of the unified medical language system (umls).there are many reasons why neither the data models, such as hl7,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet85box 2.4health level sevenhealth level seven (hl7) is one of several organizations accredited by theamerican national standards institute that is developing standards for representing and communicating data related to health care. hl7 has focused on the clinicaland administrative data generated within and across health care institutions. thedata model and transactions standardized by hl7 have been widely adoptedthroughout the health care information industry for interchange between applications in a heterogeneous vendor environment. however, the data models used bymost vendors remain proprietary and nonstandard. the hl7 data model (the mostrecent version, 2.3.1)1 has been implemented in several ways: as a messagebased format using an hl7defined syntax, as a relational data model, and as anobjectoriented data model. most recently, the data model has been implementedwithin the framework of the extensible markup language (xml) (world wide webconsortium, 1998). because of the widespread adoption of xml as an interchangeformat for all kinds of web commerce, this implementation is likely to have broadadoption.1see <http://www.hl7.org/library/standardsnon1.htm#hl7> version 2.3.1.nor the vocabularies that are among the constituents of the umls becamepopular, but these are beyond the scope of this report. however, it isclear that one important reason is that there have been no sufficientlymotivating arguments for data sharing across or even within institutions.unlike billing transactions or pharmaceutical transactions, clinical transactions have only an indirect effect, at best, on the profitability of healthcare organizations. the health care industry is much less consolidatedthan the pharmaceutical industry, which has been more successful indeploying an interoperability standard. an additional inhibitor is thenature of clinical transactions, which tend to be more complex and variedthan commercial transactions. the inertia with which clinical information systems have been deployed and accepted into practice has encouraged the development of consumerdriven health information systems inwhich third parties store and provide access to clinical data. nonetheless,the functionality of these consumer information systems will be no betterthan that of their counterparts in health care institutions without the widespread adoption of standards for health data exchanges and the development of a robust means for authenticating users.use of the extensible markup language (xml) for internetbasednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86networking health: prescriptions for the internettransactions may provide additional interoperability but could encountersimilar barriers. xml is the universal format for structured documentsand data on the web. like html, xml makes use of tags (words bracketed by ò<ò and ò>ó) and attributes (of the form name=òvalueó), butwhereas html specifies what each tag and attribute means (and oftenhow the text between them will look in a browser), xml uses the tagsonly to delimit pieces of data, leaving the interpretation of the data to theapplication that reads it. xml documents include an xml documenttype declaration, which contains or points to markup declarations thatprovide a grammar for a class of documents. this grammar is known asa document type definition (dtd). therefore, before xml documentsadhering to the hl7 data model can be created, a commonly acceptedhl7 dtd must be ratified (dolin et al., 1998). without agreement on thiscommon hl7 dtd, the exchange of clinical data across the internetamong health care systems will be significantly more cumbersome andwill probably be further delayed.new federal mandates are likely to encourage greater standardization that could facilitate use of the internet for exchanges of clinical information. the health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa,p.l. 104191) requires the secretary of health and human services toadopt standards for the electronic transmission of health informationassociated with the following transactions: health claims or equivalentencounter information, health claims attachments, enrollment and disenrollment in a health plan, eligibility for a health plan, health care payment and remittance advice, health plan premium payments, first reportof injury, health claim status, and referral certification and authorization.the challenge will be to ensure timely compliance with hipaa standardsby the multitude of legacy applicationsña task that will require at least asmuch effort as the y2k remediation.furthermore, the emergence of internet industries to host several ofthe aforementioned clinical transactions and their data repositories mayprovide the means for the widespread implementation of automatedhealth transactions. however, hosting such applications has its own dangers. by slicing the space of clinical transactions into sharply demarcatedsegments (e.g. clinician documentation, laboratory reporting, medicationordering), there is a risk that important data relevant to patient care willbecome more dispersed and functionally unintegrated. only by ensuringclose adherence to hipaa with a high degree of interoperability (i.e.,adherence to data storage and communication standards) can this risk beabated.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet87technical requirements for clinical carethe technical capabilities required by clinical applications of theinternet are even more demanding than those required by consumerhealth applications because a number of factors converge. the need toprotect the confidentiality of patient information is combined with theneed for high bandwidth and low latency to support remote consultations; high availability is also required to ensure that patient records canbe accessed when needed and that systems remain operational for theduration of a remote consultation. although not all clinical applicationsof the internet simultaneously stress each of these dimensions, the set offoreseeable clinical applications, taken as a whole, does.bandwidth ++++bandwidth requirements for clinical applications vary considerably,but many possible applications could demand high bandwidth. remoteconsultations, for example, would require sufficient bandwidth for realtime video at rates approaching 1 mbps for some types of diagnosticprocedures. the transmission of large medical images could also requirehigh bandwidth in some instances, to support the transfer of large numbers of images between an imaging center and a remote interpretationcenter or rapid turnaround of diagnoses from a remote specialist. evenremote access to electronic medical records could demand relatively highbandwidth to the extent that such records include images or video. inmany cases, records (or images) could be downloaded in advance of theneed to view them, although this technique would not be as effective inemergency situations.latency +++latencies across the internet are adequate for many clinical applications, such as results reporting and downloading of most medical records(if these records are already stored remotely online), but applications likeremote consultation would demand lower latencies to facilitate morenatural interactions between participants. in virtual reality applications,low latencies are needed to create realistic spaces and interactions that arenot distracting to users or participants.availability ++++because of safety and timeliness considerations in patient care, availability of the network is vital. clinicians awaiting a lab result, radiologinetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88networking health: prescriptions for the internetcal examination, or connection to a patientõs home cannot tolerate anyunavailability of the network or the clinical applications running on it.likewise, remote consultations will not be viable if network availabilitycannot be assured and connections are broken frequently. neither careproviders nor patients will tolerate delays, downtime, or lost connectionsin such applications.security ++++because patient information is so sensitive and its safety is paramount,the security of the network is vital for clinical applications. withoutassurances that the confidentiality and integrity of patient data will beprotected and that critical services will be available when needed, boththe government and the public will resist the sharing of data across institutions. security improvements will entail both technical measures (manyof which would be deployed within specific applications) and the development of robust confidentiality policies to govern the disclosure of personal health information. considerable technology is available for improving the security of many clinical transactions between established partners,but it is not widely deployed in health organizations (cstb, 1997). moreadvanced security technologies, as outlined in chapter 3, could improveprotection, especially for data exchanges between unaffiliated health organizations and between consumers and care providers.ubiquity ++ubiquitous access will be important for many clinical applications iffor no other reason than the dispersion of health care providers, many ofwhom continue to work in private practice or remote clinics. for remoteconsultations, distributed collaboration, and home care, the ubiquity ofnetwork services is essential. highbandwidth (broadband) access couldalso be important for applications requiring the transmission of largeimages or realtime video.financial and administrative transactionsthe internet is being evaluated as a medium for streamlining financial and administrative transactions in the u.s. health care system. healthcare in the united states is financed largely by a network of socalledthirdparty payersñentities that insure and pay for health services butare not directly engaged in providing care. these entities range fromgovernment programs such as medicare and medicaid, which pay for thecare of the elderly and impoverished, to privatesector organizations,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet89including traditional indemnity insurers, selfinsured companies, andmanaged care organizations. the internet could be used by providers tosubmit claims for payment or by individuals to enroll, disenroll, andchange their coverage. payers could quickly confirm an individualõseligibility for coverage and convey any changes to the health plans, which,in turn, could quickly relay the information to the personõs designatedproviders. by accelerating these transactions, the internet could reducemisunderstandings and disputes among parties, hasten payersõ premiumpayments to plans and plansõ payments to providers, and reduce administrative costs, which by some estimates constitute 30 percent of all healthcare expenditures in the united states. by one estimate, paper claims costbetween $2 and $18 each to process, whereas electronic claims have costsmeasured in cents (mccormack, 2000)health care organizations have filed claims electronically for sometime. approximately 65 percent of the 4.7 billion claims submitted forpayment by care providers and pharmacies in 1999 were submitted inelectronic form. hospitals and pharmacies have gone the farthest downthis path, having submitted 85 percent and 89 percent of their claims,respectively, in electronic format in 1999, compared to just 43 percent forindividual physician practices. much of this progress is due to promptingfrom the health care financing administration (hcfa), which administers the medicare and medicaid programs, and from blue cross/blueshield organizations, each of which was expected to receive more than 80percent of claims electronically in 1999. by contrast, hmos and othercommercial insurers, which together account for 44 percent of all healthclaims, were expected to receive just 18 percent and 45 percent of claims,respectively, in electronic format.19 medicare has required its contractedmanaged care organizations to transmit electronically beneficiary enrollment, disenrollment, and correction data in batch mode to its data center(hcfa, 1999b). these managed care plans also obtain data on the disposition of their transactions and on plan membership and payments electronically.despite the trend to electronic formats, only a few provider organizations use the internet to submit electronic claims or related transactions,and few payers are capable of accepting internetbased transactions. untilrecently, medicare transactions, for example, have been conducted usingtelephone lines to access the data center. hcfa is replacing this systemwith the medicare data communications network, which will be accessed with web browsers. hcfaõs carriers for the conventional medicare program, fiscal intermediaries, and most of the medicare+choice plansare using this network, and by july 1999, the remaining managed careplans were required to have made the transition. no such requirementsapply to communications and data transfer between individual physinetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90networking health: prescriptions for the internetciansõ offices and the hcfa carriers that process their claims. medicareand other payers plan to increase the electronic transmission of data related to the quality of care and satisfaction of beneficiaries. medicare, forexample, foresees that its health plan management system will collectplansõ qualityrelated data from the health plan employer data and information set (hedis) and the consumer assessment of health plans survey(cahps) (hcfa, 1999a).privatesector organizations have also begun to experiment withinternet applications for financial and administrative transactions. manysuch organizations see the internet as a plausible means of achieving thelongheld vision of seamless integration of information across organizations. health organizations can assume that networking capabilities willbe in place so they can concentrate their resources on higherorder functionality. the internet may also make electronic claims submission practical for small group practices that cannot afford the hardware and staffneeded for more conventional electronic data interchange (edi) systems.the regence group of seattle, washington, for example, has developed awebbased interface application called network data express (ndex)for determining beneficiary eligibility and making referrals. the systemfeatures claim status inquiries, provider directories, reference materials(such as the formulary), email, and managed care data and reports. itprocesses about 20,000 transactions per month, doing the work of two tothree fulltime employees who would otherwise give the same information out by phone (see appendix a for additional information onregenceõs system).other efforts have been initiated at the state and regional level topromote health information exchanges. the community health information technology alliance (chita) in seattle, washington, the minnesotahealth data institute, and the affiliated health information networks ofnew england, a project of the massachusetts health data consortium, arethree examples.20 such programs attempt to facilitate information exchangeamong a variety of organizations, including care providers, insurers, pharmacies and pharmaceutical benefits managers, accrediting organizations,and state health organizations. considerable effort has been devoted todefining standards for data exchange and determining the types of datathat must be exchanged for different transactions.security concerns have been a major impediment to greater sharing ofinformation for payment and administration. many such transactionsñespecially paymentñcontain sensitive information related to a particularpatientõs health, so their confidentiality must be maintained. similarlystrong requirements exist for data integrity. according to one information security officer interviewed as part of this project, the responsibilitiesof security officers in health care differ from those of their counterparts innetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet91other industries: the applicable state and federal laws are different, andthe privacy and security concerns are greater. at the same time, thehealth care industry is driven by economics, not privacy, so there is aneed to balance cost effectiveness with security protections.chita and the foundation for health care quality worked with themassachusetts health data consortium and minnesota health data institute on a threestate project focusing on electronic security. the goalswere to determine how electronic security could be implementedaffordably and to develop a business case for a communitywide, secureinfrastructure for electronic business. the group worked with saic todevelop a security and risk management plan for businesstobusinesshealth information networks. the plan identifies seven levels of increasing health care security, numbered 1 through 7. chita is working withseattlearea health care organizations to implement level 6 security practices (hsl 6) within participating regional organizations.hsl 6 supports remote access to a data repository but not directremote access to the internal network of a health organization. it includesspecifications for three networkbased information services that aredeemed essential to financial and administrative transactions: (1) authenticated, secure messaging, (2) authenticated, secure file escrow and transfer, and (3) authenticated, rolebased access at the level of individualusers. the security model has been developed and published (saic,1998), and chita is in the process of identifying an organization that willfunction as a trusted intermediary to oversee a prototype implementation, followed by a wider pilot project in the region. issues to be addressedinclude the identification of a certificate authority, which might be a nonprofit organization, the state or federal government, or a private corporation.hcfa is also a strong proponent of edi but has prohibited the submission of payment information over the internet owing to concerns aboutsecurity and confidentiality. in january 1999, the agency revised its security policies to allow internetbased transmission of information after ithas been received from outside parties (hcfa, 1999a). hcfa is notallowing claims transmission over the internet except by those medicarecontractors participating in an interoperability pilot of the hcfa internetsecurity policy. the pilot, which began in september 1999 and was scheduled to run through december 1999, tested email, batch, realtime, andwebbased transmissions, while utilizing various authenticating andencryption technologies and including digital certificates through cooperating certificate authorities. results of the pilot and accompanying recommendations were anticipated in february 2000. depending on thefindings and the costbenefit analysis associated with the transmission ofclaims, hcfa will decide on whether or not and when to allow internetnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92networking health: prescriptions for the internettransmission on an operational basis.21 acceptance of the internet byhcfa could stimulate its wider use for submitting claims because hcfaprocesses a significant percentage of the nationõs health care payments,and its acceptance could signal that such submissions can be handledsecurely.advances in the use of the internet for financial and administrativetransactions will be accelerated by the hipaa of 1996 and by the 1997balanced budget act (p.l. 10534). the hipaa requires providers, provider organizations, payers, and clearinghouses to adopt uniform transaction standards, code sets, identifiers, and electronic signature standardsfor electronic transmissions of health care claims. in addition, hipaaprescribes security standards for the protection of all electronic healthinformation both within and between health care enterprises, and it gavecongress until august 1999 to pass comprehensive health privacy legislation. in the absence of such legislation, the secretary of health and human services is to promulgate regulations to protect the privacy of personal health information (harman, 1998) (see chapter 5). some healthcare organizations report that they have been slow to implement programs for internetbased submissions of medical claims until the newregulations are in place. they fear that they may need to modify theirsystems after final regulations are promulgated or that congress maypass legislation that supersedes them. the mayo foundation, for example, uses dialup connections and leased t1 lines to submit claims electronically to government and commercial payers but will not implementan internetbased system until security and privacy guidelines have beenadopted by the federal government (mccormack, 2000).a number of obstacles may further delay the widespread use of theinternet for financial and administrative transactions. while many largehealth care organizations are moving toward electronic billing and haveinternet connections, many private practitioners (almost half of all physicians practice independently) lack internet access and practice management systems for electronic billing. furthermore, many practice management systems are not interoperable with the internet, requiring users todownload claims information into a separate internetbased application,a process that adds unnecessary cost and complexity. organizations largeand small that have legacy systems operating for edi and claims processing may also be slow to replace those systems with internetcompatiblesystems, although in the long run they will need to modernize their systems. a lack of standards for electronic claims will continue to impedeefforts at internetbased exchanges, as many practice management systems use different formats for data, and payers often cannot accept data inmultiple formats. continued standards efforts, including those mandatedby hipaa and those under way in other regional collaborations, maynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet93ease this concern, but the decentralized nature of the health care industrypresents a significant impediment.technical requirements for financial andadministrative applicationsbandwidth +the bandwidth requirement for most financial and administrativetransactions is modest. most transactions consist of short, textbasedmessages. in some cases payers may request care providers to transmitlarge diagnostic images in support of claims for payment, but such imagesneed not be delivered rapidly, so even in these cases, bandwidth is not asignificant consideration.latency +latency is also not a significant factor in financial and administrativetransactions. in some cases, such as checking on the terms of a patientõscoverage for certain procedures and eligibility for reimbursement, timelyresponses are desirable. if an organizationõs servers are far too small andthe system response time gets long, there could be problems, but thosewould be problems not with the internet itself but with the individualnodes on the network. for many transactions, such as submission ofclaims for payment, latency is not an issue at all as the payment processtends to be slow. granted, improvements in technology and processescould eventually allow for nearrealtime review of claims and electronicpayment for procedures, but response times and latency would not be adriving consideration in such systems.availability +++the importance of availability in financial and administrative transactions is relatively high, depending on the specific use. the routine usesof payers require no more than a moderate level of availability. systemoutages could be compensated for by waiting to send a payment request.however, the preapproval of immediate care for beneficiariesñfor example, the approval of pharmacy claimsñwould demand greater availabilitysince there is greater need for a rapid response. care providers andpayers are unlikely to use the internet for such transactions if it is notreliable.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94networking health: prescriptions for the internetsecurity ++++security of internet communication of healthrelated data is a sinequa non of the internetõs greater use for financial and administrative transactions. many of these transactions contain sensitive, personal information on the types of health care services that were provided to a particularpatient or the diagnosis of a condition. hence, they are almost as sensitive as clinical records. both care provider organizations and payers alsohave strong incentives to demand that data integrity be maintained, toensure that information is not corrupted during transit or when stored incomputers attached to the network. as with clinical transactions, providing such security entails both technological mechanisms and confidentialitypolicies that govern disclosures of information by health organizations.care providers and payers with established relationships can make use ofexisting technology for securing information during both transmissionand storage, but more advanced technologies for authenticating userswould enable transfers of information among a larger number of payersand providers.ubiquity ++requirements for ubiquity of access would be high if the objective isthat all providers, including individual physician offices, routinely submit claims and quality improvement information, eligibility checks, andother information via the internet. in the short term, claims administratorscould use the internet for communications with institutional providers,reducing the degree of ubiquity required.public healthpublic health workers promote health and the quality of life bypreventing and controlling the spread of disease, injury, and disability.public health officials collect statistics on the occurrence of diseases, disseminate guidelines to health care practitioners and the public, fundresearch on ways to improve public health, and deliver health care tounderserved populations. a number of these activities could be enhancedby an internet that is better attuned to public health needs, that providessufficient security to protect sensitive medical records, that is accessible toall public health workers and the public at large, and that remains operational even in times of natural or manmade disasters. public healthsurveillance, in particular, stands to benefit from internetbased transactions to assist in collecting data about the health of individuals, personal risk factors, and medical treatments, as well as data about potentialnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet95sources of disease and injury in the environment and resources that canbe used to take effective action.in recent years, attention has turned to making certain that publichealth officials at local, state, and regional levels have adequate connectivity and expertise to use the internet for their work. several reportshave reflected on the need for new relationships and better collaborationbetween public health officials and individual health care providers.22the national library of medicine (nlm), in conjunction with severalother public health organizations, has initiated a program, partners ininformation access, designed specifically to help public health officialsgain access to the internet and to relevant health information.23 sinceoctober 1998, 20 awards totaling just under $1 million have been madefor programs in 20 states. the goals of this program are fourfold: (1) toincrease public health professionalsõ awareness of the services of the nlm,the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), and the nationalnetwork of libraries of medicine (nn/lm), (2) to assist public healthprofessionals in getting connected to the internet, (3) to train public healthofficials in the use of information technology and information services,and (4) to increase awareness of public health information needs andresources among nn/lm members. individual projects will attempt toprovide modems and connections to internet service providers for publichealth departments lacking such capabilities; support access to publichealth information and related biomedical topics via local medical libraries; survey the information needs of public health officials; and train public health officials to use the internet and specific information resources,such as pubmed and cdc wonder.these efforts reflect the growing awareness of the linkages betweenpublic health and the care of individuals. recent changes in the ecologyand epidemiology of disease and the organization of health care deliverysystems have led to a convergence of these two components of healthcare. for example, the aids pandemic forced many to realize that highsocioeconomic status did not confer immunity from epidemic infectiousdiseases. second, it has become increasingly clear that the major controllable causes of disease involve the traditional interests of public health:smoking, alcohol and drug abuse; injuries; and nutritional problems,including obesity. finally, the advent of managed care and capitation hasmade payers responsible for protecting the health of populations. thisconvergence of public and private health interests represents a historicalopportunity to bring public health thinking into the daily practice of medicine. it makes public health surveillance a more compelling applicationof the internet. by some estimates, only about 10 percent of all earlydeaths in the united states can be prevented by medical intervention;populationbased approaches could prevent up to 70 percent of them bynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96networking health: prescriptions for the internettargeting underlying risks such as tobacco, drug and alcohol abuse, dietand sedentary lifestyles, and environmental, occupational, and infectiousrisk factors (mcginnis and foege, 1993).public health surveillancethe public health system in the united states is hierarchically organized around community (city, county, or other local jurisdiction), state,and federal efforts. each of these jurisdictions is chartered to collect different sorts of data and share them in different ways. the federal publichealth centers must recognize largescale trends in the occurrence of disease and allocate resources to minimize the damage to the public health.community public health offices must process information about individual patients and local outbreaks in order to recognize and respond tothe needs of the community. for historical reasons, the three levels ofpublic health monitoring and surveillance have developed very differentorganizations and communication mechanisms. however, there are fairlywell defined communication points where the systems interact with oneanother. for example, physicians and medical laboratories must reportthe occurrence of certain conditions to local health departments, depending upon the reporting requirements. certain conditions must also bereported to state public health offices, which in turn file reports with thefederal cdc. although the sets of data reported to cdc are uniformacross the states (and updated regularly), each state and county healthdepartment can require that any condition it deems significant must bereported (rural counties, for example, have different interests from urbanones).an important mechanism for collecting information of great significance to public healthñand one that is ripe for the internetñis automaticreporting by medical laboratories of test results for some communicablediseases, such as tuberculosis. such systems promise both to improvereporting of adverse events and to lower the costs of collecting and maintaining such data. testing laboratories are required to report certain diagnoses to their local health offices so that public health officials may ensurethat adequate treatment is delivered and that spread of disease is contained. currently, most such reporting is done on paper, with laboratoryresults being sent by mail or fax to the public health office.24 officialsfrom the county public health office then follow up with the local physician and/or patient to investigate possible causes of the condition, pathsof contagion, and needed interventions. this reporting system is fraughtwith errors and delays, as reports are transmitted in a range of forms(mail, fax, etc.), following different sets of rules, to different county offices.not surprisingly, reports are often incomplete or are sent to the wrongnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet97county health department because testing laboratories cannot determinein which county the patient resides.the internet offers a way to streamline this system, ensuring thatreports are sent in a timely manner to the correct local public health officeand to the state for analysis. the washington state department of health,for example, has begun to develop its electronic laboratory reportingsystem, to support internetbased submission and notification of cases ofreportable diseases within the state, which total about 100,000 annually.the system uses the internet to allow testing laboratories to report conditions directly to the department of health, which forwards the information to the appropriate local health department. it is intended to hastenthe filing of reports, reduce the burden of reporting for laboratories andhealth agencies, improve the stateõs ability to track disease outbreaks thatcross county lines, and ensure that reports are transmitted to the correctcounty health office. the system takes advantage of the broad reach ofthe internet to establish connectivity among the health departments andprivate testing laboratories. in preliminary tests with the group healthcooperative of puget sound, the system improved the rate of reporting ofhealth conditions at both the state and local levels, especially for smallercounties whose paperbased reports were more prone to be lost or misdirected. the time to file a report with the counties improved moderatelyñto less than one dayñwhile the time to transmit reports to the state improved dramaticallyñfrom a mean of 40 days with a paperbased systemto just a day with the internetbased system.25the internet also offers unprecedented opportunities for planningand resource allocation at the community, state, and federal levels, potentially improving care and reducing costs. especially in a setting of limitedresources, mechanisms for identifying the need for resources and deploying them rapidly to affected populations are of critical importance. automated systems for tracking the outbreak of diseases both acutely (on thescale of hours) and subacutely (on the scale of days to a week) wouldallow for dynamic allocation of resources, such as medicine, nonpharmaceutical medical supplies, donated organs, blood products, andeven medical personnel, based on needs. consider an outbreak of illnesscaused by a pathogenic bacteria contaminating hamburgers sold by achain restaurant. early detection of such an outbreak could lead to rapidnotification of local and state public health officials so they could begin totrack down the source of the infection. at the same time, pharmaceuticalsuppliers could be notified that an extra supply of certain types ofantibiotics or rehydration intravenous fluids would be required in theregion. finally, hospital personnel could be alerted to the fact that thesecases were appearing and could be briefed on the signs and symptoms tomake them more prepared for emergency room visits related to the outnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98networking health: prescriptions for the internetbreak. at the federal level, information about these outbreaks could contribute to decisions on the costeffectiveness of setting up new regulations, their enforcement, or their propagation and dissemination withinthe health enterprise. clearly, application software must be developed toassist decision makers in allocating resources and in identifying andresponding to trends in disease, but the internet would provide the infrastructure necessary to gather the data upon which these decisions will bebased.integrating data sources for improved decision makingby allowing automated queries to disparate databases, the internetcould also help public health officials better integrate the available data toimprove data analysis and health monitoring. currently, a number ofpolitical and bureaucratic boundaries impede the use of the internet forpublic health purposes. most importantly, federal and state public healthagencies are organized in vertically integrated, diseasespecific systems.one rationale for this structure is that vertically integrated data and communications systems best serve the traditional public health functions fora given disease.26 thus, dozens of systems support individual diseases(such as aids) or disease groups (e.g., hospitalacquiredñnosocomialñinfections). the result is massive duplication, and a patientõs clinicalinformation could reside in several different systems that do not interconnect. the internet could be a powerful technical tool (and political motivator) to realign these programs and allow better integration of data formonitoring public health. doing so would require that public healthoffices and their databases be connected to the internet and that mechanisms be put in place for protecting the security and confidentiality ofdata that contains personally identifiable health information.beyond integrating databases within the public health sector, theinternet offers the opportunity for public health officials to collect datafrom private sources that might be important in their surveillance efforts.school attendance records and sales of prescription drugs or nonprescription remedies could signal the outbreak of a disease in its early stages,before symptoms reach the level at which people visit a doctor. indeed,the new york city department of public health arranged to receive suchdata from one local drugstore chain to improve its surveillance activities,recognizing that abnormal sales of antidiarrheal medicines could indicatea wideranging but lowlevel epidemic of food poisoning or problemswith the water supply. being able to access such information quicklythrough the internet could allow health care providers to respond rapidlyto disease clusters and reduce the exposure of the population to disease.much of this information is available today in electronic format, and withnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet99proper protections for proprietary and confidential information, it couldbe made available to public health officials via the internet.responding to bioterrorist attackshow to detect and respond to a bioterrorist attack (e.g., an intentionalrelease of poisonous gases or tainting of the public water supply) hasbecome a growing concern for the public health community. the use ofbiological weapons by terroristsñeven an individual terrorist actingaloneñcould inflict lifethreatening illnesses on a large scale and, unlikeexplosions or chemical releases, could easily escape immediate notice.many biological agents would not produce symptoms in their victims fordays, weeks, or longer, and initial reports of illnesses might not appearunusual, delaying recognition of a widespread problem.in the case of bioterrorist attack, each of the phases of the publichealth process would depend on a successful infrastructure: recognizinga trend, identifying the cause of the trend, formulating a strategy forresponding to it, allocating resources for the response, deploying theresponse, and monitoring its success. initial clinical reports, which mightcome from doctorsõ offices and emergency rooms over a large area, wouldneed to be aggregated at a high enough level for a geographical pattern toemerge and a problem to be detected. local public health officials in theaffected areas would need to confer with one another to plan a coherentresponse to the attack and allocate resources to address immediate medical needs. data would need to be provided to public health teams chargedwith identifying the pathogen and formulating and implementing aresponse. the ability to keep information from the public in order toavoid panic could also be important, depending on the situation.the cdc found in a 1998 study that most local health departmentslacked the capabilities to adequately detect and respond to a report ofbioterrorism. it found that most such departments lack basic informationand communications systems and cannot communicate reliably withcdc, state health departments, or emergency response agencies in a crisis. half lacked internet access, 20 percent lacked suitable computer capacity, and 70 percent lacked training in the use of electronic information technologies for conventional health purposes (cdc, 1998).to remedy this problem, cdc is developing a national health alertnetwork that will facilitate the collection of information from testing laboratories, the sharing of information among public health officials, andconsultations among them regarding needed responses.27 a total of$28 million was allocated to this task in fy99.28 the network will usedesktop personal computers and laptops connected to the internet withsufficient bandwidth to handle the transfer of laboratory reports, interacnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100networking health: prescriptions for the internettive collaboration among public health officials, and multimedia distancetraining. it will make use of public key encryption for secure communications and authentication. because of its critical nature and the need for itscontinuous availability, the network will be designed with sufficientredundancy to provide backup operations in case of a link failure anddisaster recovery plans to allow rapid restoration of service in case ofother component failures.29 videoconferencing capabilities are seen asimportant, for they would allow public health officials to communicatemore effectively during a crisis than they could with either text or audioalone. mechanisms may be needed to accommodate (possibly by diversion) high volumes of traffic in an emergency.technical requirements for public health applicationsuse of the internet for public health surveillance would require technical advances in a number of areas. of primary interest are ubiquity andsecurity, but availability is also of concern. other technical parameters,such as bandwidth and latency, are less important in most public healthapplications, although the desire for videoconferencing in widespreademergencies would increase the need for bandwidth and for low latenciesto support realtime, interactive video. solutions to these technical problems could greatly expand the use of the internet in support of publichealth.bandwidth +in general, the information transmitted for the purposes of publichealth requires relatively low bandwidth. public health data rarelyinvolve images or other large data objects, although videoconferencingamong public health officials would require higher bandwidth from atleast some computers and locations. of course, there is also the potentialfor many data objects to be transmitted through the network, raising thebandwidth requirement by virtue of aggregated traffic levels rather thanlarge individual files.latency +few of the applications of the internet in public health are sensitive tosmall delays (i.e., of seconds to minutes) in the transmission of data, sothat latency is less important.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet101availability +++for public health, the availability of the network is of moderateimportance. although short downtimes can normally be tolerated, theminutetominute monitoring of outbreaks of acute disease (especially inthe case of bioterrorism) would not tolerate extended periods of networkfailure. if the internet were to be used for detecting bioterrorist attacks, itwould have to be reliable and resistant to hostile attacks (which couldaccompany a bioterrorist attack). because data collection and aggregation take place continuously, loss of network might lead to loss of dataand failure to respond in a timely fashion.security +++the security of data on the internet is of paramount importance topublic health applications. data reported by testing laboratories containidentifying information that is used by public health officials to map diseases and conduct interviews with affected patients. the public healthsystem depends on the publicõs trust that sensitive health data are beingused for the benefit of the public only. such data must be protected bothin transit and while stored in computers in public health offices. sharingpublic health information at the community, state, and federal levelsrequires the development of advanced technologies for intelligently stripping data of identifiers so that personal identities cannot be reconstructedfrom the data. although certain local public health functions (treatmentand prevention of tuberculosis, for example) require knowledge of thepatient and his or her home situation, it becomes less necessary to haveidentifying information at the state and federal levels, where generaltrends are of interest. even with these technologies, it is critical to havetechnologies for authenticating data and users. also important is theability to protect sensitive institutional data and sensitive informationrelating to bioterrorist attacks. such protection would require policies todetermine who may access which data, as well as technologies to protectthe confidentiality of the information and its integrity.ubiquity ++the success of the public health system requires that reporting andsurveillance networks have widespread connectivity that includes local(e.g., community) health departments, testing laboratories, and the provider organizations that order the tests. to serve the entire nation in acosteffective, standardized way, it is critical that the public health information infrastructure extend to every community, state, and federal publicnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102networking health: prescriptions for the internethealth agency. information gaps would be a great burden on the nation,since they would require creation of a secondary, mostly redundantmechanism for data collection and dissemination. as in many other areasof information technology, a few exceptions threaten to make the entireenterprise too expensive. at the same time, the benefits of a ubiquitousnetwork to community, state, and federal agencies would be substantialand would probably improve public health greatly. public health organizations often run on tight budgets, so the cost of access to networkingtechnologies must be reasonable. in any event, fewer distinct entitieswould probably need to be connected for public health applications thanfor consumer health, clinical care, or financial and administrativeapplications.professional educationdespite advances in technology and the internet, the education ofhealth professionals is practiced much the way it has been for decades.students of medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and allied health disciplines setout on a course of graduate and postgraduate education, with much ofthis training occurring in classrooms or lecture halls. the emergence ofthe internet and internetbased technologies has the potential to transform health professional education at all levels. educational systems thatwere once teachercentered and geographically limited can now becomelearnercentered and unconstrained by geography. if the internet is tosupport this transformation, the demands on it will be substantial.graduate educationgraduate education is provided by 124 accredited fouryear medicalschools in the united states in two phases: basic science education andclinical education. basic science courses, such as anatomy, physiology,and pharmacology, are taught in a traditional lecture format supplemented by reading and handson laboratory sessions. significant challenges exist in providing basic science education, including the largeamount of information that needs to be transmitted, the fast pace ofchange in the information base, and a lack of tools that would allowstudents to index what they learn and to retrieve it later in their training.in contrast, clinical education uses different methods. knowledge aboutthe diagnosis, treatment, and care of patients is transmitted mostly usingan apprenticeship model, whereby the student learns from taking care ofpatients under the guidance of more senior clinicians.significant efforts have been made over the last decade to make basicscience education less didactic and more problemoriented. these effortsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet103have led to new teaching methods and materials, some of which usecomputers and the internet, and new courseware. the advent of onlinetextbooks, journals, and interactive courseware shared across institutionscould accelerate this trend so that students spend less time reading booksand attending lectures and more time researching topics online. anothertrend in basic science education is the use of sophisticated simulations todemonstrate anatomical or physiologic concepts. such simulations arethreedimensional, color representations that can be rotated or otherwisemanipulated. the bandwidth requirement for these applications is high,straining local networks, especially local access connections to studentsõhomes. there are other significant barriers to the routine use of computers and the internet in basic science education. not all students havecomputers, and few campuses have network connections that allow themto gain access to the internet from classrooms, libraries, or other campusfacilities. networking bandwidth and servers within the institution cannot always handle the dozens of students trying to access the sameresources at the same time.the internet can also reshape clinical education to overcome somelimitations of the apprenticeship model. first, supervising clinicians maynot themselves be uptodate on certain issues and thus are not always thebest source of information on these issues. second, the location of clinicaleducation can limit the studentõs exposure to certain types of patients anddiseases. for instance, certain infectious disease such as tuberculosis andaids are seen more frequently in urban hospitals. students who do theirclinical education in a rural setting might not be properly equipped todeal with such patients if they later practice in an urban setting. structural changes in the health care industry may also serve to limit the diversity of health problems students gain exposure to during their clinicaleducation. the rise of hmos and specialty clinics makes it far harder foran intern to see a reasonable variety of patients and diseases just by working in a hospital. one effect of the rise of hmos has been to shift the locusof care away from hospitals and toward local clinics and outpatient facilities. as a result, many of the patients interns see in a hospital setting havealready been diagnosed in one of these other facilities, which will tend tolimit the internsõ experience.computerbased tools and the internet can complement apprenticeshipbased clinical education. perhaps the best examples of such tools arethose that allow students and clinicians to search and retrieve the latestmedical literature over the internet and use the evidence retrieved toguide clinical decisions. the process of incorporating knowledge fromthe medical literature into patient care decisions is referred to as evidencebased practice. today, students can use the internet to search medline,the bibliographic database containing millions of citations to the bionetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104networking health: prescriptions for the internetmedical literature, to read abstracts of journal articles, andñin somecasesñto download electronic versions of the original journal article.similarly, new internetbased systems are emerging that allow search andretrieval of textbooks, drug information, medical news, and patient education material. the impact of this trend on local networks and theinternet could be substantial. assuming that some 70,000 medical students, 100,000 medical residents, and 150,000 students in allied healthsciences (e.g., nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, public health) in the unitedstates will regularly be accessing textbooks, journals, and other educational material from centralized repositories on the internet, traffic couldincrease substantially not only on the internet but on the lans of medicaleducation institutions.30 although the item bandwidth required to transmit a single data element might be low (e.g., 100 kb for an html journalarticle with graphics), the total bandwidth requirements could be muchlarger owing to the large number of users and the high frequency ofusage. this may call for a better understanding of network managementand of the tradeoffs between increased network capacity and the localcaching of data or its replication on other sites to reduce bandwidth needs.the trend to evidencebased practice will probably continue. clinicalstudents will increasingly be expected to support their patient care planswith evidence from the medical literature. to do this, they will becomeeven heavier users of online literature retrieval systems such as medlineand electronic journals. although bandwidth will become an even largernetwork issue because more users than ever will be using these resourcesmore frequently, the bandwidth needs will not generally be as great as thebandwidth needs to support realtime video streams for other applications.another trend in clinical education will be to communitybased education. students who trained mainly in academic hospitals will spendmore time training in community hospitals and rural clinics. this trendcould be accelerated by internet links between remote areas and academicmedical centers. using such links, students can discuss cases with preceptors (using audio and videoconferencing), share clinical experienceswith fellow students, and download educational material from universityand other web sites. internet access in all small community and ruralhealth settings would be important for the success of such communication.the internet could also allow clinical students to take greater advantage of simulations to learn about diseases and situations they would nototherwise encounter during their training years. these simulations couldtake the form of interactive, multimedia modules retrieved over theinternet at the time of need. modules could include highresolutiongraphics and images, streaming audio and video, and text. similar multimedia content would be required for simulations that test student knowledge for purposes such as allowing advancement through the schoolnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet105table 2.5 effect of latency on interactive simulationsroundtriplatency (msec)effect25user cannot detect a problem.50user detects a problem but cannot identify it as latency.100user recognizes a latency problem and can compensate for it.200user recognizes a latency problem but cannot compensate for it.source: colonel richard satava, yale university, presentation to the committee onmarch1, 1999, washington, d.c.curriculum and granting a license to practice. such simulations willrequire that the internet and local networks have adequate bandwidthand, for interactive simulations, low latency. already researchers areworking on systems to allow the simulation of surgical techniques. thesesimulations combine threedimensional imagery with haptic feedback thatrecreates the touch and feel of live surgery. such systems requireextremely low latency, on the order of a few hundred milliseconds perroundtrip, to prevent users from perceiving an unnatural lag betweenthe time they take an action and sense a response (table 2.5). they alsorequire the elimination of mismatches between different data sources:visual, audio, and haptic information need to be properly synchronizedfor a user to properly experience a virtual surgical system.continuing educationonce clinicians are in practice, they are essentially on their own tokeep their knowledge and skills uptodate. they do so informally byreading journals and textbooks, by interacting with consultants, and bytalking with peers. a formal process, designed to maintain and enhanceclinician knowledge and skills, also exists and is referred to as continuingeducation (ce). ce credits are not a national requirement but are requiredby some states and subspecialty boards for licensure and board certification. for instance, 28 states require physicians to meet minimum cerequirements for licensure, and 9 specialties require it for board certification (ama, 1996). the ce requirements vary, but they usually call forcompleting 150 hours of courses over a threeyear period. three of theeleven states with the largest concentration of physicians have no cerequirements (new york, new jersey, and illinois).traditional ce consists of a timebased system of credits that areawarded for attending conferences, workshops, or lectures. typical cenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106networking health: prescriptions for the internetcourses are teacherinitiated, use passive educational models such as lecture, and are often sponsored by the health care industry. systematicreviews of ce interventions have shown that traditional ceñshortcourses, conferences, and seminarsñare largely ineffective in improvingknowledge or health care outcomes (davis et al., 1995). two newerapproaches, academic detailing (targeted visits by physician educatorssuch as pharmacists) and computerized reminders, have, on the otherhand, been found to have a positive effect on knowledge and outcomes.the general success of interventions such as computerized reminders suggests that knowledge delivered in the context of daily patient care and forthe purpose of assisting in problem solving is where ce should focus inthe future. if this suggestion is acted on, the internet and systems thatintegrate patient data with general medical knowledge will probably playa central role in transforming postgraduate education.the main trend in postgraduate education will be continuous (asopposed to continuing) education. instead of being concentrated in aweekõs worth of offsite conferences, education will be provided usingmultiple modalities available at different times during daily practice.although traditional ce classrooms and conferences will still exist, virtualconferences will become more common. using the internet, clinicianswill be able to choose from libraries of video and audio lectures, interactive courseware, and live discussions among colleagues from aroundthe world. for the educational tools that are not live, clinicians will havegreat flexibility where and when they use them. ce credits, once awardedfor sitting in lectures, will be awarded based on time spent and information learned using these online resources. to make virtual conferences areality for all practicing clinicians, the clinicians will need highspeedinternet access from their health care sites and from their homes.in addition to learning in virtual conferences, clinicians will do muchof their learning of new diagnostic and therapeutic measures in the context of daily patient care. this new learning modality will be fueled bytwo converging trends: (1) the emergence of patient records in electronicform and (2) the availability of medical literature over networks. in thisnew modality, behind every abnormal test result, unfamiliar diagnosis, ornew drug in the electronic medical record will be a link to the best available knowledge on that topic. instead of having to initiate a search forinformation when a question arises, the answer will be anticipated and alink to the answer created within the patient record. as they use this uptodate knowledge at the point of need, clinicians will also be able tofulfill ce requirements, because the time they spend using the resourcesand the effect the knowledge has on the patient care process will be loggedand reported automatically.31 of course, such capabilities also raise issuesof privacy. will care providers be able to peruse outside informationnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet107sources and pursue learning opportunities without being monitored? willthe use of such resources be viewed positively (e.g., the provider is tryingto expand his or her knowledge) or negatively (e.g., the provider does notunderstand some new procedure or diagnostic method)? such issues willneed to be addressed in order to ensure acceptance of these technologies(see chapter 3 for a discussion of technologies to protect online anonymity). in this vision of integrated patient data and knowledge sources,computer networks will play a vital role. because of the timecriticalnature of the knowledge delivery during the patient care process, reliability of the network and information servers will be vital. because queriesposted to knowledge sources will be based on patient characteristics,security of the network will also be important.technical requirements for health professional educationbandwidth +++the bandwidth requirements for health professional education aremoderately high. whether large numbers of people frequently use lowbandwidth applications, such as literature searching, or infrequently usehighbandwidth applications, such as teleconferencing or simulations,bandwidth will be important and sometimes a limiting factor. the development of virtual classrooms and interactive surgical simulations coulddrive bandwidth requirements even higher.latency +++in general, applications to support health professional education donot require instantaneous delivery, and so the latency requirements of theinternet are not great. however, interactive simulations (such as those forteaching surgical techniques) and conferences would suffer from longlatencies.availability ++in general, the availability of the network for health professional education is of moderate importance. many educational activities are not astimecritical as patient care activities and can tolerate lowlevel data lossesor occasional unavailability. however, as the internet becomes more andmore of a tool for education, as students and instructors come to rely on itmore as a communication medium, and as education becomes more integrated with patient care activities, the need for availability will increase.as computergenerated reminders and links to external resources becomenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108networking health: prescriptions for the internetmore closely integrated into medical records, availability will becomemore important.security +for the most part, health professional education is based on publicdomain information, so the security requirements for the network are notgreat. however, with the interplay between patient data and medicalknowledge required to support new modes of education, security willbecome critical. tools for protecting anonymity may also become important to the extent that clinicians want to be able to consult online resourcesanonymously.ubiquity +++for health professional education, the ubiquity of the network is ofgreat importance. improvements in clinician knowledge and clinical outcomes will partially depend on the extensive deployment of new learningtechniques and tools. without access to the internet from potential sitesof care delivery and from their homes, clinicians practicing in poor orremote areas will not be able to benefit from these new capabilities. as alarger number of medical students do internships in remote locations, theneed for access will also increase.biomedical researchbiomedical research attempts to understand the mechanisms underlying human health and disease. it ranges from basic investigations of themolecular details of biological systems to the study of clinical implications of new scientific findings. in basic biology, the work tends to focuson (1) the biological sequencing of dna and proteins, (2) the threedimensional structures of anatomical parts and biochemical molecules,and (3) the determination of metabolic pathways. progress in biomedicalresearch has recently been fueled by an explosion of biological data available for analysis, as evidenced by the growth in the number of dna bases(chemical units) that have been sequenced, from next to none in 1982 to inexcess of 3 billion in 1999. the internet has been widely accepted withinthe biomedical community and greatly facilitates the research enterpriseby helping integrate disparate databases for improved analysis, allowinglinked simulations, and enabling remote control of biomedical researchapparatus. each of these applications poses a range of technologicalchallenges.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet109biomedical databasesthe most important reason for the adoption of internet technologieswithin the biomedical community has been the development of publiclyavailable databases containing biological information. many major biological databases are available at no charge on the web and offer rapidaccess and query capability (table 2.6), and research laboratories arebeginning to release primary data onto their web sites so colleagues canuse them for reanalysis or testing new hypotheses. some databases areextremely popular: each day some 600,000 searches are run from 120,000different addresses against pubmed, a webbased service hosted by thenational center for biotechnology information (ncbi) with abstracts andsome full articles from medline plus additional journals in the life sciences. these figures grew at an annual rate of 50 percent over the last 3years.32such high rates of use create a number of problems for the host sites.the network bandwidth required for any individual database requestmay be small (a few kilobytes of data per query), but the aggregate effectof this traffic on bandwidth going into the database server can be significant, overwhelming capacity. because databases such as medline andgenbank are intended to serve a multitude of users in a timely fashion,they are designed for individuals to use in an episodic manner; theycannot routinely allow companies or institutions to perform many queriesin a short period of time, such as to run automated queries of a programthat is searching systematically through the literature as part of somedatamining application. commercial online databases have similar problems (box 2.5). for this reason, many users prefer to obtain a local copy ofthe databases so that they can subject them to high levels of use withouttable 2.6 examples of online databases of interest to the biomedicalresearch communitydatabasecontentmedlineindex of the entire biomedical serial literature. containsbasic reference information since 1966 and limited fulltextreference information from the national library ofmedicine. contains more than 9,000,000 references from alist of 3,900 periodicals.genbankdatabase of dna sequences.swissprot and pirdatabase of protein sequences.protein data basethreedimensional macromolecular structures.omiminformation about human genetic diseases.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 2.5bandwidth concerns of a commercial content providerovid technologies, inc., is an aggregator of information on science, technology,and medicine. the company provides centralized access to resources such asbibliographic databases and full text journals via individual cdroms, serverslocated on local area networks, and the internet. the entire ovid database contains about 200 gigabytes (gb) of text and images, about 5 to 10 gb of which isupdated each month. on average, each subscriber (there might be 100 to 250individual users) downloads 300 mb of data per month, which translates to 70 kbof data per individual per day. some large academic institutions have 100 concurrent users who download 30 gb of data per month. usage rates triple every year.ovid online is based in utah and is connected to the public internet via threet1 lines. this bandwidth is sufficient for most north american users, but some 13large universities, consortia, and corporations have established dedicated connections to the database (typically via frame relay connectionsñsee chapter 3) withspeeds of 56 to 256 kilobits per second (kbps). these dedicated connections alsoallow pharmaceutical companies to prevent competitors from finding out what information they are seeking. other users have established hybrid connections inwhich certain databases (e.g., medline) are loaded onto a local server andupdated weekly, but other large databases (e.g., those containing full text journals)are accessed via the internet or a dedicated line.because of inadequacies in internet bandwidth to locations overseas, the company has established additional servers in the united kingdom, sweden, japan,hong kong, and australia onto which ovid products have been loaded via cdrom. the company recently contracted with a service provider that will provideguaranteed bandwidth and quality of service for transoceanic downloading ofupdates. updating the entire database demands kilobytes per second of bandwidth, but it is difficult and expensive to update six to eight regions of the worldsimultaneously. ovid would like more bandwidth and improved quality of servicein order to conduct networkbased updates. alternatively, it could redesign itssystem to send just the 5 to 10 gb of changed information. the tradeoff is amatter of cost as much as of technical capability.source: based on a presentation by william detmer, vice president, ovid technologies, inc., to the committee on march 2, 1999, washington, d.c.monopolizing public resources.33 doing so also allows companies to usethe databases without fear that their searches will be watched by competitors. knowing the kinds of information that companies are searching forcan yield clues about the projects they are working on. local replicationwould be unnecessary if trusted security services were available acrossthe internet that could guarantee that queries and results from a web siteremained anonymous and confidential or if the servers could supportnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet111individual use as well as heavy automatic use by computer programsemploying datamining techniques.while increasing the bandwidth into biomedical research databases isone way of alleviating bottlenecks, the ratelimiting factor in some systemsis the computational server, not the communications bandwidth. thencbi, for example, uses a t3 line for connectivity to the internet, whichprovides it with 45 mbps of bandwidth. as of mid1999, ncbi was utilizing only about onethird of that capacity.34 the computational server hasbecome the bottleneck, because ncbi is receiving more requests to compare large data sets with one another and with data sets provided byusers. the volume of requests for large data set comparisons is still small,but ncbi has developed some governors to limit requests from particularsites so that other users can access the system.network limitations also pose difficulties for users of biomedical databases. some algorithms that act upon databases require that every singleelement of the database be compared with every other element. thus, ifthere are 1,000,000 entries in the database, then 1,000,000,000,000 possiblecomparisons must be computed, requiring very fast computation if solutions are to be found in reasonable amounts of time. in many cases,investigators transfer their data sets to remote supercomputing sites (suchas the sites sponsored by the national science foundation in san diegoand illinois) so that the processing will not be slowed by data transferrates over the internet. such remote processing has limitations, especiallyin providing realtime feedback to the researchers.a data source commonly requiring extensive computational analysisis the output of highresolution imaging devices. highresolution imagescontaining millions of elements cannot be transferred rapidly enough toallow researchers to manipulate them in real time. thus, accurate visualization requires that the image be rendered by a local computer withsufficient computational capabilities or by the efficient transfer of information from an image server to a display device on the internet. furthermore, the size of the databases makes transfers slow, and replicating themmakes it hard to keep them current during a computation.this process can also be facilitated by improved networking capabilities. replication of databases would not be necessary if researchers hadhigher bandwidth networks that could transfer a terabyte (tb, or 1012bytes) of data in a few minutes. but doing so requires networking capabilities of tens of gigabits per second (downloading a 1 tb database in 10minutes demands a network capable of 13 gbps). short of such bandwidth, techniques for rapid streaming of data would allow simulations toòpretendó that the data is already local, even though it is being streamedfrom a remote database. this capability is difficult to achieve routinelynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112networking health: prescriptions for the internettoday. although it is possible, it is not generally implemented, and localreplication could be easier.linked simulationssome biomedical investigations require multiple simulations to berun simultaneously. for example, attempts to understand the physiologyof vision might require simulations of both macroscopic and microscopicbehaviors, including the quantum mechanics of photoreceptors, the molecular dynamics of macromolecules that respond to light, the populationdynamics at the cell membrane as it signals the detection of photons, andthe neural network of cells that convey these signals to the brain. thesemodels are all highly interactive and need to share data with one another.the output of one model must be fed into another model. the amount ofdata transferred between simulations may be large or small, but the effectsthey induce on subsequent levels of simulation can be substantial. eachof these simulations may itself require significant computation.technologies that would facilitate distributed simulations includethose for creating uniform techniques for accessing disparate data sources(static, preexisting data, as well as dynamically created data) on theinternet. many important biomedical questions can be answered only byquerying multiple databases, extracting subsets of data, and combiningthem to determine the final answer. a major software innovation thatpromises to make biomedical researchers more effective and efficient willbe the development of intelligent software agents that assist the investigator in understanding what data are available, what they mean, and howto use them to test new hypotheses. as biomedical researchers performexperiments, such technologies could transfer data directly into a database using the internet, making them available to other collaboratingresearchers or computational processes simultaneously. researchers arecreating software to monitor the progress of long, complicated experiments and to alert investigators to unanticipated irregularities in the dataor the progress of data collection. as technologies are developed forrepresenting the set of interests for a biomedical researcher (an òinterestprofileó), intelligent agents could scour the internet for data of interestand relevance to the researcher, based on this profile. these agents couldscan newly published biomedical literature, the publicly accessible websites of other scientists, and other internet information resources, bringing the most relevant sources to the attention of the researcher or abstracting and summarizing them in a manner that is most relevant. some earlyexamples of this technology have long been available through variousjournals and online services that notify users when items that match theirpersonal profiles (based on keywords) are published.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet113the existence of databases on the internet enables automated (orsemiautomated) data mining to extract new principles from data. datamining techniques often use statistical associations between variables topostulate relationships that have not been appreciated previously andthen go to the available databases seeking evidence to support or refutethe association. for such software agents to be effective and reliable, thedatabases need to be accessible continuously. even though each individual software agent might not require very high bandwidth, a networkexperiencing multiple agents operating for millions of individuals willhave a large aggregate requirement for bandwidth.remote control of experimental apparatusthe internet provides a means for remotely controlling some of theexpensive experimental equipment used in biomedical research, includingelectron microscopes, dna sequencing facilities, gene chips for analyzing the expression of nucleic acid or protein sequences, nuclear magneticresonance spectrometers, and xray crystallographic radiation sources.35in such systems, investigators send samples of interest to device operators, who load the samples and prepare the equipment. the investigatorscan then run their experiments remotely, specifying the desired magnification, controlling the focus and field of view, and retrieving images asdesired. such systems have proven especially effective in instances(pathology, for example) where the desired information could not begathered from a set of still images but called for moving the sample andchanging the magnification of the microscope (wolf et al., 1998).the ability to remotely control experimental equipment offers severalbenefits. first, it could help make unique or expensive equipment available to a larger number of researchers. just as networking has opened upthe nationõs supercomputer resources to the broader research community, so it could open up specialized facilities to the biomedical researchcommunity, thereby improving utilization rates. second, remote accesscould reduce travel costs associated with experiments. because sophisticated equipment is scarce, researchers often travel from their home institutions to remote locations to use it, which consumes both time andmoney. moreover, the development of appropriate methods for specimen preparation and analysis is often an iterative process that is difficultto complete in a single visit to the laboratory. remote access to instruments and computation could allow researchers more control over specimen preparation, data collection, and image processing without subjectingthem to the time limits of a visit. longterm studies that require multiplesessions could also be made more practical. third, the networking ofexperimental apparatus could allow research results to be more easilynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114networking health: prescriptions for the internetshared among collaborating researchers or displayed to a classroom ofstudents for educational purposes. most implementations of remotelycontrolled equipment to date send imagery back to the researcher via aweb site. any researcher with a password can view the results, and somesystems are being developed to allow collaborators to hand off control ofthe equipment during the course of an experiment.simple telemicroscopy systems create images that can be transmittedacross the internet with little difficulty. one system developed in germanygenerated fullscreen images measuring 1,024 768 pixels with 8bits ofgray scale, for a total file size of 786 kb. these images could be transferreduncompressed over a 28.8 kbps modem in less than 4 minutes. usingstandard jpeg compression, this same image could be transferred in 20seconds. in experiments with the system, overall response times weredominated by image compression times rather than by delays across theinternet. indeed, the researchers in germany were able to reduce responsetimes to 2.5 to 4 seconds across a local area network; the times did notdiffer significantly when the microscope was operated through a directinternet connection from other sites in europe (wolf et al., 1998).nevertheless, for higher resolution images the internet can introducesignificant lag times, especially when multiple images must be retrieved.for example, the national center for microscopy and imaging research(ncmir) at the university of california at san diego houses a stateoftheart 400 kiloelectronvolt (kev), intermediatehighvoltage electronmicroscope (ivem) that can be used to create threedimensional imagesfrom multiple twodimensional images via a technique known as electrontomography.36 the slices required for threedimensional reconstructionare 1,024 1,024 pixels, with 16 bits of precision per pixel, for an imagesize of 2 mb. a typical data set consists of either 61 or 121 images,depending on experimental requirements (a total of 121 or 242 mb). during peak periods, three to four such tomographic data sets might beacquired in a single day, generating up to about 1 gb of raw data. theintermediate imageprocessing tasks can easily quadruple that storagerequirement and the final tomographic volumes can alone easily exceed400 mb. a new, highresolution camera with an image dimension of2,560 1,960 14bit pixels has boosted data storage requirements by afactor of nearly five.37the collaboratory for microscopic digital anatomy (cmda) is building an infrastructure for allowing researchers to use ncmirõs ivem andother imaging instruments from a remote site for the purposes of investigating their biological specimens and analyzing the threedimensionalstructure using tomography.38 early experiments with remote operationof the ncmir found that the internet was too slow to allow visual guidance of the microscope. as a result, researchers were forced to rely on anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet115digital survey of the specimenñconsisting of a large mosaic of lowmagnification imagesñto guide the process. features on this survey calibrate the spatial coordinates for remote image acquisition. researchersexamine the survey with specialized software and issue requests to themicroscope to image certain areas, create image mosaics, or collect a seriesof tilted images for tomographic reconstruction.improvements in information infrastructure and the anticipated availability of highspeed networks led researchers involved in cmda todevelop a videobased controller for the ivem that can run on any javaenabled web browser. the video controller displays optical and stageparameters for the microscope, the command being executed, and a livevideo image of the specimen being examined to allow more natural, interactive control. researchers can adjust the focus, brightness, stage position, and magnification of the microscope, and they can acquire and viewhighresolution images of the specimen. control can be traded amongmultiple researchers participating in a session, all of whom can view theimages. users can individually set the size of images transmitted to themand the amount of image compression in order to match the speed of theirinternet connections to the frame rate desired. during sessions, videostreams are generated for 1 to 4 hours.in experiments conducted to date, simple commands to the microscope were processed in less than 1 second; automated commands forfocus and exposure setting were performed in approximately 30 seconds.for users with conventional network connections, video streams werecompressed using jpeg algorithms to create grayscale images varying insize from 3 to 12 kb per frame. with these connections, the system performed at a maximum rate of 8 frames per second (96 kb/sec), but average performance was more often in the 3 to 5 frames per second range.higher bandwidth connections can allow the transmission of fullscreendigital imagery to researchers. such images require approximately 36.5mbps of bandwidth.39 in april 1999, researchers were able to use a combination of the vbns and other networks to allow remote operation of themicroscope from osaka, japan. highresolution images were acquiredand transmitted in as little as 45 seconds but currently require 36.5 mbps(before intraframe compression).the visually guided system has led to a dramatic improvement inremote use of the microscope. researchers are now able to scan theirspecimen, find areas of interest, and capture highresolution images withease and great precision. the current network infrastructure is adequatefor lowresolution, lowframerate video, which leads to increased controlof the microscope. at times, frame rates are still too slow or latenciesfluctuate too much (i.e., there is too much jitter) to provide the level ofinteractivity required for operations such as manual focusing from a disnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116networking health: prescriptions for the internettance. higher speed networks and new transport protocols are neededfor highresolution video at fullñand constantñframe rates. ncmir ison the vbns and expects that a growing number of its collaborators willalso join the network or other highspeed networks being developedunder the next generation internet or internet 2 initiatives (see chapter 1).with the higher transmission rates available on these networks, visuallyguided control may become more feasible. use of mpeg compressionmay also allow higher frame rates to be transmitted over more conventional network connections.security, availability, and ubiquity of access are of less concern thanbandwidth in the remote control of experimental apparatus but are stillimportant. security is important for ensuring the integrity of datareturned to the investigator and, depending on the nature of the experiments, for maintaining the confidentiality of the data once collected.reliability is of interest to the extent that researchers want to ensure thatthe network is available at the time they have been assigned for theirexperiment. ubiquity of access is of less concern because experimentalapparatus will be used by a small number of highly specialized researchers,most of whom have internet access through their institutions. however,the system would be better for educational purposes if smaller educational institutions could download images or observe ongoing experiments remotely.publication on the internetbiomedical research depends on first creating a hypothesis about theworld, then designing and running an experiment to test this hypothesis,and finally collecting and analyzing data to determine if the hypothesis issupported or refuted. because hardcopy publication is so expensive, thescientific community has compromised by publishing papers that presentthe primary data in summary visual form and that describe the methodsused to collect the data, as guarantees that the reported results are accurately reported. with the growth of the internet, it now becomes possibleto consider publishing all scientific data (in its raw form or after someprocessing) on the internet for sharing and analysis by other scientists.this forms the basis of the ebiomed proposal advanced by haroldvarmus, former director of the national institutes of health (nih), for thenih to house copies of publications and associated primary data sets forthe life sciences (varmus et al., 1999). the physics community has permitted the submission of primary data sets for many years, and certaintypes of biological data are being released routinely at the time of manuscript publication (for example, dna sequencing data (genbank) andmacromolecular structure data (pdb)). the advent of new experimentalnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet117technologies (e.g., gene expression arrays, or òdna chips,ó which recordthe level of expression of a gene product within a cell at a particularmoment in time) that produce massive amounts of data makes it attractive to consider largescale internet publication of these data sets.these data sets could be even more useful to the scientific communityif they were linked with other data sources to create a grid of relatedbiological information. by having otherwise disconnected data typeslinked together, computer programs could propose scientific hypothesesbased on the data in one set of databases and then test them based on thedata in another set of databases. the ncbi has already created a repository of roughly 10 databases that link biographic information, data ongenetic sequences and structure, and data on human diseases. othertechnologies are being developed for the similar linking of data (e.g., srs,biokleisli, and kegg).40the support of largescale deposition, storage, and retrieval of primary biomedical data on the internet calls mainly for availability andsecurity, with moderate emphasis on bandwidth. it is critical that thedata be reported accurately on networked resources and that the creatorsof the data be identified and authenticated; it is also critical that all data becaptured and available, in order to avoid losses of valuable scientific data.latency and ubiquity are less important, since the retrieval of these data isoften asynchronous with their collection and is done by specializedresearchers.the success of online publishing of biomedical research findings (bothprimary data and the conclusions drawn from them), and the much largeraudience that such publications may draw, could strain the existing modelfor scientific peer review. peer review is essential to ensuring the validityof information published by the scientific community, but too many documents are released for public consumption for them all to be reviewed.methods will be needed to track which documents have been read,reviewed, and revised by authors in response to critiques and which havenot. many social issues remain to be resolved (e.g., control of publicationand dissemination, interaction between peer groups and publishers, andthe very definition of peer groups), but technologies are also needed tosupport the outcome of the social negotiations. for example, methods areneeded for (1) providing an enduring stamp of approval for documentson the network so that those that have been reviewed can be identifiedsecurely, (2) allowing peer groups to be defined and maintained,(3)searching the internet to retrieve documents of interest, and (4) validating the authenticity of online documents by, for example, digital watermarking. in this context, it is important to note that the idea of peers canbe generalized beyond the current idea that they are a group of scientificinvestigators from a particular field. already, other groups have emergednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118networking health: prescriptions for the internetthat may wish to provide a stamp of approval, including diseasespecificactivist groups, consumer groups, political groups, and others. there isno reason technologies cannot be used by all these groups to label anddistinguish documents of interest to their members, using their owncriteria.collaboration among researchersthe internet could also prove to be a useful medium for enhancingcollaboration among biomedical researchers in different locations. theremote control of experimental apparatus is one example of this capability, but others are also possible. for example, envision the followingscenario:biomedical researchers in three distant cities are interested inthe structure and biological function of a new transporter proteinwhose structure has just been reported in a journal as a result ofthe human genome project. they believe this newly discoveredtransporter is expressed in abnormal amounts in a debilitatingdisease that affects many older individuals within the population. the researchers individually have studied various aspectsof the biochemistry associated with this particular disease butthink their work could be advanced considerably if they couldcollaborate with one another. use of the internet and specializednetworkaware molecular modeling software could enable themto carry on their collaborative research from afar. they couldconduct a virtual meeting from their respective offices using theinternet and specialized conferencing and interactive modelingsoftware. each scientist could display and interactively manipulate threedimensional molecular models on his or her local workstation as well as the remote workstations of the other collaborators. by using the workstation mouse, one collaborator could,for example, point out the putative binding site on the proteinwhile another suggests a small molecule that he or she thinksmight be good at inhibiting the function of this protein. together,the scientists function as a group and can accomplish much in ashort time.such scientific collaborations are common and convenient when theytake place within an institution, but when the participants are far apart,schedules must be coordinated and travel arranged to a single location.with enhanced internet services and software, such collaborations couldnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet119be performed at a distance as well. if the scenario described above isextended to a larger group, where one of the participants is an instructorand the others are students, the ability of the students to question theinstructor interactively (e.g., to use the mouse to point to a portion of theprotein in the above example and ask why this portion of the proteindoesnõt contribute to binding) adds an extremely important quality tothe educational experience: the ability to enter into dialog with theinstructor.these kinds of applications would require that the internet providesufficient bandwidth to enable realtime multimedia communicationamong participants. to the extent that participants need to engage inrealtime manipulation of biological images, the network would also needto support low latencies. both distant scientific collaborations and interactive distance learning could benefit substantially from multicast protocols that allow sending network packets to multiple destinations simultaneously and efficiently. in fact, any time multiple recipients are involved,multicast protocols may substantially reduce the impact computer applications have on the network.another form of remote collaboration is virtual conferences. a critical element of scientific progress is the ability of scientists to gather atconferences to share new ideas, the latest results, and the latest theories.it is widely recognized that in addition to the formal proceedings at suchconferences, the conversations that take place in side rooms are often justas critical for ensuring scientific progress. thus, there would be someadvantage in allowing remote participants not only to attend formalpresentations but also to make contacts with their colleagues and haveprivate conversations. whether the cost of enhancing the internet to provide such capabilities would exceed the benefit is not yet clear. buildingin an infrastructure for ubiquitous realtime videoconferencing would bevery expensive. today, a researcher can attend a remote conference usingtechnologies like realvideo that produce quite good sound and passablevideo over the internet, and when this is coupled with a sharedwhiteboard or shared applications, there is a good approximation to beingthereñexcept for the realtime interaction. latencies across such networks are typically a few seconds, but that should not keep remote participants from listening to the speaker and viewing their slides. somesystems allow questions to be sent by email or an electronic whiteboard,also with some time delay.biomedical research is an international enterprise, and language isstill a barrier to communication. although english is recognized as thedominant language for scientific communication, there are still someapplications (especially for informal collaboration) where support formultilingual interactions would accelerate progress. indeed, languagenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120networking health: prescriptions for the internettranslation capabilities could be of great help in the consumer health andclinical care arenas. one of the main reasons for the poor access to healthcare in this country as it becomes increasingly diverse is the number ofnonenglishspeaking persons encountering an englishonlyspeakinghealth care system.clinical researchclinical research involves both clinical trials to establish the efficacyof a drug or a device and the subsequent monitoring of the effectivenessof a product in general (rather than in controlled circumstances) after ithas entered into widespread usage.41 additional elements of operationsmanagement and organizational policy also have heavily clinical researchovertones. the internet can contribute to a number of these activities, asmanifest in clinical trials. as computerbased health records become morewidely available, health services researchers will likely use them to exploredimensions such as effectiveness and patient satisfaction via the internet.the agency for healthcare research and quality, as well as the nih (andnlm), is likely to become more interested in the potential of the internetto achieve better quality outcomes and cost management.clinical trials are an essential activity in the creation and testing ofnew drugs and devices for medical diagnosis and therapy. the u.s. foodand drug administration requires careful and statistically valid testingby human volunteers before it gives marketing approval. with the mapping of the human genome and the rise of pharmacogenetics, clinicalresearch and clinical trials could become even more prevalent. knowledge of the availability of clinical trial opportunities, and guidance toconduct them in a timely and accurate fashion, present a significantknowledge distribution and management challenge for which the internetis a useful infrastructure. clinical research in human health and disease,such as that supported by the nih via federal grants and contracts, hassimilar information management requirements. the internet providesthe capability to enroll patients, validate eligibility, collect data, and disseminate results to and from widely distributed urban and rural sites.internetbased clinical trials may be extremely important to progress on anumber of rare diseases that require large populations of patients in orderto make clinical research feasible.in the area of clinical research and clinical trials of drugs and devices,a growing number of companies and academic centers are using theinternet to recruit volunteer participants. pursuant to the fda modernization act of 1997, a congressionally mandated national clearinghouseand directory of clinical research studies for serious diseases is beingdeveloped as an internetaccessible resource by the nlm in collaborationnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet121with other federal health and science organizations. there is interestingwork at the national cancer institute (nci) on cancer trials using networked information facilities and proposals to mount collaborativenational (and international) databases for other clinical trials that mightreduce cost or increase effectiveness. commercial companies are buildingand making available similar òonestopshoppingó information resourcesfor patients interested in participating in clinical studies. since clinicalresearch requires detailed compliance with complex diagnostic and treatment schedules (called clinical protocols), there are both commercial andacademic efforts under way to develop detailed, participantspecific protocol guidelines that can be transmitted from a central data managementunit via the internet to participating clinical investigators. encounterspecific guidance and secure data capture via widearea computer networks promise to improve the speed with which clinical trials can becompleted, as well as to reduce errors of omission and commission in theconduct of clinical research. current estimates indicate that each day ofdelay in introducing a new drug to the marketplace costs pharmaceuticalcompanies $1 million in lost revenues (cyberatlas, 1999).security is an extremely important technological consideration inclinical trials. in addition to concerns about the privacy of patientsinvolved in the trials, there will probably be significant commercial interest in some of the resulting data sets, making security and control of theraw data a serious consideration. tools will need to be in place to authenticate the source of information, protect the confidentiality of informationcollected, and protect its integrity. ubiquity of access is important to theextent that it will allow researchers to draw upon larger population basesfor their studies. depending on the protocol for the trials, access at aphysicianõs office or public kiosk may or may not suffice, and in somesituations, access may be needed from the home.technical requirements for biomedical researchbandwidth ++++the bandwidth requirements for many biomedical research applications are high. teleconferencing and highresolution, realtime transferof images (during remote instrument manipulations, for example) havevery high requirements for bandwidth. there is also a trend in theresearch community toward increasing dependence on the internet forcommunicating data and scientific models. it is impossible to predict thelongterm needs of biomedical research, but it is likely that the needs forbandwidth will increase as researchers invent new methodologies for thelargescale collection of data about entire genomes, organisms, and comnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122networking health: prescriptions for the internetmunities of organisms. these data may be collected at points all over theworld at very high rates. aggregated traffic back to individual researchcenters could be very high.latency +++in general, biomedical research is not a timecritical enterprise. thereare exceptions, of course, such as the use of the internet to drive biomedical research instruments (as, for instance, in remote telemicroscopy),where feedback is critical for positioning samples or for adjusting thesettings of the instruments. large distributed simulations also requirelow latency to improve the speed of their calculations.availability ++for biomedical research, the availability of the network is of moderateimportance. research efforts are not often timecritical and can toleratelowlevel losses of data or network unavailability. obviously, longstretches of such poor performance would be unacceptable, but the needsfor availability are not as great in this domain as they might be in clinicalcare or business applications. nonetheless, as the internet plays an everlarger role in research (that is, as it becomes the primary means for accessing primary data, publications, and professional colleagues), it is likelythat availability will become more important and even missioncritical forthe biomedical research enterprise. most importantly, only if they perceive an available internet will reticent adopters of internet technologiesembrace these technologies fully.security ++for the most part, biomedical research deals with public domain information, so the security requirements for the network are not stressed.since most studies can be done on aggregate data in which no individualpatient is identified, issues of privacy are not paramount. if the researchdeals with patient information (clinical or genomic), however, then security requirements of the internet jump to the highest levels.ubiquity ++for biomedical research, the ubiquity of the network is not a criticalfactor. most major medical centers and research institutions have network connectivity and are motivated to maintain firstclass resources tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet123support their investigators, making the issues of universal access lessrelevant. one exception to this might be an epidemiological study inwhich data are collected from people over the internet. in that case, thenetwork would need to be accessible to all patient populations of relevance to the study.summaryinternet applications promise to improve the quality of, and access to,health care while simultaneously reducing its costs. realizing theseapplications requires overcoming a number of technical and nontechnicalobstacles. for example, quality of service across the internet must beimproved to provide the bandwidth and latency required for applicationssuch as video consultations and remote surgery. reliability must beimproved to ensure that failures of critical network connections occuronly infrequently and impose minimal consequences, especially wherehuman life is at stake. security capabilities must ensure the confidentialtransmission of health information across the internet while vouching forthe integrity of the information. access controls must take into accountthe different access privileges of different kinds of health care workers.and, to achieve its most farreaching effects, all care providers andpatients must have access to the internet. additional detail on theseneeds is provided below. chapter 3 goes on to examine technical challenges in further detail, while chapters 4 and 5 provide additional insightinto the organizational and policy issues that must be resolved.bandwidthhigh bandwidth is important for a number of health applications,especially those relying on the transmission of realtime video or largemedical or biomedical images. beyond high bandwidth for specific dataintensive applications there is a need for high aggregate bandwidth tosupport a high volume of moderately dataintensive applications, such astransfers of large medical records. but bandwidth is not the most important capability for all health care applications. many consumer healthand public health applications, for instance, can currently be supportedby the bandwidth available on todayõs internet. bandwidth is particularly important in a number of biomedical research applications, especially in the rendering of threedimensional images of biomedical structures. it could also be important in professional education, where it wouldsupport a virtual reality system for simulated surgeries and other formsof training.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124networking health: prescriptions for the internetlatencycertain highly specialized health applications, such as remote controlof experimental equipment or simulation of surgical procedures for educational purposes, require much lower latency than is available on todayõsinternet. however, many other health care applications, such as searching for information on the internet, do not require instantaneous deliveryof information and therefore will not be adversely affected even by thelatency of todayõs internet.availabilitybecause health care can be a lifeanddeath matter, the availability ofmany internet applications related to its provision and the network acrosswhich these applications run is paramount. if timecritical information isnot available for decision making because data have been lost in transfer,then the safety and quality of patient care can be compromised. althoughsome health care applications might have lower requirements for network reliability, the most demanding applications still require a higherlevel of availability than most consumer applications. if health care organizations are to use the internet for important patient care tasksñwhetherretrieving medical records, accessing decision support tools, or conducting telemedicine sessionsñthey need to know that the network will beavailable a large percentage of the time.securitybecause of the highly personal nature of health information and thedetrimental effects inappropriate releases of such information could haveon social standing, insurance eligibility, and employment, the level ofprotection required for some health information is extremely high. suchprotection must be afforded by security protocols embedded in the relevant applications and in the computers connected to the internet, as wellas in the network itself. it will be as much a matter of the rules governingappropriate releases of information as it will be of technical securitymechanisms, such as encryption. equally or perhaps more importantfrom a qualityofcare standpoint is the need to protect the integrity ofdata and software and the availability of critical services.ubiquitythe continuing trend toward patient empowerment is being fueledby the greater access of patients to general and personal health informanetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet125tion. the internet is already playing a large role in improving access tothis information, but unfortunately not all americans are able to benefit.socioeconomic status and geographic location are still strong determinants of whether a person has access to the internet. if it is a societal goalto give all persons access to internetbased health care information andservices, then nearubiquitous access to the internet will be required.use of the internet in support of health care financial and administrative transactions, public health, professional health education, and biomedical research presents a number of technical challenges that rival thosepresented by the provision of health care (table 2.7). security is of utmostconcern in financial and administrative uses, as well as in public health,both of which require access to health records containing patientspecificinformation. availability is, in general, of lesser concern than in otherhealth care applications of the internet, if only because human life is notimmediately at stake. nevertheless, financial and administrative transactions, public health, and biomedical research all require high degrees ofsystem availabilityñespecially public health, where the network wouldhave to continue to function even in the wake of a largescale disaster.ubiquity is important in all these applications, although fewer peoplewould need access to the internet for noncarerelated activities than forthose directly related to health care.beyond these demands for technical capabilities, applications of theinternet in health care financial and administrative transactions, publichealth, professional education, and biomedical research demand attention to a number of organizational and policy issues. most importantly,table 2.7 relative importance of technical needs of the internet byhealthrelated applicationsapplicationbandwidthlatencyavailabilitysecurityubiquityconsumer health+++++++++++++clinical care+++++++++++++++++financial and+++++++++++administrativetransactionspublic health++++++++++professional education+++++++++++biomedical research+++++++++++++note: plus signs (+) denote the relative importance of the technical feature within thedesignated application area. the scale ranges from a single plus sign, which denotes minimal importance, to four plus signs, signifying great importance.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126networking health: prescriptions for the internetorganizations engaged in these healthrelated activities need to recognizethe value of the internet for their missions. second, they need to developstandards for information exchange, identifying the data elements ofimportance and agreeing on a standardized vocabulary for describingdata and a standardized format for exchanging data. third, organizations will need to ensure equitable access to internet resources. this issuemay be of greatest importance in the educational arena, where schoolshave begun to mandate the purchase of laptops by students but havefound that some students lack highbandwidth connectivity from theirhomes or offcampus work locations. these issues are explored in greaterdetail in chapters 4 and 5 of this report.referencesaffiliated health information networks of new england. 1999. leading the way to healthinformation exchange in the electronic world. massachusetts health data consortium,waltham, mass., april.american medical association (ama). 1996. continuing medical education directory. ama,chicago, ill.baker, d.b. 1998. òpcasso: providing secure internet access to patient information,ósaic science and technology trends ii. science applications international corporation,san diego, calif.biermann, j. sybil, g.j. golladay, m.l. greenfield, and l.h. baker. 1999. òevaluation ofcancer information on the internet,ó cancer 86(3):381390, august 1.boodman, sandra g. 1999. òmedical web sites can steer you wrong,ó washington post,august 10, health section, p. 7.burton, thomas m. 2000. òmedtronic to join microsoft, ibm in patientmonitoring venture,ó wall street journal, january 24, p. b12.carns, ann. 1999. òwww.doctorsmedicinesdiseasesgalore.com: todayõs cybercraze isany web site devoted to health or maladies,ó wall street journal, june 10, p. b1.centers for disease control and prevention (cdc). 1998. strengthening community healthprotection through technology and training: the health alert network. cdc, atlanta, ga.chand, g., b.c. breton, n.h.m. caldwell, and d.m. holburn. 1997. òworld wide webcontrolled scanning electron microscope,ó scanning 19:292296.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council. 1997.for the record: protecting electronic health information. national academy press, washington, d.c.cyberatlas. 1999. òonline healthcare market looks energized.ó available online at <http://cyberatlas.internet.com/bigpicture/demographics/article/0,1323,6061153701,00.html>.davis d.a., m.a. thomson, a.d. oxman, and r.b. haynes. 1995. òchanging physicianperformance: a systematic review of the effect of continuing medical educationstrategies,ó journal of the american medical association 274(september 6):700705.dolin, r.h., w. rishel, p.v. biron, j. spinosa, and j.e. mattison. 1998. òsgml and xml asinterchange formats for hl7 messages,ó pp. 720724 in proceedings of the amia symposium, bethesda, md.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet127fridsma, d.b., p. ford, and r. altman. 1994. òa survey of patient access to electronicmail: attitudes, barriers, and opportunities,ó paper presented at eighteenth annualsymposium on computer applications in medical care, washington, d.c., october1519. see <http://smiweb.standord.edu/pubs/smiabstracts/smi940524.html>.goedert, joseph, 1999. òelectronic claims growth sputters,ó health data management (september):8486.harman, j. 1998. òtopics for our times: new health care datañnew horizons for publichealth,ó american journal of public health 88:10191021.health care financing administration (hcfa). 1999a. hcfa information system securitybulletin handbook, bulletin 9801, baltimore, md., january.health care financing administration (hcfa). 1999b. òtelecommunications requirements:migration of medicare managed care organizations (mco) to the medicare datacommunications network and the replacement of the rlink software,ó operationalpolicy letter no. 92 opl99.092, u.s. department of health and human services, may6. available online at <www.hcfa/gov/medicare/op1092.htm>.hripcsak, g., p.d. clayton, t.a. pryor, p. haug, o.b. wigertz, and j. van der lei. 1990.òthe arden syntax for medical logic modules,ó pp. 200204 in proceedings of the symposium on computer applications in medical care, r.a. miller, ed. ieee computer societypress, los alamitos, calif.huang, h.k. 1996. òteleradiology technologies and some service models,ó computerizedmedical imaging and graphics 20(2):5968.huang, h.k. 1999. pacs: basic principles and applications. wileyliss, new york.institute of medicine (iom), committee on the quality of health care in america. 1999. toerr is human, linda kohn, janet corrigan, and marla donaldson, eds. national academy press, washington, d.c.kohane, i.s., p. greenspun, j. fackler, c. cimino, and p. szolovits. 1996. òbuilding nationalelectronic medical record systems via the world wide web,ó journal of the americanmedical informatics association 3(3):191207.lasker, r.d. 1998. òchallenges to accessing useful information in health policy andpublic health: an introduction to a national forum held at the new york academyof medicine,ó journal of urban health: bulletin of the new york academy of medicine75(4):779784.lou, s.l., edward a. sickles, h.k. huang, david hoogstrate, fei cao, jun wang, andmohammad jahangiri. 1997. òfullfield direct digital telemammography: technicalcomponents, study protocols, and preliminary results,ó ieee transactions on information technology in biomedicine 1(4):270278.mandl, kenneth d., isaac kohane, and allan m. brandt. 1998. òelectronic patientphysiciancommunication: problems and promise,ó annals of internal medicine 129:495500.mccormack, john. 2000. ògroup practices find their way to the internet,ó health datamanagement 8(1):4653.mcginnis, j.m., and w.h. foege. 1993. òactual causes of death in the united states,ójournal of the american medical association 270:22072212.nash, sharon. 1999. òthe doctor is online,ó pc magazine online, july 14.resnick, paul. 1997. òfiltering information on the internet,ó scientific american (march):106108.reuters new service. 1999. òinternet could organize medical records,ó july 27.rind, d.m., i.s. kohane, p. szolovits, c. safran, h.c. chueh, and g.o. barnett. 1997. òmaintaining the confidentiality of medical records shared over the internet and worldwide web,ó annals of internal medicine 127(2):138141.rybowski, lise, and richard rubin. 1998. building an infrastructure for community healthinformation: lessons from the frontier. foundation for health care quality, seattle.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128networking health: prescriptions for the internetscience applications international corporation (saic). 1998. security and risk managementfor businesstobusiness health information networks, final report, three state healthinformation planning project. saic, san diego, calif., june.science panel on interactive communication and health (scipich). 1999. wired for healthand wellbeing: the emergence of interactive health communication, thomas r. eng anddavid h. gustafson, eds. office of disease prevention and health promotion, u.s.department of health and human services, washington, d.c., april. available onlineat <http://www.scipich.org>.usa today. 1998. òhealthrelated activities conducted online,ó july 10.u.s. department of health and human services. 1998. healthy people 2010 objectives. draftfor public comment, september 15, u.s. department of health and human services,washington, d.c. available online at <http://web.health.gov/healthypeople>.u.s. public health service, public health data policy coordinating committee. 1995.making a powerful connection: the health of the public and the national informationinfrastructure. july 6. available online at <www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/staffpubs/lo/makingpd.html>.varmus, harold, david lipman, and pat brown. 1999. òebiomed: a proposal forelectronic publications in the biomedical sciences,ó memorandum dated may 5.available online at <http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/pubmedcentral/ebiomedarch.htm>.wolf, guenter, detlev petersen, manfred dietel, and ever petersen. 1998. òtelemicroscopyvia the internet,ó nature 391(february 5):613614.world wide web consortium. 1998. òextensible markup language (xml) 1.0. w3crecommendation,ó report no. recxml19980210, february.notes1.a search using altavista on july 29, 1999, returned 40,156 web pages in response tothe query òdiabetes mellitus.ó2.for an example of the criteria according to which healthrelated web sites can beevaluated, see <http://hitiweb.mitretek.org/iq/onlycriteria.html>.3.information on pics is available online at <http://www.w3.org/pics/>. see alsoresnick (1997).4.for example, a company named personalmd.com had stored the health records of10,000 subscribers online free of charge as of july 1999. the company sends consumers acard with a personal access code that allows them to retrieve their records over the internetor by a faxback system (reuters news service, 1999). another group, the medical registry, charges $100 to retain medical information online, allowing customers to update it asoften as they wish.5.the medical registry, which was started by emergency room physicians, allowsdoctors to access a patientõs record during an emergency by entering their drug enforcement act number. patients are issued a wallet card and alert bracelet containing the address of the web site, the patientõs password, and the phone number of a faxback servicethat can access and download the patientõs records.6.for more information on pcasso, see baker (1998).7.the national heart attack alert program is a federal effort that may lead to improved techniques for remotely monitoring patients. the program has the overall goals of,first, reducing morbidity and mortality from acute myocardial infarctions (heart attacks)through rapid identification and treatment and, second, heightening the potential for animproved quality of life for patients and family members. remote monitoring and collecnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet129tion of patient vital signs is seen as one possible avenue for early detection of heart attacksand for getting patients into the health care system quickly. information about the programis available online at <http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/nhaap/nhaappd.htm>.8.data from michael kiensle, associate dean for clinical affairs and biomedical communications, university of iowa college of medicine, personal communication, july 12,1999.9.inhome monitoring with a video link offers benefits to patients, but not for diagnostic reasons. as one reviewer of an early draft of this report noted, the patient needs to seethe care provider to address the problem of noncompliance, which often results when patients misunderstand instructions and take medications at the wrong time, in the wrongdosage, and so on. the way to improve compliance is to ensure that the care providercaptures the attention of the patient while delivering instructions. video can help ensurethis happens.10.at present, teleconsultations conducted across networks that use the ip require approximately twice the bandwidth of traditional pointtopoint networks. the reasons aretwofold: (1) internet protocols impose some additional overhead functions that requirebandwidth and (2) the devices used to encode video streams into ip packets (coder/decoders, or codecs) are much less efficient than their nonip counterparts. but ip codecs are lessexpensive, in part because they carry less hardware compression, and nextgeneration ipcodecs are expected to provide better performance and impose less of a penalty on ipbasedsystems.11.east carolina university recently received a grant from the national library of medicine to investigate these requirements.12.pending further study of the medical efficacy of higher bandwidth forteleconsultations, an upper limit on bandwidth for video consultations can be estimated byconsidering the need for broadcast quality video. a video display with 640  480 pixels thatis refreshed 30 times per second and has 24bit color demands 221 mbps. with standardcompression technologies, such as that of the motion picture experts group (mpeg), reductions of 90 to 1 are common, resulting in a need for 2.5 mbps. improved coding maylower this figure further. for transmission quality equal to highdefinition television, whichis just entering consumer production, 19 mbps would be required. these figures representthe maximum bandwidth that remote video consultations could be expected to use, but, asthe evidence collected by ecu and other practitioners indicates, much less bandwidth issufficient in many applications.13.information on the national laboratory for the study of rural telemedicine at theuniversity of iowa is available online at <http://telemed.medicine.uiowa.edu/index.html>.14.anthony chou, university of california at san francisco, presentation to the committee, december 16, 1998.15.as described later in this chapter, attempts are being made to make these specializedinstruments available to a larger number of researchers through the internet.16.stentor, inc., has developed a system that can provide highresolution images overlowerbandwidth networks by providing only portions of the overall image at any onetime.17.in addition to the lack of standardization of medical data models, there has been nowidespread adoption of portable decisionsupport tools, despite the efforts of many inprojects such as the development of the arden syntax (see hripcsak et al., 1990). theabsence of sound, widely accepted automated decisionsupport tools that are integratedwith each other and with internet health transactions will undermine the capabilities ofsuch tools to achieve the desired goal of medical error reduction. for example, if one set ofinternet transactions attempts to optimize for medication orders and another set of internettransactions attempts to optimize the ordering of procedures, several possibly dangerousnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130networking health: prescriptions for the internetand/or expensive interactions between the two might occur. in a tightly integrated system,as compared to disparate and separate internetbased systems, such interactions might beminimized. this situation suggests that a nearterm challenge will be to ensure qualitycontrol and coordination among the many different internetborn clinical transactions andto develop robust medical decisionsupport tools that can serve a wide range of institutionsand patient populations.18.in a survey of 153 chief information officers conducted by the college of healthinformation management executives in 1998, 80 percent said they use hl7 and 13.5 percentplanned to implement it in the future.19.all claims data in this paragraph derive from research conducted for faulkner &grayõs 2000 health data directory, as cited in goedert (1999).20.for additional information on these efforts, see rybowski and rubin (1998) andaffiliated health information networks of new england (1999).21.further information on hcfaõs pilot program can be obtained from either<www.wedi.org> or <www.afecht.org>.22.for example, the u.s. public health service released a report in 1995 describing thepotential applications of the internet in public health and identifying technical challenges tobe addressed (u.s. public health service, 1995). in 1997, the new york academy of medicine and the national library of medicine cosponsored a symposium on public healthinformatics that called for improved structures and assessment mechanisms for publichealth information (lasker, 1998). slide presentations of several symposium speakers areavailable at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ nichsr/nyam/nyam.html>. the department ofhealth and human servicesõ document healthy people 2010 (u.s. department of health andhuman services, 1998) includes a section on objectives for improving the public healthinfrastructure. they include widespread access to the internet and realtime, onsite accessto public health data for public health workers and individuals. section 14, objectives 5 and6, is the most relevant example.23.participating organizations include the national network of libraries of medicine,the centers for disease control and prevention, the health resources and services administration, the association of state and territorial health officials, and the national association of county and city health officials.24.reports from physiciansõ offices and hospitals also tend to be reported on paper.25.jac davies, washington state department of health, presentation to the study committee, february 11, 1999, seattle, washington.26.the traditional public health functions are surveillance, case identification, treatment, prevention, research, guidelines, education and feedback.27.president clintonõs proposal for this program would also create a network of regional labs to provide rapid analysis and identification of select biological agents.28.the health alert network is part of a larger antibioterrorism effort that received$158 million in fy99. another $72 million was proposed for fy2000, which would raise thetotal to $230 million.29.this information is derived from òhealth alert network architectural standards,ósupplement to the centers for disease control and prevention program announcementno. 99051.30.the association of american medical colleges reports that total enrollment in fulltime undergraduate medical programs in the united states was 66,900 in the 19971998academic year. there were 99,099 residents being trained in clinical settings (primarilyteaching hospitals). according to the quinquennial survey, approximately 242,000 studentswere enrolled in all health sciences programs during the 19961997 academic year.31.the shine project at stanford medical center is experimenting with providing cmenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health applications of the internet131credit to physicians who request pointofcare information during patient interactions. information on this program is available online at <http://shine.stanford.edu>.32.these figures were provided by dennis benson at the national library of medicinein a personal communication dated february 11, 2000.33.there have been laboratories whose access to ncbi/pubmed was suspended temporarily when usage rates climbed too high. one lab at stanford lost access after a graduatestudent wrote programs that were downloading 3,000 abstracts per minute from the website. the scientific goals of this student were meritorious, but the resource was not built tosustain this use (russ altman, stanford university, personal communication, december 22,1999).34.james ostell, national center for biotechnology information, presentation to thestudy committee on march 1, 1999, washington, d.c.35.researchers at the university of cambridge, the university of california at san diego (see box 2.4), and the university hospital charit” in berlin have all developed internetbased systems for controlling experimental apparatus (chand et al., 1997).36.electron tomography is a technique whereby threedimensional structure is derivedfrom a series of twodimensional projections using advanced image processing steps. inthe most common form, the specimen is tilted around a single axis and imaged at regularintervals. the ivem at ncmir is one of a few such instruments in the united states madeavailable to the biological research community. support for ncmir is provided by thenational center for research resources (ncrr) of the national institutes of health (nih).37.this information is taken from a paper entitled òncmirõs collaboratory for microscopic digital anatomy: a national science foundation national challenge project,ó whichis available online at <wwwncmir.ucsd.edu/cmda/>.38.cmda has already been used by researchers at montana state university to collectdata on synaptic organization in the sensory ganglia of the insect nervous system and byscientists at the university of oregon studying neurotransmission (synaptic vesicle release)in vestibular hair cell synapses. other users are studying the abnormalities in nerve cells inalzheimerõs disease, the structural relationships of protein molecules responding to calcium within nerve cells, and the threedimensional pattern of branching of the dendrites inneurons that create a highly linked network of cellular communication.39.in the longer term, it is hoped that digital video standards will give good resolutionand smooth motion at 30 frames per second at much lower bandwidth.40.more information on srs is available at <http://srs.ebi.ac.uk:5000/>. information onbiokleisli is available at <http://smiweb.stanford.edu/projects/helix/mis214/bdkowvldb95.pdf>(a paper). information on kegg is available at <http://www.genome.ad.jp/dbget/dbget.links.html>.41.clinical research lies at the juncture of clinical care, biomedical research, and publichealth but is somewhat distinct from each of these topics. it is described in the section onbiomedical research in this report for reasons of editorial convenience and exposition.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1323technical challengesongoing efforts to develop and deploy improved networking technologies promise to greatly enhance the capabilities of the internet. protocols for quality of service (qos) could enable vendors to offer guarantees on available bandwidth and latencies across the network. advancedsecurity protocols may better protect the confidentiality of messages sentacross the network and ensure that data are not corrupted during transmission or storage. broadband technologies, such as cable modems anddigital subscriber line (dsl) services, have the potential to make highspeed internet connectivity more affordable to residential users and smallbusinesses. in combination, these capabilities will enable the internet tosupport an everincreasing range of applications in domains as disparateas national security, entertainment, electronic commerce, and health care.the health community stands to benefit directly from improvementsin qos, security, and broadband technologies, even though it will notnecessarily drive many of these advances. health applicationsñwhethersupporting consumer health, clinical care, financial and administrativetransactions, public health, professional education, or biomedical researchñare not unique in terms of the technical demands they place on theinternet: nearly all sectors have some applications that demand enhancedqos, security, and broadband technologies. nevertheless, particularhealth applications require specific capabilities that might not otherwisereceive much attention. use of the internet for videobased consultationswith patients in their homes, for example, would call for twoway, highbandwidth connections into and out of individual residences, whereasnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges133videoondemand applications require high bandwidth in only one direction. human life may be at risk if control signals sent to medical monitoringor dosage equipment are corrupted or degraded, or if electronic medicalrecords cannot be accessed in a timely fashion. even when no lives are atstake, the extreme sensitivity of personal health information could complicate security considerations, and the provisions of health care at thepoint of needñwhether in the hospital, home, or hotel roomñcouldincrease demand for provider and consumer access to internet resourcesvia a variety of media.this chapter reviews current efforts to improve the capabilities of theinternet and evaluates them on the basis of the needs of the health sectoroutlined in chapter 2. particular attention is paid to the need for qos, forsecurity (including confidentiality of communications, system access controls, and network availability), and for broadband technologies to provide end users with highspeed connectivity to the internet. also discussed are privacyenhancing technologies, which are seen by many as aprerequisite for more extensive use of the internet by consumers. thechapter identifies ways in which the internetõs likely evolution will support health applications and ways in which it may not. it gives examplesof challenges that realworld health applications can pose for networkingresearch and information technology research more generally. in thisway, it attempts to inform the networking research community about thechallenges posed by health applications and to educate the health community about the ways in which ongoing efforts to develop and deployinternet technologies may not satisfy all their needs.quality of servicequality of service is a requirement of many healthrelated applications of the internet. health organizations cannot rely on the internet forcritical functions unless they receive assurances that information will bedelivered to its destination quickly and accurately. for example, careproviders must be able to retrieve medical records easily and reliablywhen needed for patient care; providers and patients must be able toobtain sustained access to highbandwidth services for remote consultations if videobased telemedicine is to become viable. in emergency caresituations, both bandwidth and latency may be critical factors becauseproviders may need rapid access to large medical records and imagesfrom disparate sources connected to the internet. other applications,such as internetbased telephony and business teleconferencing, demandsimilar technical capabilities, but the failure to obtain needed qos in ahealth application might put human life at risk.compounding the qos challenge in health care is the variability of anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134networking health: prescriptions for the internethealth care organizationõs needs over the course of a single day. theinformation objects that support health care vary substantially in size andcomplexity. while simple text effectively represents the content of a careproviderõs notes, consultation reports, and the namevalue pairs of common laboratory test results, many health problems require the acquisitionand communication of clinical images such as x rays, computed tomography (ct), and magnetic resonance imaging (mri). the electronic formsof these images, which often must be compared with one another in multiple image sets, comprise tens to hundreds of megabytes of informationthat may need to be communicated to the end user within several secondsor less. medical information demands on digital networks are thus notablefor their irregularity and the tremendous variation in the size of transmitted files. when such files need to be transmitted in short times, veryhigh bandwidths may be required and the traffic load may be extremelybursty.no capabilities have yet been deployed across the internet to ensureqos. virtually all internet service providers (isps) offer only besteffortservice, in which they make every effort to deliver packets to their correctdestination in a timely way but with no guarantees on latency or rates ofpacket loss. roundtrip times (or latencies) for sending messages acrossthe internet between the east and west coasts of the united states aregenerally about 100 milliseconds, but latencies of about 1 second dooccurñand variations in latency between 100 milliseconds and 1 secondcan be observed even during a single connection.1 such variability is notdetrimental to asynchronous applications such as email, but it can renderinteractive applications such as videoconferencing unusable. similarly,the rates of packet loss across the internet range from less than 1 percentto more than 10 percent; high loss rates degrade transmission quality andincrease latencies as lost packets are retransmitted. furthermore, becausemany applications attempt to reduce congestion by slowing their transmission rates, packet loss directly affects the time taken to complete atransaction, such as an image transfer, over the network.several approaches can be taken to improve qos across the internet,with varied levels of effectiveness. for example, internet users can upgrade their access lines to overcome bottlenecks in their links to isps, butsuch efforts affect bandwidth and latency into and out of their own siteonly. they provide no means for assuring a given level of qos over anydistance. similarly, isps can attempt to improve service by expanding thecapacity of their backbone links. however, as described below, suchefforts provide no guarantees that bandwidth will be available whenneeded and contain no mechanisms for prioritizing message traffic in theface of congestion. to overcome these limitations, efforts are under wayto develop specific protocols for providing qos guarantees across thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges135internet. these protocols promise to greatly expand the availability ofguaranteed services across the internet, but their utility in particularapplications may be limited, as described below.increasing bandwidthone approach taken by isps to improve their datacarrying capacityand relieve congestion across the internet has been to dramatically increasethe bandwidth of the backbones connecting points of presence (pops).2todayõs backbone speeds are typically on the order of 600 megabits persecond (mbps) to 2.5 gigabits per second (gbps), but some isps haveconsiderably more bandwidth in place. a number of isps today have tensof strands of fiberoptic cable between their major pops, with each strandcapable of carrying 100 wavelengths using current wavelength divisionmultiplexing (wdm) technology. each wavelength can support 2.5 to10 gbps using current optoelectronics and termination equipment. thus,an isp with 30 strands of fiber between two pops theoretically couldsupport 30 terabits per second (tbps) on a single interpop trunk line.3this is enough capacity to support approximately 450 million simultaneous phone calls or to transmit the 40 gigabyte (gb) contents of thecomplete medlars collection of databases in onehundredth of a second.even with this fiber capacity in the ground, most isps currently interconnect their pops at speeds significantly lower than 1 tbpsña situationthat is likely to persist for the next few years. the limiting factors are thecost and availability of the equipment that needs to be connected to thefiber inside the pop. this equipment includes synchronous opticalnetwork (sonet)4 termination equipment and the routers or switchesthat are required to forward packets between pops. the sonet equipment is expensiveñas are the routers and switches that connect to thesonet equipmentñso isps have an incentive to deploy only enough tocarry the expected traffic load. more importantly, routers are limited interms of the amount of traffic they can support. as of late 1999, theleading commercial routers available for deployment could support 16oc48 (2.5 gbps) interfaces, with a fourfold increase (e.g., to 16 oc192)expected to be deployable in the next 1 to 2 years. terabit and multiterabitrouters with a capacity at least six times greater than a 16 oc192 routerare under development. despite these increases in capability, routersmost likely will continue to limit the bandwidth available between popsfor the foreseeable future. the commercial sector understands the needfor faster routers and is addressing it, at least to meet nearterm demandsfor higher link speeds. additional research on very high speed routersmay be justified to provide longerterm improvements in datacarryingcapacity.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136networking health: prescriptions for the internetincreases in the bandwidth of the internet backbone alleviate some ofthe concerns about qos but may not completely eliminate congestion.demand for bandwidth is growing quickly, and it appears that isps aredeploying additional bandwidth just fast enough to keep up. currenttraffic measurements indicate that some internet backbone links are at ornear capacity. factors driving the growth in demand for bandwidthinclude the increasing number of internet users, the increasing amount oftime the average user spends connected to the internet, and new applications that are inherently bandwidthintensive (and that demand othercapabilities, such as low latency and enhanced security). nielsen ratingsfor june 1999 put the number of active web users at 65 million for themonth and average monthly online time per user at 7.5 hours, up from 57million users and 7 hours per user just 3 months earlier.5 as an exampleof increasing bandwidth demands, medical image files that now containabout 250 megabytes (mb) of data are expected to top several gigabytes inthe near future as the resolution of digital imaging technology improves.internet protocols further limit the capability of isps to provide qosby simply increasing bandwidth. the transmission control protocol(tcp), which underlies most popular internet applications today, is designedto determine the bandwidth of the slowest or most congested link in thepath traversed by a particular message and to attempt to use a fair shareof that bottleneck bandwidth. this trait is important to the success of theinternet because it allows many connections to share a congested link in areasonably fair way. however, it also means that tcp connections alwaysattempt to use as much bandwidth as is available in the network. thus, ifone bottleneck is alleviated by the addition of more bandwidth, tcp willattempt to use more bandwidth, possibly causing congestion on anotherlink. as a result, some congested links are almost always found in anetwork carrying a large amount of tcp traffic. adding more capacity inone place causes the congestion to move somewhere else. in many cases,toptier service isps attempt to make sure they have enough capacity sothat the congestion occurs in other backbone providersõ networks. theonly way out of this quandary, apparently, is to provide so much bandwidth throughout the network that applications are unable to use it fully.applications that do not use tcp are not the solution, either, becausethey also tend to consume considerable bandwidth. such nonadaptiveapplications are typically those involving realtime interaction, for whichtcp is not well suited. internet telephony is a good example of such anapplication. although an individual call might use only a few kilobits persecond, many current internet telephony applications transmit data at aconstant rate, regardless of any congestion along their path. becausethese applications do not respond to congestion, largescale deploymentcan lead to a situation called congestive collapse, in which links are sonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges137overloaded that they become effectively useless. furthermore, when theseapplications share links with tcpbased applications, the latter willrespond to congestion to the point where they may become unusable.short of deploying additional bandwidth in the internet and replacingnonadaptive applications with adaptive ones, the primary approach toaddressing this problem is either to equip routers with new mechanismsto prevent congestive collapse or to provide suitable incentives to encourage the development of adaptive applications.more fundamental factors also limit the utility of increased bandwidth as a means of solving the qos problem. adequate bandwidth is anecessary but not sufficient condition for providing qos. no user canexpect to obtain guaranteed bandwidth of 100 mbps across a 50mbpslink; similarly, it is not possible to guarantee 10 mbps each to 1,000 applications that share a common link unless that link has a capacity of at least10 gbps.6 the simple fact that internet backbones are shared resourcesthat carry traffic from a large number of users means that no single usercan be guaranteed a particular amount of bandwidth unless dedicatedallocation mechanisms are in place. in the absence of qos mechanisms, itis impossible to ensure that delaysensitive applications are protectedfrom excessive time lags.7in theory, isps could attempt to provide so much extra bandwidth tothe internet that peak demand could almost always be met and servicequality would improve (a technique referred to as overprovisioning, usedwith some success in local area networks, or lans). however, researchindicates that overprovisioning is an inefficient solution to the qos problem, especially when bandwidth demands vary widely among differentapplications, as is the case in health care. overprovisioning tends not tobe costeffective for leadingedge, highbandwidth applicationsñeventhose that can adapt to delays in the network. if the objective is to makeefficient use of networking resources and provide superior overall service, then mechanisms that enable the network to handle heterogeneousdata types appear preferable to the separation of different types of datastreams (e.g., realtime video, text, and images) into discrete networks(shenker, 1995).a number of efforts are under way in the networking community todevelop mechanisms for providing qos across the internet. the twomain approaches are differentiated services (diffserv) and integrated services (intserv). although they are very different, both attempt to manageavailable bandwidth to meet customerspecific needs for qos. both diffserv and intserv will enable greater use of the internet in some healthapplications, but it is not clear that these programs will meet all the needsposed by the most challenging health applications.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138networking health: prescriptions for the internetdifferentiated servicesrecent efforts in the internet engineering task force (ietf) haveresulted in a set of proposed standards for diffserv across the internet(blake et al., 1998). as the name implies, diffserv allows isps to offerusers a range of qualities of service beyond the typical best effort. theisps were active in the definition of these standards, and several areexpected to deploy some variant of diffserv in 2000.differentiated services do not currently define any mechanisms bywhich qos levels could be determined for different communications sessions on demand; rather, initial deployment is likely to be for provisionedqos that is agreed upon a priori. as a simple example, a customer of anisp might sign up for premium service at a certain rate, say 128 kilobitsper second (kbps). such a service would allow the customer to sendpackets into the network at a rate of up to 128 kbps and expect them toreceive better service than a besteffort packet would receive. exactlyhow much better would be determined by the isp. if the service werepriced appropriately, then the provider might provision enough bandwidth for premium traffic to ensure that loss of a premium packet occurredvery rarely, say once per 1 million packets sent. this would providecustomers with high assurance that they could send at 128 kbps at anytime to any destination within the ispõs network.many variations of this basic service are possible. the service description above applies to traffic sent by the customer; it is also possible toprovide high assurance of delivery for a customerõs inbound traffic. similarly, an isp could offer a service that provides low latency. it is likelythat providers would offer several grades of service, ranging from thebasic besteffort through premium to superpremium, analogous to coach,business, and first class in airline travel. a customer might sign up forseveral of these services and then choose which packets need which service. for example, email might be marked for besteffort delivery, whereas a video stream might be marked for premium. customers then wouldneed to develop their own policies to determine which types of trafficflows would be transmitted at different qos levels.although diffserv is an improvement over besteffort services, it hasseveral limitations that might preclude its use for some healthrelatedapplications. first, research has shown that simple diffserv mechanisms(e.g., those that classify qos levels at the edge of the network and providedifferential loss probabilities in the core) can be used to provide a highprobability of meeting usersõ qos preferences for pointtopoint communications (clark and wroclawski, 1997). however, in the absence of significant overprovisioning and explicit signaling to reserve resources, suchguarantees are probabilistic, which virtually precludes absolute, quantifinetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges139able service guarantees. the qos provided by diffserv depends largelyon provisioning of the network to ensure that the resources available forpremium services are sufficient to meet the offered load. the provision ofsufficient resources to make hard guarantees may be economically feasibleonly if premium services are significantly more expensive than todayõsbesteffort service. indeed, isps need to have in place some incentivemechanism (such as increased charges for higherquality service) toensure that customers attempt to distinguish between their more important and less important traffic.a second limitation is that diffserv can be offered most easily acrossa single ispõs network. current standards do not define endtoend services, focusing instead on individual hops between routers in the network. there are no defined mechanisms for providing service guaranteesfor packets that must traverse the networks of several isps. for manyservice providers, offering diffserv across their own networks is likely tobe a valuable first stepñespecially for providers with a national presencethat will be able to provide endtoend service to large customers withsites in major metropolitan areas. services like these are also valuableover especially congested links, such as the transoceanic links; again, thesetypes of services could be offered by a single provider. nevertheless,there obviously would be great value in obtaining endtoend qos assurance even when the two ends are not connected to the same provider. tosome extent, the diffserv standards have laid the groundwork forinterprovider qos, because packets can be marked in standard waysbefore crossing a provider boundary. a provider connecting to anotherprovider is in some sense just a customer of that provider. provider a canbuy premium service from provider b and resell that service to the customers of provider a. however, the services that providers offer are notlikely to be identical, so the prospect of obtaining predictable endtoendservice from many providers seems considerably less certain than doessingleprovider qos.third, diffserv does not currently allow users to signal a request fora particular level of qos on an asneeded basis (as is possible with theintegrated services model, described below). health care organizationshave widely varying needs for bandwidth over time. for example, asmall medical center occasionally might need to transmit a mammographystudy of 100 mb in a short time intervalñcreating a need for high bandwidth over that intervalñbut it is unlikely to need even close to thatamount of bandwidth on average. thus, a dynamic model of qos wouldbe preferable. diffserv does not preclude such a model; it simply provides a number of qos building blocks, which could be used to build adynamic model in the future. a variety of means for dynamically signaling diffserv qos are under investigation by networking researchers.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140networking health: prescriptions for the internetfinally, the diffserv approach may not provide a means of differentiating among service levels with sufficient granularity to meet the qosneeds of critical applications, such as remote control of medical monitoring or drug delivery devices. in the interests of scalability, diffserv sortstraffic into a small number of classes; as a result, the packets from manyapplications and sites share the same class and can interfere with eachother. for example, a physician downloading a medical image couldinadvertently disrupt data flows from inhouse monitoring equipment ifthey are on the same network and share a diffserv class. although policing of traffic at the edges of the network helps to ensure that applicationsof the same class do not interfere with each other, it does not completelyisolate applications. stronger isolation, and thus a larger number ofclasses, may be required for some demanding applications.integrated servicesin contrast to the diffserv model, intserv (braden et al., 1994) provides quantifiable, endtoend qos guarantees for particular data flows(e.g., individual applications) in networks that use the ip.8 the guarantees take the form of òthis videoconference from organization a to organization b will receive a minimum of 128 kbps throughput and a maximumof 100 milliseconds endtoend latency.ó to accommodate such requests,intserv includes a signaling mechanism called resource reservation protocol (rsvp) that allows applications to request qos guarantees (bradenet al., 1997).9 intserv provides a service model that in some waysresembles that of the telephone network, in that service is requested asneeded. if resources are available to provide the requested service, thenthe service will be provided; if not, then a negative acknowledgment(equivalent to a busy signal) is returned. for this reason, intserv alreadyis being used in some smaller networks to reserve bandwidth for voicecommunications.several obstacles stand in the way of the deployment of intserv acrossthe internet. the major concern is scalability. as currently defined, everyapplication flow (e.g., a single video call) needs its own reservation, andeach reservation requires that a moderate amount of information be storedat every router along the path that will carry the application data. as thenework itself grows and the number of reservations increases, so does theamount of information that must be stored throughout the network.10the prospect of having to store such information in backbone routers isnot attractive to isps, for which scalability is a major concern.11additional impediments arise from difficulties in administering intserv reservations that cross the networks of multiple isps. methods areneeded for allocating the costs of calls that are transmitted by multiplenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges141isps; new ways of billing users and making settlements among isps maybe required. these are qos policy issues, discussed below. it is clear thatthe management of reservations that traverse multiple isps, each with itsown administrative and provisioning policies, will be quite complex.solutions to these problems must address the possibility that one or moreisps might experience a failure during the life of a reservation, resultingin the need to reroute the traffic significantly (birman, 1999). such concerns, if not successfully addressed, could slow or thwart the deploymentof intserv capabilities throughout the internet.alternative quality of service optionsgiven the difficulties of existing approaches, a promising avenue ofresearch focuses on qos options that lie somewhere between diffservand intserv. the goal of such approaches is to provide finer granularityand stronger guarantees than are provided by diffserv while avoidingthe scaling and administrative problems associated with intservõs perapplication reservations. one such approach, which is being pursued inthe integrated services over specific link layers working group of theietf, combines the endtoend service definitions and signaling of intserv with the scalable queuing and classification techniques of diffserv.12another approach, referred to as virtual overlay networks (vons),uses the internet to support the creation of isolated networks that wouldlink multiple participants and offer desired levels of qos, including somesecurity and availability features (birman, 1999). this approach wouldrequire routers to partition packet flows according to tags on the packetscalled flow identifiers. this process, in effect, allows the router to allocatea predetermined portion of its capabilities to particular tagged flows.traffic within a tagged flow would compete with other packets on thesame von but not with traffic from other flows. an individual user (e.g.,a hospital) could attempt to create multiple vons to serve different applications so that each network could connect to different end points andoffer different levels of service. substantial research would be requiredbefore a von could be implemented. among the open questions are howto specify properties of an overlay network, how to dynamically administer resources on routers associated with an overlay network, how to avoidscaling issues as the number of overlays becomes large, and how torapidly classify large numbers of flows.quality of service policybecause qos typically involves providing improved service to somesets of packets at the expense of others, the deployment of qos technolonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142networking health: prescriptions for the internetgies requires a supporting policy infrastructure. in some applications, itis acceptable for qos assurance to be lost for some short period of time,provided that such lapses occur infrequently. in other applications, however, the qos guarantee must be met at all times, unless the network hasbecome completely partitioned by failures. work is needed to developmeans of providing solid guarantees of qos for critical information. suchmechanisms must scale well enough to be deployable in the internet andwill involve matters of policy (whose traffic deserves higher priority) aswell as of technology.in the intserv environment, qos policy is required to answer questions such as whether a particular request for resources should be admitted to the network, or whether the request should preempt an existingguarantee. in the former case, a decision to admit a reservation requestmight be based on some credentials provided by the requesting organization. for example, if a particular health care organization has paid for acertain level of service from its isp and the request carries a certificateproving that it originates from that organization, then the request isadmitted. in the latter case, a request might contain information identifying it as critically important (e.g., urgent patient monitoring information)so that it could preempt, say, a standard telephone call that previouslyhad reserved resources.it is difficult to predict all the possible scenarios in which policy information might play a role in the allocation of qos. the rsvp provides aflexible mechanism by which policyrelated data (e.g., a certificate identifying a user, institution, or application) can be carried with a request. thecommon open policy service protocol has been defined to enable routersprocessing rsvp requests to exchange policy data with policy servers,which are devices that store policy information, such as the types ofrequest that are allowed from a certain institution and the preemptionpriority of certain applications. policy decisions are likely to be complex,because of the nature of health care and the number of stakeholdersinvolved in decision making. accordingly, the design of policy servers,which are responsible for storing policy data and making policy decisions, would benefit from the input of the health care community.policy also has a role in a diffserv environment. for example, if aninstitution has an agreement with an isp that it may transmit packets at arate of up to 10 mbps and will receive some sort of premium service, thenthe question of exactly which packets get treated as premium and whichas standard is one of policy. the institution may wish to treat emailtraffic as standard and use its allocation of premium traffic for more timecritical applications. there may be some cases in which data from thesame application will be marked as either premium or standard, depending on other criteria. for example, a mammogram that will not be read bynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges143the remote radiologist until tomorrow might safely be sent by besteffortservice, whereas one that is to be read while the patient remains in theexamination room could be sent by premium service. mechanisms forenforcing policy in a diffserv environment are currently being defined atthe ietf.multicastconcurrent with efforts to implement qos mechanisms for theinternet, attempts are under way to deploy multicast capability, whichprovides a means to make more efficient use of available bandwidth tosimultaneously distribute information from one user to a number of specific recipients. multicast stands in contrast to todayõs unicast deliverymodel, in which users communicate on a onetoone basis, and to thebroadcast model of radio and television, in which a single transmittersends information out to a large number of unspecified recipients.multicast makes largescale multiparty conferencing possible in a waythat makes efficient use of network bandwidth. it also provides an efficient mechanism for the distribution of streaming media to many recipients concurrently. at the same time, multicast presents new challengesregarding suitable pricing schemes and ways of protecting isp networksfrom potential abuse. a related trend is the development of reliablemulticast, which attempts to enable the reliable delivery of data from onesource to many destinations, even in the presence of occasional packetloss in the network. a typical application is the timely delivery of financial information to many recipients. this technology is receiving a greatdeal of attention in the research and development communities and islikely to become mature within the next few years.both multicast and reliable multicast are likely to be useful in a rangeof applications, including health. multicast technologies could be used toprovide continuing medical education online through the realtime transmission of lectures over the internet. it would allow for teleconsultationsamong geographically dispersed public health officials responding to aperceived public health hazard or bioterrorist attack. multicast also couldfacilitate collaborative consultations among physicians, medical specialists, and patients.health care applications of multicast may emphasize different designand implementation features than would applications in other domains.for example, users in the health arena may be unlikely to create largemulticast groups consisting of a single primary transmitter of informationand millions of receivers, an approach more suited to the entertainmentindustry. likewise, health organizations might not adopt the model ofdefense simulations, in which thousands of participants send informationnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144networking health: prescriptions for the internetto each other on a regular basis to report on their location, speed, andorientation.13 instead, a health application might involve large numbersof small multicast groups featuring the formation of dynamic memberships to link collaborating physicians. the technical considerations thatgo into designing multicast protocols that can support large numbers ofsmall groups may differ from those that can support smaller numbers oflarge groups. health care applications need to be considered soon toensure that suitable multicast capabilities are developed.securitysecurity is a top priority for health applications of the internet. whenever personal health information is transmitted across the internet orstored in a device attached to the network, precautions must be taken toensure that the information is (1) available to those who need it, (2) protectedagainst those lacking proper credentials, and (3) not modifiedñeitherintentionally or unintentionallyñin violation of established policies andprocedures. these three requirementsñreferred to as availability, confidentiality, and integrityñare of concern in most health care applicationsof the internet, whether they involve the transfer of personal medicalrecords between health care providers or a provider and a plan administrator, video telemedicine consultations, the reporting of information in ahome monitoring situation, or the use of remote equipment in a biomedicine experiment (in which the data may be considered proprietarybefore formal publication).strengthening system security to better protect personal health information entails costs. computing resources are needed to implement thechanges, convenience may be compromised if system users are requiredto perform added steps (such as typing in additional passwords), andadditional employees may be needed to monitor controls and investigatealleged violations of confidentiality. furthermore, poorly designed security controls may actually impede health care delivery in emergencies bypreventing or slowing access to needed information. it is therefore essential that system designers balance the potential costs of security mechanisms against their intended benefitsña process that requires assessinganticipated threats to personal health information, however dynamic anddiffuse those threats may be.to date, malicious attempts to sabotage the availability or integrity ofelectronic health information have been rare.14 however, the confidentiality of electronic medical records has on some occasions been compromised by individuals such as health care providers or administrators whohave legitimate access to some aspect of an electronic record. indeed, aprevious study by the computer science and telecommunications boardnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges145(1997a) found that the most significant threats to patient privacy stem notfrom violations of established confidentiality policies or security practicesbut from the routine sharing of patient health information among careproviders, administrators, public health officials, pharmacy benefits managers, direct marketers, and the likeñmost of which occurs without apatientõs knowledge or consent. the effects of such compromises on thepatient or consumer can range from embarrassment to loss of employment or loss of health insurance. in general, such concerns cannot beaddressed by the use of security technologies but are the province insteadof organizational policies and government legislation that set forth acceptable informationsharing practices.nevertheless, security technologies are increasingly important in aninternet environment. health organizations have tended to rely on trustamong health professionals to maintain the confidentiality of personalhealth information and have favored broad access to information (withsome form of review of accesses) over strict controls. connection to thelarger, public internet will require a new strategy. health organizationscontemplating the internet as a source of networking infrastructure forcritical transactions will need to be assured that they are protected againstsecurity risks while making their systems and data available to those whoneed them. the increasing interconnection of devices that monitor patientsand devices that deliver treatment to them increases the possibility andpotential consequences of attacks, particularly if the interconnectionstraverse the internet. the very act of connecting health information systems to the internet introduces a number of new vulnerabilities thatmalicious attackers can exploit. for example, data transmitted across thenetwork can be intercepted and interpreted if it is not encrypted properly.executable code downloaded from remote sites (or embedded in seemingly innocuous email messages) can alter or destroy data contained ininformation systems. denialofservice attacks can limit system availability.elements of securityto ensure availability, confidentiality, and data integrity, a systemrequires a number of supporting security functions, including the following:¥authentication mechanisms to verify that people or systems arewho they purport to be;¥access controls to ensure that authorized entities can access and/ormanipulate protected resources only in accordance with a predeterminedset of rules and privileges;¥encryption to protect data by scrambling it so that it cannot be reador interpreted by those without the proper decryption key;networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146networking health: prescriptions for the internet¥perimeter control to manage interconnections between an organizationõs internal network and external networks (such as the internet);¥attribution/nonrepudiation to ensure that actions taken (such assending or receiving a message) are reliably traceable and cannot bedenied; and¥resistance to denialofservice attacks.these functions are not necessarily performed by the network itself,but the need for them is heightened by the interconnection of informationresources to a network, which can expand the scope of potential threats toinformation systems. in fact, the most appropriate place to perform thesefunctions varies. for example, encryption by end hosts may be used toprotect the confidentiality and check the integrity of application data.other functions, such as authentication of routing updates, need to besupported by network elements such as routers. security features operateat different network layers (box 3.1), a variable that affects functionality.box 3.1the open systems interconnection model of layered networkspacketswitched networks like the internet are often described as using theopen systems interconnection model, which defines seven network layers:1. the physical layer is concerned with the accurate transmission of bits overthe physical media (fiber, cable, copper wire, etc.). the synchronous optical network is an important physicallayer technology used for the longdistance transmission of both data and voice.2. the data link layer is concerned with the delivery of packets between nodes.pointtopoint protocol is a wellknown data link protocol.3. the network layer handles the switching and forwarding of packets from onelink to another, enabling large networks to be built. the most important networklayer protocol is the internet protocol (ip). devices that forward ip packets areknown as routers, the basic building block of the internet.4. the transport layer handles endtoend delivery of data between applications, often adding reliability. the transmission control protocol, the bestknowntransportlayer protocol, provides reliable delivery of data for most internet applications.5. the session layer provides a variety of control functions used primarily bymultimedia applications. many applications bypass this layer.6. the presentation layer handles issues of data formatting and standard representations of multimedia. many applications bypass this layer.7. the application layer provides applicationspecific functionality. examplesinclude the hypertext transfer protocol, which is used for moving data across theworld wide web, and the simple mail transfer protocol, the basis of electronicmail.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges147the implementation of security requires a mix of technological solutions and institutional policies and procedures. institutional policiesdefine the rules to be enforced; these rules then are allocated to administrative procedures, physical security measures, and technology. forexample, organizations cannot simply deploy access control technologiesto limit access to online data without first establishing rules to determinewhich users have the authority to view and alter information and underwhat conditions. in addition to implementing technologies such as passwords and smart cards to authenticate users, organizations also need toinstitute procedures for issuing, changing, and revoking passwords, andpolicies must be in place for disciplining offenders.todayõs internet provides no security capabilities at the network level.the internet was originally designed to facilitate information exchangesamong mutually trusting entities (such as collaborating researchers), soinformation is encapsulated into packets that are passed through the network from node to node without encryption. software programs calledòsniffersó can be run on any node through which packets pass and canscan the contents of a messageñeven if the message contains sensitivehealth information or a userõs password. as devices are attached to theinternet, their vulnerabilities tend to become more accessible. forexample, weaknesses in operating systems can be exploited quickly overthe internet by individuals who wish to gain unauthorized access toresources. the large installed base of operating systems with knownsecurity flaws means that a large number of end points on the internet arepotentially vulnerable to attack.15 these shortcomings will become moresignificant as the demand for internetmediated health transactions growsand as the number of potential users increases.16several efforts are under way to improve the security of the internet.work continues on firewalls, which attempt to limit and control internetbased access to an organizationõs computing resources and, hence, support the objectives of confidentiality, integrity, and access. in addition,new protocols and standards are being developed that will authenticateend points and provide greater confidentiality of information transmittedacross the network. these advances promise to provide greatly increasedsecurity across the internet, but continued work will be needed to ensuretheir deploymentñand the deployment of the complementary capabilities needed to ensure their use. primary among these complementarytools are certificate authorities (described below), which will help validate the identity of end users and which pose a number of technical andorganizational challenges.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148networking health: prescriptions for the internetfirewallsa firewall is a device that isolates one part of a network from another,typically isolating an organizationõs trusted internal network from anuntrusted outside network, such as the internet. the function of a firewallis to limit access to the organizationõs network from the outside by allowing only presumably safe traffic to pass through. firewalls do so usingone of four basic designs (box 3.2) operating at three different networkinglayers. (this is significant because firewalls cannot prevent attackslaunched at layers higher than those at which the firewall operates.) typically, firewalls block all traffic from outside the organizationõs networkby default and then are configured to allow specific, limited access. forexample, a firewall might be configured to allow email messages fromoutside the corporate network to pass through as long as they are destined to the appropriate mail server. similarly, a firewall might allowaccess to an organizationõs public web server but not to other web serversbox 3.2four basic types of firewallpacket filters operate at the network layer, determining whether to pass orblock individual packets based on criteria such as source address, destinationaddress, and service requested. pass/block criteria are not modified dynamicallyin response to the content of previous messages. not all desired rules can beincluded in packet filters because the decision information (e.g., whether the message is a request or a response) may not be contained in the packet itself.circuit relays operate above the transport layer and pass or block entire conversations without examining the content of packets. they are generally considered more secure than packet filters but tend to require changes in applicationprograms or user behavior, a characteristic that makes them unsuitable for someenvironments.application gateways operate at the application layer and typically use a separate program (or proxy) for each application so that different precautions can betaken for each one. a mail gateway, for example, might rewrite header lines toeliminate references to internal machines and keep a log of senders and recipients. application gateways are well suited to sites that must authenticate outgoingmessages and are considered highly secure.dynamic packet filters combine the packet filter and application gateway functions. most packets are accepted or rejected based on information in individualincoming packets, but some packets cause modification of the rules that will beapplied to subsequent packets.source: based on material in cstb (1999).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges149that are used for proprietary, internal information. thus, a company canmaintain a public presence on the internet without opening up its entirenetwork to unlimited access by outsiders.despite their popularity, firewalls have several limitations. one problem is that they must be deployed at all places where an organizationõsnetwork connects to the outside world. although such networks oftenare designed to limit such external connectivity to one or two points, it isdifficult to prevent unauthorized connectivity at other points. individualusers may establish dialup modem connections to the internet withoutthe knowledge of the network administrators, creating a back door intothe corporate network. if the network can be compromised at such apoint, then firewalls provide no protection. malicious intruders can gainaccess to the organizationõs network and the computers attached to it andmay even acquire control of desktop computers.17 in addition, becauseeach of the specific filtering functions of a firewall must be configured, theissue of correctness of configuration is critical; the mere presence of afirewall is not an assurance that any given set of protections has beenestablished effectively.even properly configured firewalls in networks without back doorshave limitations. first, many firewalls are constructed as applicationssitting atop a standard operating system, so they are vulnerable to attacksagainst that system. a few firewalls use custombuilt operating systemsthat avoid the vulnerabilities inherent in other systems, but these customsystems can introduce new vulnerabilities that have not been detectedand remedied through the usual process of widespread use. second, asnoted earlier, a firewall cannot prevent attacks launched at layers higherthan those at which the firewall operates. for example, a packetfilteringfirewall cannot protect against attacks conveyed as email attachmentsbecause it cannot understand attachment types and their risks. third,firewall function is limited by the use of endtoend cryptography.firewalls cannot examine any fields in packets that have been encryptedor modify packets that must be cryptographically authenticated. hence,many systems tend to decrypt at the firewall or use a layered approach inwhich some encryption or decryption takes place at the firewall and someinside it.fourth, firewalls tend to limit the external electronic communicationsof those behind the firewall. by filtering out (i.e., blocking) incomingmessages that do not meet the specified access provisions, firewalls prevent internal users from receiving messages from some sources. such atradeoff is inherent in the design of a firewall, which must use somefairly static rules to filter incoming messages. fifth, firewalls increasinglyare challenged by the advent of higherspeed internet connections, whichrequire the examination of packets at an everincreasing rate. sixth, andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150networking health: prescriptions for the internetperhaps most importantly, firewalls are effective only against externalthreats to an organizationõs data networks; they do not address threatsposed by internal users who may intentionally or unintentionally violatesecurity and confidentiality policies. organizations that focus their security efforts too narrowly on external threats may not adequately protectthemselves from insiders. in many industries, including health care, theinsider threat historically has been of greater concern.security protocolsas the scope and use of internet applications grow, increased attention has been devoted to the development of protocols for user authentication and protection of messaging traffic. the protocols available todayoperate at a number of layers in the network. whereas early protocolsused in the military tended to provide linklevel security, more recentprotocols, such as internet protocol security (ipsec), transport layersecurity (tls), and pretty good privacy (pgp), tend to operate at thenetwork, transport, and application levels, respectively. all of these areproposed ietf standards and all can be expected to see more widespreadapplication. all use encryption as the basis for authentication and confidentiality.encryption technologiesencryption technologies generally are classified as either symmetrickey systems (also called private key cryptography) or asymmetric keysystems (also called public key cryptography), both of which may be usedduring the course of a single session between communicating parties.the two technologies differ in a number of respects, including the time ittakes to encrypt and decrypt messages and ease of administration. as aresult, they tend to be best suited to different types of applications. symmetric encryption, for example, tends to work better when communicatingparties have a preexisting relationship. asymmetric systems, in contrast,work well between parties that have not communicated before, as in manyelectronic commerce applications; however, revocation of credentials canbe more difficult than with symmetric encryption systems.symmetric encryption uses a single key to encrypt and decrypt data.parties wishing to exchange information securely must ensure that theyboth have access to the key, meaning that mechanisms must be in placefor distributing keys to pairs of users before secure transmissions canbegin. this process sometimes involves physically distributing disks containing the key, but this approach is slow and can be used only if thecommunicating parties can be identified in advance. a number of mechanetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges151nisms, including online key distribution centers,18 have been establishedto facilitate the electronic distribution of symmetric keys on an asneededbasis. many such mechanisms rely on asymmetric key cryptography toauthenticate parties and distribute keys before they exchange sensitiveinformation. in either case, care must be taken to ensure that keys are notdivulged to others, are changed periodically, and are revoked as needed.asymmetric (public key) cryptography is an important component ofinternet security because it provides a way in which strangers can establish the necessary set of shared information to support authentication andencryption. this means it could be useful in exchanges of patient healthrecords between two unaffiliated hospitals. in an asymmetric key system,a given user (e.g., an individual or corporation) has a pair of keys, one ofwhich is private (known only to the key owner) and one of which ispublic and may be shared with anyone (or posted in a directory). dataencrypted using the private key can only be decrypted using the publickey; and data encrypted with the public key can only be decrypted withthe private key. private keys also can be used to support authentication inthe following way: if a recipient can decrypt a message using the senderõspublic key, then the original message could have come only from theholder of the private key. conversely, a user wishing to send a messageto be read only by its intended recipient can guarantee confidentiality byusing the recipientõs public key to encrypt the message; the resulting datawill be readable only by the owner of the private key. asymmetricencryption systems require keys about 10 times longer than those of symmetric encryption systems and run considerably more slowly. for thisreason, asymmetric cryptography is used only to authenticate the participants in an information exchange and to distribute symmetric keys, whichthen are used to protect messages exchanged during the remainder of thesession.distribution of encryption keysa major challenge in using asymmetric cryptography is the distribution of public keys. a person who wishes to use a certain public key foreither encryption or authentication needs to know for certain that the keybelongs to the appropriate entity; otherwise, authentication is not possible, and encrypted data may be read by an unintended recipient. thisproblem usually is handled by having some sort of certification authority(ca) issue certificatesñdigitally signed documents that state òpublic keyx belongs to entity y.ó a certificate can be trusted only if the readerknows the public key for the ca. thus, if a user obtains a single authoritative public key (that of the ca), any other entity that needs to provenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152networking health: prescriptions for the internetownership of a certain public key to that user can do so by providing acertificate for the key.one difficulty involved in issuing certificates is scale: large numbersof certificates need to be given to all potential participants in varioustypes of transactions. health care would benefit greatly from the issuanceof certificates to all health care consumersñthe entire u.s. population.such widespread deployment of certificates would enable consumers togain authenticated access to sensitive health care information (e.g., labtest results) from any provider. thus, a public key infrastructure (pki)suitable for health care would need to have the capacity to operate on ascale of hundreds of millions of users. good initial progress has beenmade in issuing certificates to internet vendors of goods and services, butthe process has not been extended to individual consumers. one way tomake the process more scalable is to arrange cas in a hierarchy, with theroot ca certifying lowerlevel cas that issue certificates to even lowerlevel entities, and so on down to the level at which certificates for individual users are issued. in this case, the process of proving that one is theowner of a certain public key may involve providing a hierarchical chainof certificates that leads from the root down to the owner of the key. theterm pki often is applied to the general problem of distributing keys andcertificates to a large population in a scalable way.the task of building a hierarchy of cas presents its own challenges.19most notable of these is the establishment of consistent policies for issuing certificates. one ca, for example, might give certificates to anyonewho requests one by email, whereas another might require recipients tosign an affidavit and provide a birth certificate and passport before providing a certificate. in the system used to support pgp for secure email,any user with a public key can issue a certificate, creating a òweb of trustóamong particular groups of users rather than a strict hierarchy. pgp alsoallows users to decide how well they trust a certain certificate based onwho it is from and how many corroborating certificates the user holds. ina hierarchical model, if just one ca in the hierarchy uses weak proceduresto establish an individualõs identity (e.g., issuing certificates to individualswithout seeing them in person with positive proof of their identity), thenthe whole certification system is compromised, because anyone might beable to get a fake certificate from that ca. such policy differences make itdifficult for users and applications to interpret certificates and determinewhich ones meet their criteria of proof of identity, effectively undermining the goal of enabling broad deployment of asymmetric cryptography.one way to address this issue (proposed in the privacy enhanced mailarchitecture but not widely deployed) is to have the toplevel ca certifythe policies used by lowerlevel cas, so that weaker policies can be readilyidentified. however, it is clear that variability of policies among cas willnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges153add complexity to the system and is likely to weaken the overall level oftrust that can be placed in public keys.another challenge is certificate revocation, which may be required ifthe owner of a public/private key pair believes that the private key hasbeen compromised. revocation typically is handled by a combination ofexpiration dates on certificates and revocation lists, which are publishedlists of certificates that are to be considered invalid, signed by the issuingca. to be sure that a certificate is valid, therefore, it is essential to havethe most uptodate revocation list from the ca that issued the certificate.the use of expiration dates on all certificates ensures that revocation listsdo not grow infinitely large, but it requires all users to undergo periodicrecertification, thus increasing the workload on the cas. an effective pkimust have an efficient means for disseminating uptodate revocationlists.the certificate model also raises issues of personal privacy. the camodels developed to date bind a public key to a particular identity,whether an organization or individual. the use of that key, therefore, canbe linked to the activities of that organization or individual. some workhas been initiated on keycentric systems, in which names associated withpublic keys are not bound to a particular individual but have, rather, onlylocal significance for the convenience of users. the simple public keyinfrastructure working group of the ietf is attempting to develop aninternet standard that incorporates these ideas, but no related commercialproducts are available.internet protocol securityinternet protocol security is an architecture and set of standards thatprovides a variety of services, such as encryption and authentication of ippackets, at the network layer (kent and atkinson, 1998a,b,c). ipsec canprotect traffic across any lan or wideareanetwork technology and canbe terminated at end systems or security gateways (e.g., firewalls). nowbeing standardized at the ietf, ipsec has been deployed initially in virtual private networks (vpns) that use the internet as the underlyingmedium but establish an encrypted tunnel across it. an encrypted tunnelcan be created between a pair of ipsec gateways, which might be located,for example, at two geographically separated offices of a single company.each gateway encrypts the data and sends them to the other gateway.the receiving gateway then decrypts the data before passing them on tothe final recipient at the site. because the data are encrypted using a keyknown only to the two gateways, the message cannot be read by anyoneelse while crossing the internet. furthermore, the receiving gateway canauthenticate the data as having come from the sending site and not somenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154networking health: prescriptions for the internetother source on the internet. an attractive feature of this technology isthat a configuration of one device at each site can protect traffic betweenthose sites against eavesdropping and corruption. protection does notextend beyond the ends of the tunnel.virtual private networks have several limitations. first, vpns basedon tunnels do not scale well. increasing the number of participants in avpn increases the number of points at which the system can be compromised and makes the process of key management much more difficult.second, ipsec tunnels frequently require a priori knowledge of whereconnectivity will be required, because the gateways must be configuredwith appropriate keys (in the absence of an automated key managementinfrastructure) and routing information may need to be modified to forcetraffic to use the appropriate tunnel. this characteristic makes ipsec aviable alternative for information exchanges between organizations withwellestablished relationships but less effective for unexpected or transitory exchanges of information. in health care, vpns might be useful forsecure communications among elements of an integrated delivery systemor between health care providers and the health care financing administration (hcfa), which processes medicare claims, but they could notreadily support exchanges of patient records between unaffiliated hospitals in an emergency situation.third, ipsec tunnels do not necessarily protect data during the entiretransit between sender and receiver. many enterprises encrypt data onlybetween vpn gateways, which are devices that sit at the boundarybetween the public internet and the corporate network and encrypt datatraversing the internet. this configuration simplifies the key management problem because it requires encryption keys for the gateways onlyñnot for all the computers connected to themñand averts the need tomodify end usersõ machines. at the same time, it leaves data unencryptedas they pass between the usersõ computers and their respective gateways,meaning that someone with physical access to the data lines could, intheory, intercept and read the messages. some users note that, in practice,the expectation of security in a vpn can lull them into failing to encryptdata passed across it. often, unencrypted data are sent over a lan untilreaching a vpn gateway; in other cases, as with frame relay, the data arenot encrypted and are subject to misrouting.transport layer securityan alternative mechanism for providing encryption and authentication across the internet is transport layer security, which is widely usedacross the internet in the form of the secure socket layer (ssl) system(dierks and allen, 1999). this technology is widely used for transmittingnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges155sensitive information (such as credit card numbers) between webbrowsers and servers. transport layer security uses asymmetric encryption to authenticate the server (and, optionally, the client) and symmetricencryption to protect communications between the end user and the website. an organization that requires encryption for transactions processedthrough its web site obtains a certificate from a ca (e.g., verisign,cybertrust, certco, or dst). when a user connects to the organizationõsweb site, the site provides its certificate. modern web browsers comeequipped with the public keys of the major cas so that the browser canverify the public key of the web site and thereby authenticate it.secure socket layer can support encryption in both directions (to andfrom the web site), but as commonly used today it provides authentication of only the host organizationõs web site.20 the bidirectional authentication function is generally not invoked; it would require the client (aswell as the server) to have a certificate, which is not generally the case. asa result, users can readily verify the identity of the organization withwhich they are communicating, but the server site typically cannot verifythe identity of the person using asymmetric encryption techniques. existing transport layer security, therefore, has been used for credit card transactions in which authentication of the user is not performed cryptographically but rather by some other means (e.g., verification of card number,expiration date, and billing address or a name and password) in whichthe misidentification of a client has a known cost (e.g., unrecoverableaccounts receivable). in the absence of client certificates, ssl is not wellsuited to applications in which the costs of misrepresentation of identitycannot be quantified and in which secure passwords are not consideredsufficient for authentication. in the health domain, such applicationsmight include the delivery of health care via the internet or realtimepatient monitoring.although an individual can obtain a certificate in much the same waythat a corporation running a web site does, the issuance of certificates tomany individuals requires methods that are more scalable than thoseavailable today and that ensure greater compatibility in the criteria usedto issue them.21 organizations that maintain a presence on the internetgenerally find it possible to obtain a certified public key from one of thesmall number of cas, but there is no infrastructure in place to enableindividuals to obtain certificates on a large scale. such problems arelikely to inhibit the use of applications in which authentication of theconsumer is as important as authentication of the vendor.several initiatives are under way to deploy cas for health applications. in october 1999, intel announced that it would work with theamerican medical association to provide digital certificates to physiciansin the hope of enabling doctors to transmit information such as test resultsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156networking health: prescriptions for the internetto patients and other health care workers. healtheon/webmd has agreedto provide the product to physicians, while other health web sites, includingwellmed and franklin health, intend to provide access to the product onthe consumer side (reuters, 1999).22 the robert wood johnson foundation has also awarded a $2.5 million grant for a fivestate healthkeyinitiative that will explore ways to facilitate electronic exchanges of information among companies in the health sector while protecting the confidentiality of the data.23 pki is one of the solutions being considered.the financial industry has found ssl suitable for many of its consumeroriented activities, such as online banking and stock trading, but the limitations of this system in the health domain are apparent. at present,financial institutions rely primarily on certificates for server authentication and on passwords for client authentication. as users obtain moreonline accounts, they need more passwords. to help themselves remember all these passwords, users take many steps that reduce security, choosing passwords that are easy to recall (and easy for others to guess), reusingpasswords already in place for other accounts (thus making all of theiraccounts vulnerable to the compromise of a single password), and writingdown passwords (making them easier for others to find). furthermore,financial organizations usually issue passwords by mailing them to theaddress of record for the account. this process introduces significantdelay in password assignment, making the process inappropriate forhealth applications in which an emergency room physician may needaccess to a patient record at a remote hospital. the distribution process isalso limited in that a mailed password can easily be intercepted by thewrong member of a householdña vulnerability that may have moreserious consequences with health data than with financial information.hence, the tradeoffs that are acceptable for applications in the financialsector do not seem suitable for health care.confidential emailsoftware to encrypt email has been available for many years, but itsuse has been limited because, until recently, it had not been integratedwell into standard email applications. pgp is a welldeveloped collection of encryption software that is commercially supported and availablefree of charge for noncommercial use (zimmerman, 1994). although itsupports a variety of functions, it is used most often to digitally sign and/or encrypt email. to send an encrypted email message, the sender mustgain access to the public keys held by the intended recipient(s), who musthave obtained pgp public/private key pairs in advance.24 an emailmessage to be sent to several recipients is encrypted using a symmetricalgorithm with a new (secret) session key. this key is then encryptednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges157using the public key of each of the recipients, and the results of thisencryption are included in the header of the transmitted message. software run by each recipient uses the recipientõs private key to retrieve thesession key.the emerging standard for commercial email systems is secure/multipurpose internet mail extension (s/mime). mime is an extensionto standard email formats that supports the transmission of data, such asvideo and audio, that are not usually represented as ascii text. s/mimesupports the transmission of signed and/or encrypted data in email messages in much the same way that pgp does. however, s/mime usescertificates based on an international standard called x.509 version 3 andgenerally embraces the hierarchical model for cas, as opposed to pgpõswebs of trust.access controlsaccess controls are an important element of computer systems security. they consist of a range of techniques for controlling the capability ofactive entities (such as computers, processes, or users) to use passiveentities (such as computers, files, directories, or memory). for example,access controls can prevent certain users from viewing a particular database, modifying information that they can view, or running certain programs and functions. because they operate at the level of bits, accesscontrols can be used to permit users to access portions of an encrypted filewhile still protecting the overall confidentiality of the information. accesscontrols can operate at virtually all layers in a networked applicationñfrom the physical layers defining the communications medium itselfthrough the application layer consisting of software programsñand canextend access privileges based on various characteristics, such as the userõsidentity or role in the organization (box 3.3).health care poses an especially difficult challenge with respect toaccess controls because of the difficulty of balancing the need to protectconfidential information from unnecessary dissemination against the needto ensure adequate access to enable the provision of care. it is oftendifficult in a clinical setting to determine a priori who should or shouldnot be granted access to a particular patientõs medical record. manyclinicians may interact with a patient during the course of treatment, andall are likely to need access to the medical record. during a typical hospital stay, numerous health care workers, including dieticians and pharmacists who must consider potential drug and food interactions, will needaccess to the record. a study by the institute of medicine (1997) identified33 different types of individual users of patient medical recordsñincluding care providers, health plan administrators, researchers, educators,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 3.3types of access controlaccess controls can be based on labels, identity, capability, or location. inlabelbased access control, access decisions are made by comparing a labelstored in the data with a label stored with the subject attempting to access thedatañthe subjectõs identity is irrelevant. in identitybased control, access decisions are made by comparing the identity of the subject with a list of individualusers and groups of users who are allowed to access the object. as such, identitybased access controls depend on accurate authentication of the identity of theuser.1 in capabilitybased control, access decisions are made by checking a socalled permission ticket attached to the object. locationbased access controlsare typically used in conjunction with the other three forms of access control toallow different levels of access depending on the userõs physical location. forexample, a terminal in a patientõs hospital room might be configured to allow anyauthenticated care provider to access that patientõs record, whereas remote accessmight allow providers to view records of only their own patients.2these approaches can be combined to produce different forms of access control. in health care, many access controls are rolebased, using a combination oflabel, identity, and capabilitybased controls. rolebased systems grant permission for a particular individual to access particular data or capabilities based on jobfunctions. for example, administrative workers might be granted access to billingrecords but not to clinical databases containing medical records of patients. physicians and nurses might both be granted access to the clinical database, but onlyto records of patients directly under their care. similarly, distinctions might bemade with regard to which care providers can view information and which onescan enter treatment orders and/or prescriptions. roles can be defined broadly(e.g., physician, nurse, administrator) or narrowly (e.g., cardiologist, neurologist,intensivecare nurse, pediatric nurse, human resources administrator, billing clerk),depending on the granularity of the meaningful distinctions among workers in aparticular organization and the level of differentiation required.1some types of smart cards that are used for authentication contain information on useraccess privileges, providing a physical example of the close linkages between these twofunctions.2virtual private networks and firewalls can also be considered forms of highlevel accesscontrol that limit user access to a network or a portion thereof. a firewall might useidentitybased controls (such as the userõs ip address), whereas a vpn might use acombination of identitybased control (using the identity contained in a certificate) andcapabilitybased control (based on the possession of an encryption key).accreditation boards, and policy makersñand 34 representative types ofinstitutions. each of these users needs different information, and theiraccess privileges could be markedly different, compounding the difficulty of developing effective access controls and confidentiality policies(upon which access controls are based).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges159also important are tools that support rapid access for authorizedindividuals. in some cases, military or commercial secrets may requireprotection over a span of decades or more (e.g., the formula for cocacolaor technical details of nuclear weapons). patient records can contain dataequally sensitive from the standpoint of the individuals concerned, requiringlifetime protection, yet they also must be available in emergency situations to a much larger class of people. furthermore, many different usersmay have occasional permission to view or modify portions of records.for example, a major public benefit of increased automation of health careinformation systems should be the availability of the data for researchstudies. unless the subjects of the studies can be assured that their information will be protected, through either the clear enforcement of appropriate release policies or the òanonymizationó of the records, this benefitwill be limited.because they need to ensure adequate access to health information inemergencies, many health care organizations either (1) routinely givephysicians access to information on all patients within the organizationõscare or (2) routinely give them access to information on only those patientsdirectly under the physicianõs care but provide emergency overrides toallow access to the records of other physiciansõ patients if needed. theorganizations then rely on the use of audit trails to review accesses afterthe fact. such audits are intended to deter the abuse of access privileges,but their effectiveness depends on the availability of tools for automatically detecting anomalous accesses to medical records. some work isunder way on such tools, but they are still in their infancy. more work isneeded to develop sophisticated audit analysis tools that take into accountexpected usage patterns and auxiliary information, such as appointmentschedules and referral orders, to more accurately identify potential violations of confidentiality policies.the introduction of networking (e.g., the internet) compounds theaccess control problem by facilitating the exchange of electronic medicalrecords among different users of health information. standard accesscontrols can limit the use of information within a single organization butcannot control how information is used once transferred to another organization. some work is under way to develop technologies that couldcontrol such secondary uses. cryptographic envelopes and associatedrightsmanagement languages, such as those developed by ibm, xerox,and intertrust technologies, enable content owners to send data in anencrypted form to users outside their organizations and to specify theactions that different users can undertake with protected data, perhapsallowing them to view it, for example, but not to print or redistribute it.such tools may also allow auditing accesses of health records across institutional boundaries. cryptographic envelopes are still relatively new andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160networking health: prescriptions for the internetwere developed primarily to protect copyrighted material and ensureproper payment for viewing or copying it. additional work is needed toextend this model into the health sector and develop rules for sharinginformation among different types of health care organizations.network availabilitynetwork availability is another essential element of information systems security.25 availability is the probability that the network (i.e., theinternet) will be operational at a particular point in time and accessible tothose who need it. high availability is a key requirement for missioncritical and timecritical applications of the internet, including many inhealth care. if the availability of the internet is uncertain, then health careproviders cannot rely on it for the provision of remote patient care oraccess to electronic medical records in the emergency room, althoughthey may still be able to use it (with some degree of frustration) to submitbills and allow consumers to select physicians.network availability can be compromised by a number of factors,including hardware or software failures, operator errors, maliciousattacks, or environmental disruptions (e.g., lightning strikes, backhoescutting fiberoptic cable) that cause particular links or entire sectors of thenetwork to fail. availability is closely related to both qos and security inthat the failure of a link connecting two routers across the internet canaffect the capability of an isp to meet its qos guarantees, and securitymeasures that protect a network from malicious attacks (whether actualnetwork intrusions or denialof service attacks) can help ensure its availability. in addition, security measures such as ensuring software correctness and ensuring software integrity (avoiding viruses, worms, trojanhorses, etc.) will address some issues of availability. however, suchmechanisms do not necessarily protect a network from accidental operatorerrors or physical damage or ensure network survival in the face of hostile attacks.by virtue of its design, the internet is reasonably resistant to manyforms of failure. its weblike interconnections among routers ensure theexistence of multiple routes for channeling messages across the network.if one link fails, then traffic can be routed along an alternative pathway.in most cases, the network can converge on a new path that avoids thefailed link within a matter of seconds, providing sufficient reliability formany, if not most, internet applications. nevertheless, service outages dooccur. isps and web hosting facilities operate their network infrastructureswith cuttingedge technology but, despite the adequacy of the equipmentand redundant fiber links, outages lasting for hours occur several times ayear. the causes vary. faulty routers can announce incorrect routes andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges161cause disturbances to propagate throughout a providerõs network, forexample, or an upgrade can cause unexpected problems when a networkis large, despite extensive testing.to counteract these problems, many enduser organizations maintainredundant links from different isps. to do so, an organization needs torun its own internet routers and announce and manage its own routesacross the internet. the management overhead involved in deciding howto balance traffic between the links and when to switch all traffic to onelink is significant and errorprone. indeed, many of the difficulties thatarise today are directly related to the complexity of this problem. thenumber of routes, the size of the resulting data structures, the inherentlydistributed nature of routing algorithms, and the constraints applied byadministrative/business requirements all contribute to this complexity.a continued strong research effort is required to improve the reliabilityand performance of internet routing protocols.additional efforts are needed to consider means of responding todisaster scenarios in which large portions of the network fail, resulting inmajor outages. such disasters could be confined to the network, in whichcase mechanisms are needed for ensuring continued transmission of avariety of network traffic, or they could be more widespreadñfires, earthquakes, or stormsñand thus might call for ways of mobilizing health careresources despite widespread network outages. in both cases, mechanisms are needed to ensure adequate network availability for missioncritical applications and to handle highpriority traffic. many policy issues would need to be addressed to help balance the networking needs ofhealth care organizations against those of other critical communications.additional work is needed in the area of survivability to ensure that thenetwork can maintain or restore an acceptable level of performance during failure conditions by applying various restoration techniques.some work is under way in the department of defense to developtechniques for prioritizing network traffic in case of degradations thatlimit network capacity, but such work may need to be extended to consider the requirements of health care. as an example, in disaster situations, telephone service providers can block incoming calls to the affectedregion at their source (by providing a busy signal) so that limited linkcapacity can be used for more urgent outgoing calls. congestion controlon the internet is problematic because no mechanisms exist to managetraffic based on user, connection, source, or destination. routers do notstore information about users and connections, and doing so would requiresignificant memory and management mechanisms and would also raise ahost of privacy concerns that would need to be addressed. some neweralgorithms for congestion control have been designed to work at the ipnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162networking health: prescriptions for the internetlevel, but more research is needed, especially in the area of defining andenforcing flexible and varied policies for congestion control (cstb, 1999).broadband technologies for the local loopbefore the health community and health care consumers can benefitfrom future internet applications, they must gain access to sufficient bandwidth in their local connections to isps to handle the anticipated trafficloads. health care organizations that intend to transmit detailed radiographic images to remote specialists for nearrealtime interpretation, forexample, will need internet connections capable of transmitting hundredsof kilobits per second, if not megabits per second. biomedical researchinstitutes conducting distributed simulations will also need highbandwidthconnections. organizations will meet many of these needs by leasingcommunications lines with the needed capacity. alternatively, someorganizations that provide content over the internet and expect highdemand for their services may attempt to offload some of their functionsto third parties that can acquire the needed capacity, although there maybe limitations to this model in health applications (see box 3.4).box 3.4web hosting for health applications?web hosting is one approach taken by some organizations to overcomingbottlenecks in local access technologies. this term refers to an arrangement inwhich an organization hands off the management of its web server to anotherparty, such as an internet service provider, while continuing to provide the content. the responsibility for maintaining performance, reliability, redundancy, andnetwork bandwidth rests with the hosting company, which potentially can reapeconomies of scale by performing the same service for many web content providers. companies that host web sites can contract for large amounts of bandwidth and spread the costs over many customers. web hosting is popular in manybusiness settings because of the challenges involved in administering a webserver and the cost of the highbandwidth connections that are often requiredbetween a web server and the internet.despite its advantages, web hosting is not well suited to many health applications. first, the sensitivity of the information may preclude its transfer to a thirdparty in unencrypted form. second, web hosting works well when the web serverprovides content that may not change very rapidly. this condition may not holdtrue in an environment in which health care companies endeavor to provide services over the internet.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges163table 3.1 technologies for wireline connections to the internettechnologyamaximum data ratebds056 kbpsds1 dialup56 kbps to 1.344 mbpsds1 private line (t1)1.544 mbpsds3 private line (t3)45 mbpsoc3155 mbpsoc12622 mbpsoc482.5 gbpsoc19210 gbpsads, digital service; oc, optical carrier.bkbps, kilobits per second; mbps, megabits per second; gbps, gigabits per second.source: b. davie, cisco systems, presentation to the committee on september 9, 1999,washington, d.c.many businesses already connect to the internet over dedicated linesat speeds ranging from 1.5 mbps (t1 lines) to 155 mbps (oc3 access).the various possibilities are listed in table 3.1. a few organizations leaseoc12 lines capable of transmitting 622 mbps, but these tend to be limitedto a few highprofile web sites that expect large amounts of traffic. alternatively, large organizations can subscribe to services that provide highbandwidth access over a shared medium. frame relay, for example, is apacketswitched connection typically sold at speeds ranging from 56 kbpsto 1.5 mbps; packets from various subscribers are mixed together acrossthe underlying links. frame relay is less expensive than a dedicated linebut introduces some uncertainty about instantaneous capacity as otherorganizations contend for bandwidth. asynchronous transfer mode (atm)is another service that is starting to supplement frame relay as a switchedalternative to leased lines. in addition to offering higher speeds (e.g., 155mbps), atm offers a wider range of qos options than frame relay doesand was designed to handle mixed voice, data, and video.although leased lines, frame relay, and atm are viable alternativesfor a variety of institutional users, they are generally too expensive forresidential users and small businesses (such as private practioners).leased lines can cost from hundreds to thousands of dollars per month,depending on the bandwidth provided, and a 56kbps frame relay connection can cost $150 per month after installation. the overwhelmingmajority of residential users today connect to the internet using a modemconnected to a conventional telephone line. such connectivity is almostuniversally availableñaccessible from any location with a telephonelineñbut is limited in bandwidth. the fastest modem connections todayare capable of providing 56 kbps, but many residential users connect atnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164networking health: prescriptions for the internet28.8 kbps or less. these low connection speeds are suitable for many oftodayõs health applications, such as downloading online information andparticipating in chat groups, but they can be bottlenecks for large files(whether text, video, or audio) and realtime video.future health applications of the internet may demand more bandwidth to residential and small institutional users than conventionalmodems operating over telephone lines can provide. for example, ifonline health records become more widely used and begin to containmore medical imagery (e.g., x rays, ct scans, mris), then greater bandwidth will be needed to download the images quickly. if rural healthclinics begin sending radiographic images to remote specialists for nearrealtime interpretation, then they will need significant bandwidth. moresignificantly, applications such as videobased teleconsultations andteleradiology will require as much bandwidth out of the home or smalloffice (upstream to the isp) as into it (downstream into the home or office),because images will be transmitted in both directions.this requirement for symmetry in upstream and downstream bandwidth allocation represents a significant shift from most current consumerinternet applications, which assume the majority of information will flowfrom the internet to the consumer. two of the more popular technologiescurrently available for broadband access in the local loopñmodems usingcable television lines and digital subscriber line (dsl) technologies (box3.5)ñallocate bandwidth asymmetrically, providing more bandwidthdownstream than up (table 3.2).26 cable modems, for example, enableusers to receive data at speeds as high as 10 mbps but transmit data atonly 384 kbps. bandwidth is shared with neighboring residences (up toseveral hundred), so the exact amount of bandwidth available to an individual at a given point in time depends on his or her level of activity.27most deployments of dsl technology support up to 1.5 mbps downstream and 768 kbps upstream. unless highquality videoconferencing ordistributed simulation games become popular with consumers and drivethe need for downstream video, the health sector could become a driverfor this capability.it is possible to reconfigure dsl symmetries with a technology available today, discrete multitone (dmt). but this can be done only if anupcoming standards decision for veryhighspeed dsl (known as vdsl)favors the dmt approach. some vdsl technologies provide data speedsup to 26 mbps downstream and 3 mbps upstream over copper wire atdistances of up to 3,000 ft. the use of dmt makes it possible to achievemore symmetric bandwidth allocations of up to 10 mbps in each directionat distances of up to 5,000 ft. if this approach is not standardized, thenasymmetric technologies will be locked in much more strongly and diffinetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges165box 3.5technical alternatives for wireline broadband accesscable modems allow residential users to connect to internet service providersover a hybrid fibercoaxial (hfc) network that is currently installed to deliver cabletelevision signals. fiberoptic lines run from the cable operatorõs central facility (orheadend) to local neighborhoods (or nodes), where they connect into the existingnetwork of coaxial cables that extend to individual homes. one or more of the 80to 120 channels carried over a typical hfc network can be allocated to data transfers for internet access. each channel is 6 megahertz (mhz) and offers 30 megabit per second data rates shared with other users in the local neighborhood. theheadend assigns time slots to users on the same network and achieves utilizationrates of approximately 85 percent. all transmissions are encrypted between theheadend and user, and encryption keys change frequently. uplink capacity incable systems is typically limited to roughly 384 kilobits per second by channelspectrum. cable systems transmit information to the home in channels spreadacross the 50 to 700 mhz spectrum (50 mhz is the equivalent of channel 2, whichis where cable companies were required to start for compatibility reasons). datamust be sent upstream over the 5 to 42 mhz spectrum, which offers lower datarates.digital subscriber line (dsl) technology runs over the existing twistedpair copper wire that is used for telephony, but at the central office the twisted pair isconnected to a dsl modem rather than a conventional telephone switch. thesystem uses multilevel coding of information to obtain high bandwidth across limited lengths of wire. a technique called discrete multitone in effect divides thebandwidth of the telephone wire into 256 separate subchannels, each with 4 khzcapacity. because many service providers are interested in supporting videoondemand for entertainment purposes, most of these channels have been allocatedto downstream capacity, resulting in a proliferation of asymmetric digital subscriberline offerings, with roughly 6 mhz of downstream capacity and 600 khz of upstream capacity. the signal coding is an international standard.sources: milo medin, excite@home corp., presentation to the committee on december 17, 1999, stanford, calif.; hawley (1999).table 3.2 wireline technologies for residential broadband accesstechnologydownstream data rateupstream data ratedialup modemup to 56 kbpsup to 56 kbpsasynchronous digitalup to 10 mbps;up to 768 kbps;subscriber linetypically 1.5 mbpstypically 384 kbpscable modemup to 10 mbps384 kbpsnote: kbps, kilobits per second; mbps, megabits per second.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166networking health: prescriptions for the internetcult to dislodge in the future. many companies have strong vested interests in existing asymmetric technologies and might resist the use of dmt.another drawback to cable and dsl networks is that they are notcurrently accessible from all locations within the united states. cablesystems pass through approximately 80 million u.s. homes but tend to beconcentrated in densely populated, not rural, areas. they also tend topass through residential neighborhoods instead of business districts (anartifact of the focus on entertainment applications), a pattern that mayimpede the use of these technologies by some health facilities. in addition, some older cable networks cannot support cable modems. thedeployment of cable modem service is accelerating, but cable companiesare expected to focus on upgrading their infrastructure in densely populated areas, where the greatest revenue can be realized from highspeeddata services.the availability of dsl services and the amount of accessible bandwidth are highly sensitive to the distance of a residence from the centraloffice and to the quality of the copper wiring. asymmetric dsl (adsl)services typically can support data rates up to 1.5 mbps downstream and384 kbps upstream over twisted pair up to 18,000 ft, which would reachalmost 80 percent of u.s. households, according to the adsl forum. forexample, one dsl provider offers services at 384 and 768 kbps in metropolitan areas only and expects to be able to reach 65 percent of the residences in those areas. the remaining 35 percent of residences would notbe accessible with the current technology because of either their distancefrom the central office or the low quality of the telephone lines. deployment in remote or impoverished areas is not likely to proceed quickly.another means of internet access is wireless technologies, which (atleast theoretically) could be used virtually anywhere and also ease theproviderõs burden of laying down wires, fibers, and cable. lowspeedwireless services (e.g., approximately 30 kbps) are currently available inonly a few parts of the country but are likely to become more widespread.highspeed wireless is also likely to become an alternative for connectingto the internet, initially for businesses but perhaps also for consumerswho are not well served by cable or dsl. local multipoint distributionsystem (lmds) technology uses highfrequency microwaves for twowaycommunications at data rates of up to 155 mbps. it operates within areas(or cells) 2 to 5 miles in diameter. performance is limited by rain and bythe need to maintain a line of sight between the transmitting and receiving stations.satellitebased systems using either geostationary or low earth orbit(leo) satellites boast maximum transmission speeds twice as fast aslmds, 3 to 6 times faster than cable, and up to 12 times faster than dsl.such systems are likely to cost hundreds of dollars per month for servicenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges167plus $500 to $1,000 for the antenna (skoro, 1999). geosynchronous systems are limited by significant propagation delays (i.e., latency), whichmay preclude their use in some interactive applications; furthermore, theirdatacarrying capacity is distributed among a large number of users. leosystems overcome some of the problems with delay, but the satellitesmove fast and have smaller coverage areas, meaning that large numbersof satellites are needed to provide global coverage and techniques areneeded to manage the handoff of connections between satellites. highpower transmitters are needed to achieve high data rates, which implieslarge antennas and/or highfrequency operation. at higher frequencies,signals degrade more quickly in rain and other adverse weather conditions.overall, the deployment of broadband internet services has been slow,albeit increasing, in the united states. only about 1 percent of all u.s.households with internet access had broadband connections in 1999(clark, 1999). a number of factors are at play, including technology,economics (both the cost of building broadband networks and the costs ofservice), and policy. most u.s. households have yet to subscribe to broadband services because these connections are not offered in their geographic area, or because they are too expensive or not viewed as useful.the spotty coverage and high cost of highbandwidth access technologiesmean, unfortunately, that those who could benefit most from the healthcare applications of the internetñsuch as people in rural areas with limited access to medical specialistsñare the least likely to have highspeedinternet access.work in many areas, both technical and policyrelated, will be requiredto enhance network access for health applications. in some cases, technicalwork will be pursued by the computing and communications industrieswithout the participation of the health community. even so, by voicingits needs, the health community will help ensure that they are met. inother cases, the requirements of the health care community may motivateresearch. again, the articulation of specific needs will be necessary, andparticipation in research may be needed as well. the following sectionidentifies several needs that are of particular interest to the health carecommunity.privacyenhancing technologiesa popular cartoon depicts a dog sitting in front of a computer monitor and is captioned, òon the internet, nobody knows youõre a dog.ó atone level, this statement is trueñan ordinary internet user can choose acryptic pseudonym or screen name so that a typical email recipient orchat room participant cannot easily identify the individual behind thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168networking health: prescriptions for the internetname. but, unless users encrypt email before sending it, every routerthat forwards the message will be able to read it. even if the message isencrypted, each router in its path knows the network address from whichit was sent and its destination. the userõs isp knows the name and addressof the individual who is paying for the service. if the user sends themessage from a workplace, then the employer has the right to read it;even a free, public access system is not entirely safe because others maybe looking over the userõs shoulder. if the user browses the web, then theweb server reached will very likely be able to learn a lot about the userõscomputer system, including the make, operating system, and browser.accordingly, a user querying a database for information on a sensitivedisease or condition might wish to take precautions.there are powerful incentives for web servers to monitor their visitors, because the data extracted have commercial valueñthey allow businesses to know which parts of their web site are interesting to whichvisitors, thus supporting targeted advertising. consumers may benefitfrom such advertising because they learn of new products in a mannerthat coincides with their tastes, but the implied lack of privacy can be adeterrent to the use of the internet in certain health care applications.patients express considerable concern about health information. to protect their privacy, some patients withhold information from their careproviders, pay their own health expenses (rather than submit claims to aninsurance company), visit multiple care providers to prevent the development of a complete health record, or sometimes even avoid seeking care(health privacy working group, 1999). the internet may ease some suchconcerns because it enables consumers to find health information withoutvisiting their care providers, and it may eventually allow them to seekconsultation from, or be examined by, multiple providers in differentparts of the country. but without additional privacy protections, a host ofnew companies could collect information about personal health interestsfrom consumers who browse the web, exchange email with providers,or purchase health products online. profiles of patientsõ online activitiescan divulge considerable information about personal health concerns.patients have little control over how that information might be usedñorto whom it may be sold.concerns about anonymity extend beyond consumer uses of theinternet. care providers and pharmaceutical researchers, too, expressconcerns about the privacy of their internet use. some care providerswonder if their use of the internet to research diagnostic informationmight be construed as a lack of knowledge in certain areas. if such information were tracked byñor made available toñemployers or consumergroups, then it could hurt providersõ practices. pharmaceutical companies are concerned that the use of online databases by their researchersnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges169may divulge secrets about the companyõs proprietary research. theseconcerns can be addressed in a number of ways, both technical and policyoriented, but they need to be put to rest if the internet is to be used morepervasively for health applications.some mechanisms are available that users can exploit to reduce theirexposure to prying eyes on the internet. most attempt to protect theanonymity of users, so that the sender of a message or a visitor to a website cannot be identified by the recipient or the web server. encryption isthe basic engine that underlies all of these mechanisms. until now, mostresearch on anonymous communication has been carried out informallyand without specific attention to health care applications. most of theexisting mechanisms were designed and built in the context of theinternet, and the future development of internet infrastructure may beintertwined with their use. the benefits and dangers of supporting anonymous communication mechanisms have been the subjects of recurrent(and appropriate) discussions.health care offers one of the most compelling cases for the benefits.such mechanisms could make people feel safe in seeking out informationabout their own health problems, thereby leading to earlier diagnosis andbetter treatment. they could also be used to solicit reports about thespread of, for example, sexually transmitted diseases and other healthproblems that individuals may prefer to report anonymously. in addition, anonymous communication mechanisms can help users limit thecapabilities of others to build databases of their behavior or can reducethe extent to which they are the targets of undesired commercial solicitations. for all of these reasons, it would be appropriate for the funders ofhealth care research to support investigations into anonymous communication technologies for future internet architectures.anonymous emailencryption of email can prevent intermediaries in the network fromreading the messages but cannot prevent them from knowing that thesender and receiver are communicating; likewise, it cannot necessarilyhide the identity of the sender from the receiver.28 the first mechanismsdeveloped to support anonymous email messages were called remailers.these mechanisms would permit a user to register a pseudonym with theserver. mail coming from the user would then be remailed by the server,which would strip out identifying material in headers and make it appearthat the mail originated at the remailer. the remailer could forwardreplies sent to òpseudonym@remaileró to the registered user. for additional protection, the user could encrypt traffic sent to the remailer, sothat a wiretapper with connections to the remailerõs inputs and outputsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170networking health: prescriptions for the internetcould not easily defeat the mechanism. the wiretapper still could probably identify which user was sending mail to which destination by lookingat the timing and lengths of messages sent and forwarded by the remailer.a single remailer remains a point of trust and vulnerability, becauseit knows the mapping between identities and pseudonyms. this vulnerability has been exploited in legal attacks: for instance, the operator of awidely used finnish remailer discontinued operations when he foundthat, under finnish law, he could be forced to reveal the identities of hissubscribers. some u.s. companies have revealed pseudonymidentitymappings when subpoenaed in civil cases.to provide stronger protection, david chaum (1981) proposed a network of remailers, called mixes. in this scheme, each email messagetraverses a sequence of mixes and then is reencrypted for transit acrosseach link. in addition, each mix collects a set of messages over a period oftime and reorders the set before forwarding them, so that even an observerwho could trace the sequence of arrivals and departures from all mixeswould be unable to trace a message through the network. ad hoc networks of remailers that incorporate some of these approaches are nowoperating on the internet. a commercial service, anonymizer.com, provides an anonymous remailing facility that permits a sender, free ofcharge, to specify a chain of remailers.protected web browsingbecause forwarding of email does not require a realtime connectionfrom sender to receiver, it is reasonably easy to protect sender anonymity,at least partially. web browsing, because it depends on a reasonablyprompt interaction between client and server, is more difficult to protect.the timing of message arrival and departure may make it obvious to anobserver that two parties are communicating, even if the message contents and addresses are obscured. the problem of how to hide the identity of a user browsing the web from a server that it accesses can bebroken into two parts: first, how to prevent an eavesdropper from beingable to trace the path of the traffic and, second, how to prevent the serverfrom sending traffic over the path that causes the client (against the userõswishes) to reveal information that could identify the user.29 most of thetechniques developed for protecting web browsing have been, or couldbe, adapted to support anonymous email and other functions (e.g., filetransfer, news, vpns) as well.a straightforward approach to providing anonymous web browsinguses a trusted intermediary, analogous to a simple remailer. the userforwards the universal resource locator (url) of interest to the intermediary, which strips any identifying information from the requests, perhapsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges171even providing an alias, and forwards the request to the intended server.to the server, the request appears to have come from the intermediary.30the intermediary also forwards any data returned to the appropriaterequester. anonymizer.com, the rewebber (formerly janus), and proxymate(formerly lucent personal web assistant) all provide services of this sort.the communication between the client and the trusted intermediary canbe protected from simple eavesdropping by using ssl over this link. therewebber also supports anonymous publishing by providing encryptedurls. a user wishing to retrieve data from an anonymous server obtainsan encrypted url for that server (this encrypted version may be freelydistributed). the rewebber then decrypts the url, forwards the requestto the hidden server, collects the reply, and returns it to the user.technology to hide the communication path, based on an enhancement of chaumõs mix networks, has been developed and prototyped bythe naval research laboratory in its onion routing project (reed et al.,1998). this scheme creates a bidirectional, realtime connection from clientto server by initiating a sequence of applicationlayer connections withina set of nodes acting as mixes. the path through the network is definedby an òonionó (a layered, multiplyencrypted data structure) that is created by the user initiating the connection and transmitted to the network.only the onionõs creator knows the complete path; each node in the pathcan determine only its predecessor and successor, so an attack on thenode operators will be difficult to execute. this strategy also limits thedamage that a compromised onion routing node can do; as long as eitherthe first or last node in the path is trustworthy, then it is difficult for anattacker to reconstruct the path. all the packets in the network have afixed length and are mixed and reencrypted on each hop. in the eventthat the submitted traffic rate is too low to assure adequate protection,padding (dummy packets) is introduced. these defenses can be expectedto make it extremely difficult to use traffic analysis to deduce who istalking to whom, even if an eavesdropper can see all links.onion routing needs a separate screening mechanism to anonymizethe data flowing between client and server, so that the server is blockedfrom sending messages to the client that will cause client software toreveal its identity. although the onion routing project has implementedan anonymizing proxy to perform this type of blocking, a server can playany of an increasing number of tricks to determine the clientõs identity.other projects, such as proxymate, have specifically concentrated on hiding the identify of the client from the server and have devised more robusttechniques for doing so than those developed under the onion routingproject (bleichenbacher et al., 1998). these techniques can be combinedwith onion routing to provide strong protection against both trafficanalysis and servers that might try to identify their clients. a system fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172networking health: prescriptions for the internetprotecting personal identity on the web that appears to be closely basedon onion routing is being offered commercially by zero knowledgesystems (1998) of montreal.a different approach has been prototyped by at&t researchers intheir crowds system (reiter and rubin, 1998). instead of creating a separate network of mixes to forward traffic, each participant in a crowd runsa piece of software (called a jondo) that forwards traffic either to othernodes in the crowd or to its final destination. in effect, when a member ofa crowd receives a packet, it flips a weighted coin. if the coin comes upheads, then the participant decrypts the packet and sends it directly to itsinternet destination address. otherwise, it forwards the packet to anotherrandomly chosen jondo. the web server receiving the packet can onlyidentify the jondo that last forwarded the packet; it cannot deduce thepacketõs true origin. return traffic follows the same randomly generatedpath in the reverse direction.anonymous paymentin the physical world, individuals who do not want stores to tracktheir purchases can pay cash. the standard approach for buying items onthe internet, however, is to use a credit card, which is guaranteed toreveal the purchaserõs identity. several schemes based on cryptographicmechanisms can enable anonymous payment over the internet. chaum(1989) pioneered research in this field, but the rise of ecommerce hastriggered much additional work in recent years. the basic idea is tocreate the electronic analog of a coinña special number. the merchantmust be able to determine that the coin is valid (not counterfeit) withoutrequiring the identity of the individual presenting it. because computerscan copy numbers so easily, a basic problem is to prevent a coin frombeing spent twice. although chaum and others have invented schemesthat solve this problem and yet provide anonymity (at least for users whodo not try to commit fraud), it has proven difficult to transfer these solutions into the world of commerce. law enforcement authorities expressconcern over such technologies because of the potential for their use (ormisuse) in money laundering and tax evasion.anonymous data released from sensitive databasesfor many years, the u.s. bureau of the census has been charged withreleasing statistically valid data drawn from census forms without permitting individual identities to be inferred. the problem of constructinga statistical database that can protect individual identities has long beenknown to researchers (denning et al., 1979; schlırer, 1981; denning andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges173schlırer, 1983). to limit the possibility of identification, statisticians havedeveloped several techniques, such as restructuring tables so that no cellscontain very small numbers of individuals and perturbing individual datarecords so that statistical properties are preserved but individual recordsno longer reflect specific individuals (cox, 1988). medical records haveoften been disclosed to researchers under the constraint that the results ofthe research not violate patient confidentiality, and, in general, researchershave lived up to this requirement.recently, researchers have shown how easily even data stripped ofobvious identifying information (name, address, social security number,telephone number) may still disclose individual identity, and they haveproposed both technical approaches to reduce the chance of confidentiality compromises and guidelines for future release policies (sweeney,1998). the benefits of having full access to relevant data for researchpurposes and the difficulty of rendering data anonymous without distorting it are likely to require a continuing trust between researcher andsubject. an earlier report by the computer science and telecommunications board (1997a) discussed systemic flows of information in the healthcare industry and proposed specific criteria for universal patient identifiers.in particular, the report called for technical mechanisms that would helpcontrol linkages among health care databases held by different organizations, reveal when unauthorized linkages were made, and support appropriate linking. because internet connectivity greatly facilitates such linkages, it is appropriate to renew the call for research into such mechanismsin the present report.conclusionas the discussion in this chapter demonstrates, ongoing efforts toenhance the capabilities of the internet will produce many benefits for thehealth community. they will provide mechanisms for offering qos guarantees, better securing health information, expanding broadband accessoptions for consumers, and protecting consumer privacy. at the sametime, the technologies expected to be deployed across the internet in thenear future will not fully meet the needs of critical health care applications. in particular, qos offerings may not meet the need for dynamicallyvariable service between communicating entities. security technologiesmay not provide for the widespread issuance of certificates to health careconsumers. and the internet will not necessarily provide the degree ofreliability needed for missioncritical health applications. although muchcan be done with the technologies currently planned, additional effortwill be needed to make the internet even more useful to the health community.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174networking health: prescriptions for the internetone way to ensure that healthrelated needs are reflected in networking research and development is to increase the interaction between thehealth and technical communities. as researchers attest, most networking research is conducted with some potential applications in mind. thoseapplications are shaped by interactions with system users who can envision new applications. to date, interaction between health informaticsprofessionals and networking researchers has been limited. by contrast,the interests of industries such as automobile manufacturing and bankingare well represented within the networking community, in part becauseof their participation in the ietf and other networking groups. the healthcommunity may need to better engage these groups to ensure that healthinterests are considered.bibliographybirman, k.p. 1999. the next generation internet: unsafe at any speed? department ofcomputer science technical report, draft of october 21. cornell university, ithaca,n.y.blake, s., et al. 1998. an architecture for differentiated services. ietf request for comment(rfc) 2475, december.bleichenbacher, d., e. gabber, p. gibbons, y. matias, and a. mayer. 1998. òon secure andpseudonymous clientrelationships with multiple servers,ó pp. 99108 in proceedingsof the third usenix electronic commerce workshop, boston, september.braden, r., s. shenker, and d. clark. 1994. integrated services in the internet architecture: anoverview. ietf request for comment (rfc) 1633, june.braden, r., l. zhang, s. berson, s. herzog, and s. jamin. 1997. resource reservation protocol (rsvp): version 1 functional specification, ietf request for comment (rfc) 2205,september.chaum, d. 1981. òuntraceable electronic mail, return addresses, and digital pseudonyms,ócommunications of the acm 24(2):8488.chaum, d. 1989. òprivacy protected payments: unconditional payer and/or payeeuntraceability,ó pp. 6993 in proceedings of smartcard 2000, d. chaum andi. schaumullerbichl, eds. northholland, amsterdam.clark, d. 1999. òthe internet of tomorrow,ó science 285(july 16):353.clark, d., and j. wroclawski. 1997. an approach to service allocation in the internet. ietfdraft report, july. massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, mass. available online at <http://diffserv.lcs.mit.edu/drafts/draftclarkdiffsvcalloc00.txt>.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1996. the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997a. for the record: protecting electronic health information. national academy press,washington, d.c.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges175computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997b. modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defense. national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999. trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.cox, l.h. 1988. òmodeling and controlling user inference,ó pp. 167171 in database security: status and prospects, c. landwehr, ed. northholland, amsterdam.denning, d.e., and j. schlırer. 1983. òinference controls for statistical databases,ó ieeecomputer 16(7):6982.denning, d.e., p.j. denning, and m.d. schwartz. 1979. òthe tracker: a threat to statistical database security,ó acm transactions on database systems 4(1):7696.dierks, t., and c. allen. 1999. the tls protocol version 1.0. ietf request for comment(rfc) 2246, january.ellison, carl, and bruce schneier. 2000. òten risks of pki: what youõre not being toldabout public key infrastructure,ó computer security journal 16(1):17.goldberg, i., and d. wagner. 1998. òtaz servers and the rewebber network: enablinganonymous publishing on the world wide web,ó first monday 3(4). available onlineat <http://www.rewebber.com>.halabi, b. 1997. internet routing architectures. cisco press, indianapolis, ind.hawley, g.t. 1999. òbroadband by phone,ó scientific american 281(4):102103.health privacy working group. 1999. best principles for health privacy. institute for healthcare research and policy, georgetown university, washington, d.c.huitema, c. 1995. routing in the internet. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, n.j.institute of medicine (iom). 1997. the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care, rev. ed. dick, r.s., e.b. steen, and d.e. detmer, eds. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.jacobson, v. 1988. òcongestion avoidance and control,ó computer communication review18(4):314329.kent, s., and r. atkinson. 1998a. security architecture for the internet protocol. ietf requestfor comment (rfc) 2401, november.kent, s., and r. atkinson. 1998b. ip authentication header. ietf request for comment(rfc) 2402, november.kent, s., and r. atkinson. 1998c. ip encapsulating security payload (esp). ietf request forcomment (rfc) 2406, november.marbach, w.d. 1983. òbeware: hackers at play,ó newsweek 102(september 5):4246.paxson, v. 1997. òendtoend routing behavior in the internet,ó ieee/acm transactionson networking 5(october):601615.perlman, r. 1992. interconnections: bridges and routers. addisonwesley, reading, mass.peterson, l., and b. davie. 2000. computer networks: a systems approach. morgankaufmann, san francisco.reed, m.g., p.f. syverson, and d.m. goldschlag. 1998. òanonymous connections andonion routing,ó ieee journal of selected areas in communication 16(4):482494.reiter, m.k., and a.d. rubin. 1998. òcrowds: anonymity of web transactions,ó acmtransactions on information systems security 1(1):6692.reuters. 1999. òama, intel to boost online health security,ó october 13.schlırer, j. 1981. òsecurity of statistical databases: multidimensional transformation,óacm transactions on database systems 6(1):95112.shenker, s. 1995. òfundamental design issues for the future internet,ó ieee journal ofselected areas in communication 13(7):11761188. available online at <http://anawww.lcs.mit.edu/anaweb/pdfpapers/shenker.pdf>.skoro, j. 1999. òlmds: broadband wireless access,ó scientific american 281(4):108109.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176networking health: prescriptions for the internetsweeney, l. 1998. òdatafly: a system for providing anonymity in medical data,ó indatabase security xi: status and prospects, t.y. lin and s. qian, eds. chapman & hall,new york.zero knowledge systems, inc. 1998. the freedom network architecture, version 1.0. available from zks, 3981 st. laurent blvd., montreal, quebec, canada. december.zimmerman, philip. 1994. the official pgp users guide, technical report. mit press,cambridge, mass.notes1.evidence of such latencies can be seen in data collected by the national laboratoryfor applied network research, which are available at <www.nlanr.net>.2.isps typically have pops in major urban areas; a large provider might have 30 ormore pops in the united states.3.the 30 tbps figure was calculated by multiplying the number of strands per fiber(30) by the number of wavelengths that can be transmitted over each fiber (100) and thecapacity of each fiber at each wavelength (10 gbps). a terabit is 1012 (one thousand billion)bits per second.4.sonet is a standard developed by telephone companies for transmitting digitizedvoice and data on optical fibers.5.see <http://209.249.142.16/nnpm/owa/nrpublicreports.usagemonthly>.6.the 10 gbps figure results from multiplying 10 mbps by 1,000 applications (10 mbps 1,000 = 10 gbps).7.for example, even if available bandwidth were 10 times greater than the averagerequired, the load on certain links over short time periods could be large enough to imposelarge delays over those links.8.ip is a connectionless, packetswitching protocol that serves as the internetwork layerfor the tcp/ip protocol suite. it provides packet routing, fragmentation of messages, andreassembly.9.because of its reliance on rsvp, the intserv model sometimes is referred to as thersvp model.10.with rsvp, the load on the router can be expected to increase at least linearly as thenumber of end points increases. growth may even be quadraticñrelated to the square ofthe number of end points (birman, 1999).11.an example of a scaling issue for todayõs isps is the size of routing tables, whichcurrently hold about 60,000 routes (address prefixes) each. entries in the routing tableconsume memory, and the processing power needed to update tables increases with theirsize. it is important that such tables grow much more slowly than do the numbers of usersor individual applications, making it infeasible to store rsvp information if it grows indirect proportion to the number of application flows.12.the charter of the integrated services over specific link layers working group ofthe ietf is available online at <http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/issllcharter.htm>.13.the department of defense has a longstanding interest in using multicast technology to support distributed simulations. see cstb (1997b).14.one of the more notorious cases occurred when the ò414ó group broke into a machine at the national cancer institute in 1982, although no damage from the intrusion wasdetected. see marbach (1983).15.unixõs network file system (nfs) protocol, commonly used to access file systemsacross an internet connection, has weaknesses that enable a òmount pointó to be passed tounauthorized systems. surreptitious programs called trojan horses can be exploited toperform actions that are neither desired by nor known to the user.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technical challenges17716.most u.s. health care providers continue to maintain patient records on paper, butcurrent trends in clinical care, consumer health, public health, and health finance all indicate ashift to electronic records. without such a shift, the health communityõs ability to take fulladvantage of improved networking capabilities would be severely limited. with such a shift,the need for convenient, effective, and flexible means of ensuring security will be paramount.17.tools such as back orifice can enable a hacker using the internet to remotely controlcomputers using windows 95, windows 98, or windows nt. using back orifice, hackerscan open and close programs, reboot computers, and so on. the back orifice server has tobe willingly accepted and run by its host before it can be used, but it is usually distributedclaiming to be something else. other such clandestine packages also exist, most notably loki.18.for a discussion of key distribution centers, see cstb (1999), pp. 127128.19.for a discussion of some of the limitations of pki systems, see ellison and schneier(2000).20.it should be noted that when using ssl, data are decrypted the moment they reachtheir destination and are likely to be stored on a server in unencrypted form, making themvulnerable to subsequent compromise. a number of approaches can be taken to protectthis information, including reencryption, which presents its own challenges, not the least ofwhich is ensuring that the key to an encrypted database is not lost or compromised.21.whereas one organization may issue a certificate to anyone who requests one andfills out an application, another may require stronger proof of identity, such as a birthcertificate and passport. these differences affect the degree of trust that communicatingparties may place in the certificates when they are presented for online transactions.22.additional information on the intel initiative is available online at <http://www.intel.com/intel/ehealth/>.23.participating organizations in the healthkey initiative are the massachusetts healthdata consortium, the minnesota health data institute, the north carolina healthcare information and communications alliance, the utah health information network, and thecommunity health information technology alliance, based in the pacific northwest. additional information on the program is available online at <www.healthkey.org>.24.users can do this, for example, by registering their public keys with a public facility,such as the pgp key server at the massachusetts institute of technology.25.computer scientists generally consider system (or network) availability to be anelement of security, along with confidentiality and integrity. as such, availability is discussed within the security section of this chapter. other chapters of this report discussavailability as a separate consideration to highlight the different requirements that healthapplications have for confidentiality, integrity, and availability.26.cable modems and dsl services are typically not attractive to businesses, eitherbecause the number of connected hosts (ip addresses) is limited or the guaranteed minimum delivered bandwidth is low. in the san francisco bay area, asymmetric dsl deliversanywhere from 384 kbps to 1.5 mbps, depending on many factors. in other areas, dsl with256 kbps/64 kbps down/up link speed costs approximately $50 per month, but the costsskyrocket quickly to roughly $700 per month for 1.5 mbps/768 kbps down/up link speeds.27.quality of service mechanisms, such as integrated services, might help amelioratecontention for cable bandwidth, but only if the technology is widely deployed.28.there is at least one way to hide the identity of the sender: all email applicationscan be spoofed.29.intel corporation introduced an identifying number into its pentium microprocessorsto help servers identify client machines in the hopes of facilitating electronic commerce.public concern over the privacy implications of this capability caused the company to takethe additional step of providing a means to prevent the number from being revealed.30.this is essentially what a filtering firewall does: hides the identities (ip addresses) ofthose behind it.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1784organizational challenges to theadoption of the internethealth care organizations have had to adapt to many changes in theworld around them, from advances in diagnostic and therapeutic procedures to the emergence of administrative innovations such as managedcare and the invention of new information technologies. the internetrepresents a particularly profound change that will enable or force significant changes in organizational form and processesña transformation asprofound as any that have gone before. the internetõs capability toempower consumers, support dynamic information exchanges amongorganizations, and òflattenó organizational hierarchies promises to resultin new operational strategies, business models, service delivery modes,and management mechanisms. the changes will have such farreachingimplications that health care organizations need to start preparing now toadopt the advanced internet applications that are expected to appear inthe near future. organizations need to evaluate the potential and implications of new internet technologies, adapt them to local needs and conditions, minimize the risks associated with new product and service deployment, and plan to demonstrate the value of their efforts.this chapter examines challenges to the adoption of internetbasedtechnologies by health care organizations. it attempts to identify fundamental impediments to greater use of the internet that may be expected topersist for some time. the first section of the chapter provides a contextfor the analysis by reviewing the experiences of other industries that haveachieved some success in changing business practices by adoptinginternet technologies. the second section discusses in general terms whynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet179more health care organizations should be interested in adopting theinternet: because it can advance their strategic interests. the third sectiondeals with organizational barriers that hinder internet use. the discussion there addresses internal and external factors, such as policy andtechnical barriers, that influence and constrain the form and extent ofinternet use, as well as the range of uncertainties that inhibit decisionmaking regarding the internet. the last section addresses the importanceof organizational leadership.the chapter focuses primarily on internet adoption by care providerorganizations. to be sure, internet technologies will need to be adoptedby a number of different players in the health care arena, including consumers, physicians, and administrators. but because they are likely tobear many of the implementation costs and will have to address issues ofacceptance by consumers and care providers, health care organizationsare a suitable focus for this analysis.1 the discussion recognizes thathealth care organizations come in many formsñcommunitybased healthfacilities, managed care organizations (mcos) and health maintenanceorganizations (hmos), integrated delivery networks (idns), andnonacute facilitiesñeach of which may adopt the internet for differentapplications, whether management and administration, communicationsamong health care professionals, consumer education, or patient management. the specific factors that facilitate or impede internet applicationswill differ from one organization to the other, but the discussion thatfollows is broadly applicable because it identifies common challengesfaced by a variety of health care organizations as they attempt to implement a range of applications serving different types of end users.lessons from other industriesinternet technologies offer a range of potentially useful applicationsto organizations in many different industries. simple internet applications such as electronic mail (email) can facilitate communication withindistributed multinational corporations. related networked applicationscan simplify flows of information among elements of a single organization and among multiple organizations. realtime teleconferencing technologies can support meetings involving individuals located in differentcities. direct capture of sales information can enable retailers to streamline the delivery of inventory and forecast purchasing patterns. newautomation systems can allow for distributed management of supplychains, support of human resource functions, and exchange of contactand other sales information. although the deployment of these systemsis still in an early stage, internet technologies appear to have enhancedorganizational performance by lowering costs, increasing efficiency, difnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180networking health: prescriptions for the internetferentiating products and services, or creating broader markets. leadingusers of these technologies have found that the value of the internet liesnot simply in automating existing business processes but in creating newmeans of interaction between suppliers and consumers of products andservices, often with significant implications for industry structure.industries differ in many respects, and their degree of successachieved in applying the internet varies as well,2 but the experiences ofleading companies in different industries in which internet use is common suggest a number of general trends. the internet clearly is transforming the retail marketplace. online retailers such as amazon.com andbarnes and noble have changed the nature of the book industry by creating direct relationships between book buyers and book suppliers thathave significantly reduced inventory costs and eliminated many middlelayers in the distribution chainña process called disintermediation.3manufacturers of personal computers, such as dell and compaq, increasingly use the internet to market their wares directly to consumers, enablingthe consumers to customize their orders and enabling the firms to controlinventory at the lowest possible levels. online auction sites, such as ebay,have pioneered new ways to link buyers and sellers in a virtual marketplace, with some companies expanding on the auction concept to exploitspot markets for lastminute airline tickets, car rentals, hotel rooms, andother services.internally, the effective use of information technology (it), includinginternet technologies, can have a profound impact on organizational structure and function. as information is distributed efficiently to those whoneed it when they need it, lines of control and influence become clearer,and individual units often selforganize in new and more effective ways.the impact may be multifaceted, not only flattening organizational structures but also changing the skill mix of employees. early evidence suggests that online sales of automobiles reduce the set of skills needed bysalespeople (mcgarvey, 1999). in contrast, some stock brokerage firmsreport that online trading requires brokers to have a broader set of skills,although the total number of brokers needed may decline because muchof the effort of executing a stock transaction can be passed on to theconsumer.online interactions boost consumer expectations. many traditionalstorefront industriesñfrom retail to manufacturing to newsñare nowopen around the clock, competing in a highly visible and competitiveenvironment. consumers conduct many transactions at night or on holidays, when many traditional merchants shut their doors, and buyers oftencompare the prices of many internet vendors before making purchases.in fact, many internet companies encourage consumers to discuss topicsor items of particular interest. internet book merchants, for example,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet181allow readers to contribute reviews and rate the quality of an offering.internetbased vendors of financial information sometimes support clientgenerated discussion groups on specific equities or investing techniques.these techniques are intended to assist consumers in making educateddecisions and, simultaneously, attract them to particular sites.internet technologies also allow merchants to develop a deeper understanding of consumers. by automatically recording consumer choicesand preferences, merchants can offer both goods and advertising thathave a high likelihood of reaching a desired consumer audience. if appliedsuccessfully, these technologies enable merchants to develop a sense ofoneonone personalized service for thousands or even millions of customersña process sometimes called mass customization. vendors canalso allow consumers to preview, or experiment with, products prior topurchase. the film industry now routinely provides previews of upcoming movies on company sites on the web. the music industry also distributes promotional material online in the hopes of generating traditional sales. online mortgage vendors allow consumers to simulate thecashflow implications of various mortgage packages.most importantly, the customer relationships established by successful internet companies are not static. rather, the companies evolve astheir customersõ needs and sophistication evolve. the active empowerment of consumers forces companies to provide highly targeted servicesand a degree of variety commensurate with the buyersõ needs. duringthis period of rapid internet evolution, companies are literally reinventing their online demeanor on a weekly basis in response to changingperceptions developed through continued experimentation with theinternet. in essence, merchants and consumers are engaged in a consensual exploration of the means by which this technology can more effectively satisfy perceived mutual needs.advancing the strategic interests of health carejust as it is transforming other industries, the internet could enableprofound changes in the nature and structure of the health care industryand, ultimately, the delivery of health care services. the health careindustry isñand will continue to beñdiverse, with individual organizations facing different environmental pressures, pursuing different missions, and cultivating different cultures, but the internet appears capableof supporting at least a handful of common strategic interests. it could,for example, help organizations to do the following:¥improve the efficiency and effectiveness of processes that customers use to judge organizational performance (e.g., scheduling annetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182networking health: prescriptions for the internetappointment) or processes that form the core of the organizationõs business (e.g., medical management);¥develop partnerships with related organizations in an effort toleverage respective strengths (e.g., mcos partnering with pharmaceuticalcompanies to develop disease management programs or regional alliances of providers partnering to form a continuum of care);¥reach consumers directly to solidify brand names and eliminateintermediaries (disintermediation);¥improve, differentiate, and deliver new services to key customers;and¥improve organizational decision making.the internet already is empowering consumers to become moreinvolved in and take greater control of their own health and care. patientsare coming into doctorõs offices armed with information downloaded fromthe internet and suggestions for diagnoses and treatments. they maysoon be able to access information on the quality of care delivered bydifferent health care providers or facilities in their geographic region. therelationship between health care organizations and consumers could changeeven further when an organization uses networks effectively to expandits customer base beyond a specific geographic region. the assumptionthat just because a patient lives near a particular hospital he or she willopt to be treated at that hospital is challenged by the ease with whichnetworks afford patients access to clinical specialists worldwide.the internet also offers institutions the capacity to separate their business operations from the operations of the physical plant. the effectiveuse of computer networks could change the fundamental nature of ahealth care organization: from a unified entity providing a specific, fixedset of resources and services to a broker entity that acquires services andresources and offers them on an asneeded, ondemand basis. for example,physician practice groups could use the internet to acquire necessaryexpertise on demand and deliver health care from a distance or to gainaccess to distributed decisionsupport systems and highend applicationsoffered by application service providers, contracting for specific medicalservices from remote practice groups rather than investing in an expensive, but seldom used, onsite resource. the use of network technology toreach customers in their homes, schools, and workplaces would extendthe opportunity for the delivery of services and products at locationsaway from a health care organizationõs physical site (e.g., clinic, hospital,or campus).the internet also allows the integration of clinical data from affiliatedorganizations (such as two hospitals that contract with the same mco),enabling the assembly of a medical record that is more complete thannetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet183before and ensuring greater continuity and documentation of care. thisis a useful feature because the increased specialization of clinical treatment has contributed to a differentiation of health care services. specialization has led patients to acquire health services from different organizations (e.g., hospitals, physicianõs offices, dentists, laboratories), with theresult that the clinical records of most individuals are scattered acrossseveral institutions. other opportunities exist for hospitals to use theinternet to improve internal operations. they could communicate, in ajustintime fashion, with distributors of suppliesñperhaps diminishingthe need for an inventory management departmentñand with each otherto share patient records. they could reduce their reliance on local specialists by centralizing specialty services and offering them remotely viateleconsultations. care providers and payers could link together to consolidate utilization review activities.the internet also could affect the nature of health care research.networkenabled òcollaboratoriesó could allow individual research operations within a particular health organization (such as a research hospital)to interact with research groups at other organizations, creating a complex set of interacting research groups that share information and resultsacross multiple organizations and even national borders. private researchinstitutes, either freestanding or organized as research and developmentarms of pharmaceutical companies, could enhance their scientific collaborations with academic medical centers. the internet also would enableschools and universities to educate not only the students who arrive ontheir campuses but also authorized learners anywhere in the world whohave access to computers and internet connections.the contours of such change are beginning to emerge. health careorganizations are beginning to experiment with internetbased systems toserve a variety of functions. many mcos, for example, are developingweb sites to provide consumers with healthrelated information, the ability to select physicians or schedule appointments, and the tools to evaluate their immediate health care needs. other organizationsñboth mcosand new internet startupsñoffer personally tailored health informationover the web, matching profiles of a patientõs health status with existingnetworkbased health information resources. they also offer specificprograms for monitoring personal health status and can support emailexchanges between patients and designated providers. still other firmsfocus on the administrative side of health care, using secure communications channels to deliver a broad array of services required in a managedcare environment, with an emphasis on linking different types of healthcare organizations. offerings include products for enrolling in and managing personal health care plans; information services and portalsdesigned for consumers, providers, and physicians; systems for viewingnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184networking health: prescriptions for the internetlaboratory and other clinical data; and methods for referring patients tospecialists, ordering medications, and performing other clinical tasks.the returns to health care organizations on investments in internetbased applications are not yet clear, but the early evidence is encouraging. kaiserpermanente of northern california, for example, reports thata pilot program to test a consumeroriented web site for 100,000 membersreduced the number of visits to physiciansõ offices by 11 percent, reducedthe number of calls to nurses by 46 percent, and allowed 14 percent of thepatients to treat their illnesses at home. the result was not only significant cost savings for the organization but also improved consumer perceptions of kaiserpermanente and better understanding of health concerns.partners healthcare system, an integrated delivery organization based inboston, reports that internetbased systems reduced the time needed toreturn a radiology report to a health center from 72 hours to 4 hours. theorganization expects to realize a 20 percent reduction in the cost of specialist dermatology by using telemedicine.more study is required to fully evaluate the benefits of internetbasedapplications in health care, but the evidence cited above offers hope forimprovements in customer satisfaction and reductions in cost. given thepotential of the internet and the economic and other pressures facing thehealth care industry, it would be reasonable to expect significant investment in internet technologies and applications by more health care organizations.impediments to adopting internet applicationsdespite the promise of many internetbased applications, health careorganizations can be expected to encounter many obstacles as theyattempt to apply these technologies to realize their strategic visions. theywill face barriers to, and constraints on, organizational change, as well asuncertainty about the efficacy and effects of internetbased applications.a resistance to change might come from denial of the need to change, theinability to manage change, uncertainties about the types of changesneeded and how best to make them, mistaken assessments of optimalchanges, and failures in executing changes. these issues are not uniqueto the adoption of the internet and could arise in many other areas oforganizational change, including those driven by other types of information technology.4 what makes internetdriven change different is itsmagnitude and the high degree of uncertainty. organizations that havedifficulty making the necessary investments in, and managing, information technology in general will have even more difficulty adapting to theinternet.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet185barriers to changebarriers to change can assume many forms, from characteristics of themarketplace to organizational capabilities. the discussion below classifies barriers into two broad categories: (1) external factors that define theenvironment in which an organization operates and (2) internal factorsthat define the ability to implement change. external factors are oftendifficult for an individual organization to address directly because theydemand collective action. internal barriers are easier to overcome but inmany cases still present significant difficulties, even if the need for changeis recognized as urgent.external barriersexternal factors define the environment in which health care organizations operate and shape their ability to capitalize on the internet. thebarriers here assume many forms, including market forces, policies andstandards, finances, and technology.market forces. changes in the health care marketplaceñsuch as an agingpopulation, escalating health care costs, and changes in consumer preferencesñcan have positive and negative effects on health care organizations and the viability of different internetbased applications. often theeffects cannot be anticipated. for example, an aging population can beexpected to create a growing demand for health services, a trend thatcould benefit local hospitals but could raise costs for mcos, which wouldneed to provide more care on a per capita basis. an aging population alsocould boost demand for internetmediated care, but at the same time asthis would allow the patients to avoid travel, it would raise challenginginterface considerations. to the extent that changes in the marketplacesignify to organizations a need to change, they can be considered stimulifor transformation; to the extent that they work against organizations,they can be considered barriers.other market forces also affect the ability of health care organizationsto adopt internet technologies. many health care organizations have seenshrinking operating margins over the last several years, along with amarked increase in regulatory compliance requirements (such as thoserelated to the health insurance portability and accountability act of1996ñsee chapter 5) and in competing programmatic needs (glaser andhsu, 1999). the lack of coherent business models at work in many of thenew internetbased health companies (drugstore.com, healtheon/webmd, drkoop.com, etc.), along with their lack of demonstrated strongnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186networking health: prescriptions for the internetfinancial returns, does little to persuade established health care organizations to aggressively shift to an internetbased strategy.policies and standards. state and federal laws and regulations, professional standards, and technical standards, which remain largely outsidethe exclusive control of the health care industry, are among the policybarriers that can impede health care organizations. these barriers caninterfere with business opportunities enabled by the internet, reducingthe incentive to undertake initiatives that would benefit the nationõs healthcare system and citizensõ health. for example, policies on professionallicensure can impede attempts to deliver health services across state linesusing the internet; regulations on data security and patient privacy cancreate disincentives for the transmission of information across public communication networks such as the internet (these issues are addressed ingreater detail in chapter 5). policies of thirdparty payers and healthinsurance companies on payment for medical services can also affect acare provider organizationõs incentives to develop new internet applications. if services rendered cannot be reimbursed, the incentives fordeploying capabilities are reduced. for hmos the incentives may bedifferent, because hmos that reduce the costs of care can improve theirprofitability regardless of payment policies. as with market forces,changes in policy can serve either to motivate change or to constrain it.finances. financial barriers arise from the complex and sometimes perverse mechanisms for funding health care. care providers are oftenrewarded for treating disease rather than preventing it, a situation thatcan be expected to reduce interest in developing wellnessorientedinternet material. mcos may exhibit a similar lack of interest in wellnessactivities if their subscribers are young and transient. payment is oftenmade for each visit to the care providerõs office rather than for overalltreatment of a particular health problem, with the result that a providerhas little incentive to invest in internetbased disease management capabilities. moreover, providers generally cannot receive reimbursement forcare provided at a distance using electronic communications technologies(i.e., telemedicine), even if such practice could reduce the cost of care (seechapter 5). insured consumers do not pay for the vast majority of theircare and are constrained (by insurance companies) in their ability to findand engage their preferred source and form of careñchoices the internetcould facilitate. in effect, internet applications, while benefiting the patientand society, require investments by health care organizations withoutproviding any balancing revenue. furthermore, the economic anomalywhereby the consumer of care is not the purchaser of that care limits thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet187consumerõs ability to fully pursue the use of the internet to support personal health.technology. technology itself can be a barrier to change in organizations.technological change is especially rapid in information technology, asupreme challenge for organizations that try to keep up with the pace ofinnovation while controlling costs. significant technological changes cancreate major dislocations, rendering investments in existing technologiesobsolete. organizations cannot depreciate prior investments fast enoughto keep up with the rate of change or shift their technical and humaninfrastructures rapidly enough without undermining organizational performance. this process of technological change is particularly challengingin a health care context, where there is a heightened need to demonstratethe efficacy of such changeña process that can be expensive, timeconsuming, and difficult to do wellñand the wide range of potentialusers involvedñpatients, physicians, nurses, administratorsñall ofwhom may have different work flows and skills. managers attempting tolearn about the performance, maturity, and potential of new technologiesare often confronted with exaggerated claims. the distillation of truthfrom an overload of information is an errorprone and inefficient process.external barriers present a significant challenge to organizations.some barriers, such as demographic trends and the complex and politicized decisionmaking processes in health care, are often out of the control of organizations, although they can take steps to anticipate and mitigate the effects. policy barriers, in general, cannot be addressed effectivelyby individual organizations but require a coordinated and concerted effortby multiple players. policy barriers can be addressed in a number ofways, as explained in chapters 5 and 6 of this report.internal barriersinternal barriers can prevent organizations from recognizing the needto change and properly implementing the required changes. a lack oforganizational selfawareness, responsiveness, and competency, and areluctance to changeñcharacteristics of organizational inertiañall impedeattempts to implement necessary change. inertia is associated with alarge size, long history, and complicated internal hierarchiesñcharacteristics of many health care organizations. resilient organizations that overcome inertia have the capacity to revise their structure and function toeffectively manage external forces; organizations characterized by inertiaare less likely to do so.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188networking health: prescriptions for the internetan organizationõs ability to change is influenced by many factors,including its competence, sophistication, and history of action with othertechnologies. when basic operating principles must be reinterpreted,organizations require time to promulgate, implement, and assimilate thenew standards, policies, and guidelines based on the new principles. theappropriate use of new technology often requires a degree of process androle redefinition not usually encountered in health care settings. it maypose threats to individual roles or positions, challenge the rationale ofcurrent business or clinical practices, demand rapid political mobilization, encounter user resistance, and require additional funding. processesused in implementing new technologies, particularly if reliant on consensus, can slow the effort to adopt them. new forms of communication canrequire new interpretations of basic principles such as the core nature ofan organizationõs services. achieving consensus takes time, perhaps moretime than is feasible given the rapid pace of technological advances.hesitancy to change may result from legitimate organizational concerns as well as organizational inertia. organizations may be reluctant toadopt a new technology because it is a poor fit with the existing strategyor because they are in a market segment that does not reward innovation.in addition, change may be hindered by conflicts between the ability ofmanagement to maintain coherent integration throughout an enterpriseand the need for rapid deployment of a new technology in a more localized setting, such as in a particular department or laboratory.internal barriers must be changed by individual organizations. atthe very least, organizations need to be aware that these barriers exist andthat their persistence will hinder the efficient and effective use of theinternet (and a wide range of other technologies and innovations). anorganization should also be aware of the special problems associated withits market sector. barriers actually encountered, and the degree to whicha particular barrier is viewed as problematic, will vary among organizations. for example, clinics, particularly small group practices outsideacademic health science centers, lack the administrative and financialresources of larger organizations. they may face barriers to full internetimplementation as a result of reimbursement policies that prohibit costrecovery. additionally, they may lack the organizational resilience todeliberate and manage the uncertainty inherent in investing in technologies such as electronic medical records or distributed information systems.a hospital, on the other hand, may fail to capitalize on emergingtechnologies because its staff is not competent to understand how suchtechnologies could benefit the hospital. researchers whose collaboratorsonce worked across the hall now must communicate in an uptotheminute fashion with investigators around the world and are hamperedfrom doing so by the lack of common standards for reporting. knowlnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet189edge providers (e.g., libraries) face intellectual property and ownershipconsiderations that are rapidly changing and for which existing rules nolonger provide adequate guidance. professionals (e.g., physicians andnurses) are both protected by and limited by statebased licensure requirements that protect their scope of practice but limit their ability to practiceacross state lines.uncertainties surrounding internet strategieseven if organizations can identify the need to embrace an internetbased strategy and can overcome some of the internal and external barriersto doing so, their progress can be inhibited by considerable uncertaintyabout how best to proceed. uncertainty could cause an organization tohesitate to pursue an internetbased strategy and could result in suboptimal, deleterious, or unnecessarily turbulent or inefficient change.health care organizations face uncertainty in four areas: organizationaland industry structures for internetbased care, internal policies and procedures to guide internet use, technological capabilities of internetbasedsystems, and human resource issues. for each type of uncertainty, examplesof related issues and questions are presented below. the examples arenot intended to be comprehensive but to illustrate the range and depth ofthe uncertainty surrounding organizational internetbased health carestrategies.organizational and industry structureorganizations are experimenting with the use of the internet to extendor alter current processes. patients communicate with providers throughemail. telemedicine is offered as a means of increasing referrals fromremote clinics. some organizations offer medical content to providers fora subscription fee. others attempt to connect a range of providers andpayers in a region to improve the efficiency of care. some pharmaceuticalbenefits companies may choose to ally themselves with online pharmacies,whereas others may open their own online pharmacies. as these examplesdemonstrate, the internet has the potential to fundamentally alter theeconomics, organizational form, and interorganizational processes thatdefine health care today. these new arrangements and relationships arecomplex and not well understood. poor conception of new organizational forms and poor execution of a form place the transforming organization at risk. faced with such risk, many organizations hesitate to engagein new forms. others try different relationships between participants anddifferent types of services until one or more successful models emerge.the effectiveness of many new health care processes and initiatives isnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190networking health: prescriptions for the internetnot clear. will providing patient access to medical information improvethe quality of care and patient satisfaction? does telemedicine increasereferrals? will linking providers with retail pharmacies or pharmacybenefits managers improve medication compliance? will health careorganizations become, to a large degree, virtual? their limited understanding of the business value of these initiatives causes organizations tobe hesitant in carrying out internetenabled change. the examples belowexplore particular uncertainties in greater detail.example 1: changes in industry structure. internet investments and startups target industries with multiple distribution channels, large numbersof middlemen, and massive product selections (fitzgibbons and lee,1999). health care is such an industry; accordingly, a number of internetbased startups, such as healtheon, caresoft, and drkoop.com, haveentered the marketplace. the intent of these investments and startups isto significantly alter and improve the mechanisms by which health care isdistributed, in some cases simplifying administrative transfers of information and in others creating new channels for the provision of healthcare and health information. it is not clear whether extensive use of theinternet will dramatically change the health care industryõs structure,altering the relationships among consumers, care providers, managedcare organizations, and insurers. at one extreme, the introduction of theinternet could so empower consumers that they force major changes inmco operations that now tend to limit their choice of care providers andto direct providerpatient interactions. at the other extreme, the internetcould simply reinforce existing structural arrangements, perhaps makingthem more efficient.example 2: separation of content from transaction. the internet allowsseparating content acquisition (e.g., conducting research on vacationspots) from the execution of a transaction (e.g., booking a vacation). consumers often use information gathered in one location to inform decisionsmade and transactions executed elsewhere. this practice is already occurring in health care as consumers find healthrelated information on theinternet and later present it to care providers to help guide decisionmaking on diagnoses and needed tests, procedures, and medications.similarly, discussions with care providers can lead consumers to ordermedical supplies or nonprescription drugs through an internetbasedservice. the disaggregation of transaction and content, and the commoditization of both, may have profound impacts on the value proposition on which care providers have long based their existence. the ramifications are not well understood by the provider community (or mostother communities facing similar changes in value propositions). furthernetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet191more, health care providers do not understand how to take advantage ofsuch a change or ensure that patients are not harmed by it.example 3: alteration of roles.  the internet is altering the traditional rolesof and relationships among patient, primary care provider, local specialist, and tertiary hospital specialist. as consumers become better informedabout health issues, they may pressure mcos to relax restrictions on thepursuit of care directly from a specialist. patients may also seek greaterflexibility in selecting specialists who, although they may not be local,offer superior service and expertise. such specialists would include radiologists, dermatologists, nutritionists, pharmacologists, and others withknowledge of particular medical domains. if this occurs, then existingreferral patterns may be disrupted (or strengthened), and the definition ofhighquality service and care may change. patients may come to expect,as they have with many internetbased services, 24hour availability ofcertain service offerings that are customized to their needs. this trend, inturn, may reinforce the already growing roles of physiciansõ assistantsand nursepractitioners in the provision of care.example 4: management of the chronically ill. the internet may markedlyimprove the ability to manage and treat the chronically ill. improvementscan result from a range of internetbased services, such as the translationof medical text into lay language, patientmoderated chat sessions, òaskadoctoró chat rooms, remote consultations, and remote monitoring ofpatient health data. the extent to which such improvements will occur isnot clear; also unknown is the relative utility of various types of internetbased services and content. in both cases, the answers will vary by disease and across cohorts of patients.example 5: spot market purchase of health care. the internet supportsconsumers seeking to make spot market purchases of books, airline tickets,and automobiles by providing information on sources, cost, availability,and quality for the item or service to be purchased. this trend has yet tobecome important in health care, but one can imagine consumers engaging in spot market purchases of medications, vitamins, and durable medical equipment. continued experience with this model could encourageconsumers to pressure mcos to allow spot market purchases of radiologyprocedures, simple surgical procedures, medical education, and routinecheckups. consumers in feeforservice insurance plans might be able toenter this marketplace more quickly. a thriving spot market could reducethe cost of medical procedures by allowing rapid comparisons of servicesbased on cost and quality. it is not clear at this time whichñif anyñelements of health care delivery would be amenable to spot market purnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192networking health: prescriptions for the internetchases, whether and to what degree consumers would be comfortablemaking them, or the degree to which such purchases would pose risks orimprove care.internal policies and procedureseffective management of clinical, administrative, and fiscal processesand activities requires policies and procedures. internet use often createsa need for additional policies and procedures to guide and manage thetechnology and the new patterns of communication and processes it enables.for example, email interchanges between patient and providerñwhichare becoming more common in the health care sectorñrequire policies onthe appropriate types of clinical conversation (e.g., email should not beused to convey highly sensitive information unless one can ensure readerauthentication).5 a provider, serving as a moderator of a diseasespecificchat room, may inadvertently create a providerpatient relationship. theease with which a web page can be created by an employee may make itappear as if an organization is sponsoring or supporting the content whenin fact it actually disagrees with itñif indeed it is even aware of it. asorganizations grapple with the need for new management and medicalpolicies and procedures, they will find little precedent for how to dealwith these issues. faced with a policy and procedure vacuum and anabsence of models, organizations may hesitate to sanction internet usebecause they are not sure they can manage it well enough.health care organizations would benefit if they could refer to reference models to assist them in developing policies and procedures. reference models have been developed to guide other activities, such as general confidentiality and security practices unrelated to the internet. thesemodels include sample forms for consent and release of information, confidentiality policies, and chief security officer job descriptions. otherreference models have been developed to guide the use of email betweenpatients and care providers (kane and sands, 1998). the examples belowexplore some of the uncertainties surrounding internet policies and procedures.example 1: monitoring/conducting healthrelated chat sessions, bulletinboards, and forums. a number of health care organizations and consumerhealth web sites have established chat rooms and forums for their members. chat rooms and forums would appear to have clinical, service, andmarketing value for a wide variety of users: the chronically ill, familymembers of patients with debilitating diseases, consumers interested inhealth care topics, and providers. hosting such sessions, however, canraise a number of issues that the sponsoring organization and the modnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet193erator must address. for example, can the care providers who moderatethem diagnose or suggest treatment in such forums? what types ofliability does the sponsor assume for the quality of information, the behaviorof the forum participants, or the outcome of a participantõs efforts to seekcare? how do providers and patients prevent the formation of inappropriate providerpatient relationships? what are the characteristics of ahighquality forum service?example 2: assessing tradeoffs between security/confidentiality and access.some providers and payers will extend their services to enable patients toaccess their personal clinical data over the internet. a number of onlinehealth companies are already providing such a service. these servicesmay offer information related to test results and suggestions for pursuingrelated health care (e.g., a test showing high cholesterol levels might elicita recommendation to seek dietary counseling). such access and the information it provides may improve care as well as patient perceptions ofservice quality. however, such access also poses security and confidentiality risks. how can organizations balance the technical and managementmechanisms required to provide this access against the need to maintainacceptable security? furthermore, as consumers are offered the opportunity to create and maintain their own health and medical records online,new issues arise regarding data availability and integrity. data for theserecords will come from claims, electronic medical record systems, andprovider questionnaires, and from the patients themselves. a patientõsphysician may have only a limited opportunity to review this record toassure its integrity and quality.example 3: evaluating content. a large number of web sites (20,000 bysome estimates) offer health information, algorithms for evaluating healthrisks and status, and tools for managing chronic diseases. this is a potential boon to consumers because the information is widely available; however, providers and consumers often find it difficult to evaluate the quality of information available on sites that provide such content. healthcare organizations need to determine, among other matters, how they canhelp individuals distinguish reliable information dispensed by reputablesources from less reliable information, and how providers (especially physicians) can deal with the demands for untested treatments sometimescoming from individuals who perform their own internet research.technological capabilitiesall industries are besieged by claims that internetbased content, services, and applications can solve a wide range of problems that havenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194networking health: prescriptions for the internetplagued prior efforts to implement other information technologies. inhealth care, these problems include the difficulty of integrating a diverse,heterogeneous set of legacy systems; a lack of data standards; the complexity of medical practice; and complex, politicized health care organizational structures. it is not clear whether the traditional hurdles to implementation of complex clinical information systems, such as the electronicmedical record, are significantly lowered by the use of the internet andrelated technologies. for example, although the capability to provideaccess to a set of services, content, and applications through a wide arrayof workstations and other devices might reduce the support costs for anapplication, it is not clear that the aggregate cost of the application infrastructure is reduced.it is highly likely that the use of the internet and related technologieswill ease some of the challenges that have plagued the implementation ofinformation systems in health care over the years. it is also highly likelythat some challenges will persist, unaffected by the presence of theinternet. regardless of these uncertainties, new applications will be basedon the internet and related technologies, and legacy applications will befitted with interfaces to the internet. inappropriate expectations of theinternetõs ability to solve certain problems can cause the internetõs truecontributions to be disregarded or organizational resources to be squandered. as they assess internetenabled applicationsñparticularly thoseretaining the same labels as noninternet applications (e.g., electronicmedical records)ñhealth care organizations will have limited resourceswith which to understand the value added by the internet. the followingexamples illustrate some of the dilemmas that may arise.example 1: cost of applications.  many organizations assume that internetapplications will reduce hardware costs by allowing the use of networkedcomputers (or òthin clientsó) with less internal capability than traditionaldesktop computers but with access to shared information and applications stored on centralized web servers. to assist with this transition,application service providers (asps) such as abaton.com and qcsi areoffering online access to a variety of computer programs. unfortunately,few full cost comparisons have been made between aspdelivered applications and those delivered with existing architectures. moreover, theremay be hidden costs in the transfer to an internetbased infrastructure.for example, an internetbased infrastructure introduces new securityvulnerabilities that must be addressed, and the ability of organizations tobenefit from the internet will depend on other itrelated expenditures.variations across institutions in the implementation of emrs have a significant effect on an organizationõs capability to capitalize on the internetnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet195in support of delivery of care, payment and administration of care, andresearch. hospitals and insurance plans need to have networking infrastructure, electronic medical records, and clinical systems in place beforethey can develop more interesting web applications. elements of theinfrastructure include operating systems, networks, information, andapplications.example 2: design challenges. clinical applications of the internet posecomplex design challenges. the applications must support comprehensive interactions in a manner that is intuitive, efficient, dependable, andfast and that clearly indicates the next set of options. are there designsituations and tasks for which the internet, specifically the web, is eitherill suited on the one hand or well suited on the other? are additionalrefinements needed to tailor internetbased services to different usergroups with different capabilities and needs? the enrolled clients ofmcos and hmos may vary considerably in their socioeconomic statusand educational levels, for example, and different capabilities may beneeded to get them to use online services. the match between whathealth care organizations can do to better structure information access,and what clients require and can use, needs to be examined.example 3: ease of use. individual human factors constrain internet use inhealth care organizations. applications must be easy to use and wellintegrated into the daily routines of users. the use of it by health professionals is growing, but it is not uniform across regions (e.g., rural vs.urban areas), medical specialties, or practice types. some applicationshave a long history (e.g., results reporting systems), yet it is not clear whatfactors facilitate the use of information technology by health care professionals or what types of organizational arrangements or financial incentives facilitate or impede the technologyõs use. not enough is knownabout the barriers faced by care providers and consumers in using theinternet routinely in healthrelated activities. a substantial gap existsbetween a relatively small group of providers and consumers who activelyuse the internet for any purpose and the much larger group that has notused it or cannot use it. similarly, not much is known about the trainingrequirements that internet technologies will impose on provider organizations. substantial innovation and development will be needed to trainand prepare care providers. training for clinical information systems hasalways been difficult and laborintensive. applications often have hundreds of important features that are difficult to teach to care providerswho are impatient and pressed for time. does the ubiquity of the internetand web ease the training burden?networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196networking health: prescriptions for the internetexample 4: systems integration. internet technologies are touted as a newanswer to the challenges of integrating large numbers of diverse legacyinformation systems. however, it is not clear to what degree the technology can overcome difficulties such as the lack of data syntax and semanticstandards, technology incompatibilities, and vendor unwillingness toparticipate actively in projects that integrate their systems with those ofcompetitors.human resource needsa significant organizational commitment to internetbased applications requires information technology workers who are skilled in newtechnical areas such as html development, internet security, and digitalcommerce. it may also result in unanticipated needs for expanded computing and information processing skills among the organizationõs information technology staff and other workers. for example, a patient athome whose workstation experiences problems while accessing anorganizationõs web site may call that organizationõs help desk for supportbox 4.1unanticipated support coststhe emergence of unexpected technical challenges is illustrated by the experiences of kaiserpermanente of northern california with its consumerorientedweb site. the goals of the web site are to provide valueadded services to members, facilitate the appropriate use of services, and encourage members to take amore active role in their health care. kaiser members can also use the web site toobtain health information and service directories, request and receive problemspecific answers to clinical questions, participate in electronic discussion groupswith other members, and conduct simple tasks such as scheduling a clinic visit.more than 16,000 members have access to the site.one of the biggest challenges faced by the kaiser staff after system launchwas the unexpected need to provide technical coaching and services to members.member calls indicated that the quality of a web session was highly dependent onthe configuration of the memberõs browser, and kaiser was placed in the positionof providing technical support for the membersõ home computers. additional challenges included (1) assuring that clinicians would agree to use the clinical protocols developed to answer questions and (2) developing policies for monitoringñand intervening inñdiscussion groups. for instance, kaiser needed to rapidlydetermine how to respond in a safe and appropriate manner to a message postedby a member who was in a lifethreatening situation. in spite of these challenges,kaiserõs efforts have been successful enough to inspire imitation by other managed care organizations, notforprofit support groups, and forprofit health caresites.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet197(see box 4.1). the organization can thus be confronted with potentiallyenormous and unanticipated support costs. providers who enable theirpatients to send email may discover the need to redirect office staff andnursing time to responding to email and printing messages for filingwith paper records.health care organizations would benefit from information on thestaffing levels and skills needed to develop, implement, and supportinternetbased applications. some experience has accumulated duringearly demonstrations and evaluations of electronic medical records. inaddition, reallife experiences or lessons learned, in the form of case studies or conference presentations on new or more complex situations, wouldassist many organizations in planning for internet use. the followingexamples suggest some of the staffing issues that may arise.example 1: information systems staff. internetbased applications are likelyto present information systems staff with situations that are new or morecomplex than those they encountered with other technologies and applications. as more patients begin using its internetbased offerings, anorganization may be asked to provide workstation support to an increasingly broad and lesswellcontrolled user base. troubleshooting problems on a network shared by multiple organizations can be difficult. organizations may need to expand their staffs in traditional informationsystems categories, such as application developers and analysts, implementation and training, database and network technical issues, and support (e.g., for the help desk). they may also need to retrain existingworkers to enhance their understanding of new internet technologiesand the ways in which they can be used in a health care environment.example 2: process support staff. management, medical and allied healthpersonnel, and clerical staff will need to support new clinical, administrative, and financial processes. new processes may include triaging, responding to, and filing patient email and responding to patient requests forappointments; managing internet content updates and versions; developing internetbased curricula and serving as teaching assistants to remotestudents; and managing telemedicine consultation setup and sessions.additional staff may be needed to carry out these functions, and existingstaff may need retraining.establishing organizational leadership forinformation technologyhealth care organizations will not increase their commitment tointernetbased applications without strong leadership. issues of visionnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198networking health: prescriptions for the internetand leadership are often crucial determinants of successful health careapplications of information technology (it) in general. limited, narrowlyfocused applications may be implemented at a grassroots level in an organization and successfully applied, but when applications require complexinteractions acrossñand potentially beyondñthe organization, the skillsand talents of individual participants must be augmented by strong institutional leadership and a shared vision of what the organization is tryingto accomplish.until the 1980s, information systems managers for major corporations typically played a technical, serviceoriented role. they broughttechnical computing and communications skills, plus management abilities, to the organization. in recent years, however, the strategic role ofinformation systems has become clearer as corporations plan for the future,identify new business opportunities, and implement new practices forcommunicating with clients, distributing products, and managing inventories and finances. as a result, the technology managers are increasinglyidentified as key strategic leaders for the organizationsñat least outsidethe health care industry. their titles have generally evolved (typically tochief information officer (cio) or vice president for information systemsand technology) to reflect this central role. when their roles were considered technical rather than strategic, they often reported to the chief financial or administrative officer. today, however, they more typically reportto the chief executive officer (ceo) and participate actively in highlevelstrategic planning, priority setting, and decision making. in fact, peterdrucker has suggested that information and supporting technology isbecoming so central to strategy that the ceo of the future will be the cio(drucker, 1999).another important change has occurred during the past two decades.originally the it leader had little industryspecific expertise (e.g., a drugcompany cio typically would lack a medical or pharmacology background). their responsibilities were largely confined to managing largescale technical installations and implementations, and the it activitieswere viewed primarily as a cost center for the organization. it is nowaxiomatic in many industries, however, that the cio has deep industryexpertise. ideally, it leaders ògrow upó in that industry and combinedomain training or expertise with education in, or an inclination toward,information systems. rather than constituting a cost center, the it functions overseen by the cio are increasingly viewed as enablers of keybusiness or strategic opportunities. several studies across a range ofindustries have demonstrated a relationship between the effectiveness ofan organizationõs application of it and the presence of a senior, strategyoriented information systems executive (chime, 1998; earl and feeney,1995; kilbridge et al., 1998; mckenney et al., 1995; ross et al., 1996;networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet199sambamurthy, 1996). effective use of the internet is unlikely to be anexception.in health care, the pre1980 model lingers, with cios who often havelimited experience in medical environments and a set of expectations andreporting structures that deemphasize a strategic role and instead suggest a largely service and infrastructure orientation. this is true at allindustry levels, from communitybased hospitals to large biomedicalresearch universities. the reporting level and professional background ofthe information strategy leader in an organization inevitably influencethe attention that information management receives and can affect thetypes of initiatives undertaken. a cio with a background in clinicalmedicine might place a higher priority on the establishment of emrs anddecisionsupport systems than would a cio with a strictly technical background. this is not to suggest that every information strategy leader inhealth care needs to be clinically trained as well. what is critical is thatthe cio function as a professional peer of the organizationõs senior leadership. this individual will require a deep understanding of the businessand mission of the organization and a place at the table when strategicdecisions are made.health organizations need to recognize the importance of it management. certainly there are important educational issues: health care leadersmust be familiarized with the fundamental role that it needs to play intheir organizations, and an expanded cadre of future cios must be produced who have a combination of technical and management skills aswell as knowledge of the medical environment and its complex culturalconstraints. the effective mobilization of the internet for health care, andits use for highly leveraged applications and demonstration projects, willrequire an investment and commitment from medical organizations andvisionary leadership from ceos and other key managers who understand the strategic role of the technology and the return on investmentthat can be expected.summaryalthough internet use is embryonic across u.s. industry, its transforming potential can be seen in the existing internet initiatives and experiencesof health care and other organizations. health care organizations andinternetbased suppliers of products and services are experimenting withdifferent relationships between participants and different types of services, seeking to find business models that work. it is clear, however, thatthe internet can advance the strategic interests of the health care industry.nevertheless, health care organizations will confront many barriers tointernet use. as improved technologies become deployed in the internet,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200networking health: prescriptions for the internetorganizations will be able to consider new applications, and new barriersare likely to arise.research in several areas could give health care organizations theconfidence they need to move forward in using the internet. first,research on internetinduced changes in health care economics, organizational form, and interorganizational processes would provide guidancefor organizations and patients, helping to ensure that the changes areeffective and that they do not materially damage the health care system orharm the health of patients and consumers. second, model policies andprocedures for the effective management of internetrelated clinical,administrative, and fiscal processes and activities would help organizations address these issues before they become problems. third, an assessment of the internetõs capability to resolve (or not resolve) the health caresystemõs persistent difficulties with implementing and managing olderinformation technologies would provide guidance on the value added.fourth, case studies of the staffing levels and skills needed to develop,implement, and support internetbased applications could assist planning for internet use. poorly conceived or poorly executed change couldhave serious negative consequences for the nationõs health care deliverysystem, health care organizations, and health care research and education, as well as for its citizens. all of this research is needed for developing information and guidance to promote a positive transformation of thehealth care industry.referencescollege of healthcare information management executives (chime). 1998.  the healthcarecio: a decade of growth. college of healthcare information management executives,ann arbor, mich.drucker, p. 1999. management challenges for the 21st century. harper business press, newyork.earl, m., and d. feeney. 1995. òis your cio adding value?ó mckinsey quarterly1995(2):144161.fitzgibbons, stephen m., and richard lee. 1999. the health.net industry: the convergence ofhealthcare and the internet, industry report. hambrecht and quist institutional research, san francisco, calif., january 8.glaser, john p., and leslie hsu. 1999. the strategic application of information technology inhealthcare organizations: a guide to implementing integrated systems.  mcgrawhill,new york.kane, beverley, and daniel z. sands. 1998. òguidelines for the clinical use of electronicmail with patients,ó report for the amia internet working group, task force onguidelines for the use of clinicpatient electronic mail, journal of the american medicalinformatics association 5(1). available online at <http://www.amia.org/pubs/pospaper/positio2.htm>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizational challenges to the adoption of the internet201kilbridge, p., et al. 1998. òinformation systems for idns: best practices and key successfactors,ó pp. 229241 in proceedings of the 1998 annual himss conference, volume 2.healthcare information and management systems society, chicago.mcgarvey, r. 1999. òonline care chase,ó upside 11(12):154161.mckenney, j., d. copeland, and r. mason. 1995. waves of change: business evolutionthrough information technology. harvard business school press, boston, mass.organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd). 1999. the economicand social impact of electronic commerce. oecd, paris.ross, j., c. beath, and d. goodhue. 1996. òdevelop longterm competitiveness throughit assets,ó sloan management review 38(1):3142.sambamurthy, v., and r. zmud. 1996.  information technology and innovation: strategies forsuccess. financial executives research foundation, morristown, n.j.notes1.other types of health organizations that are not directly involved in the provision ofhealth careñsuch as educational institutions, insurers, and public health agenciesñwillface similar challenges, but they are not addressed specifically in the chapter.2.the organization for economic cooperation and development (1999), for example,estimates that between 2000 and 2005, 60 percent of retail stock trading but only 20 percentof book sales and 7 percent of music sales will migrate to the internet.3.similarly, online travel service companies, such as travelocity and expedia, haveadapted airline reservation systems in ways that allow consumers to make purchases directly from airlines, eliminating the travel agency as an intermediary.4.security, scalability, human resources, and cost are common areas of uncertaintywith new information systems.5.the american medical informatics association has developed a set of guidelines tohelp providers determine how to use email for patient care (kane and sands, 1998).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2025issues for public policya variety of cultural, social, and political forces influence the ways inwhich health care providers, health management organizations, publishers of biomedical knowledge, researchers, consumers, and others usethe internet. by shaping the prevailing policies of the times, these forcesinfluence not only the types of internetbased applications that are likelyto find widespread, routine use in the health sector but also the underlying technical capabilities of the internet. policies affecting internet use,and the debates surrounding them, reflect fundamental beliefs about theway things workñor should workñin the united states. in this sense,these policies are points of potential conflict, where ideas about individual rights, the public good, equal access, free enterprise, and the role ofgovernment collide with material, economic, and technical realities andpossibilities. the uncertainties surrounding the resolution of policy issues,combined with the organizational dilemmas outlined in chapter 4, generate considerable doubt in regard to the technological trajectories that arelikely to be pursued in the health sector and the capability of the internetto support health applications. clearly, the resolution of technical issueswill not, by itself, enable greater use of the internet in the health sector.1this chapter examines six policy issues that influence the use of theinternet in support of health objectives: the protection of personal healthinformation, access to information infrastructure, the protection of intellectual property contained in educational and reference materials, regulatory issues associated with the electronic delivery of medical services,federal support for health informatics research, and human resources.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy203these topics have been addressed in several national reports in the lastfive years (box 5.1), a sign of both their significance and the difficulties ofresolving them. many of these issues have implications outside the healthsector; nevertheless, their importance in health applications argues forstrong leadership by the health community in their resolution. the chapter describes the issues, the uncertainties they introduce to the internetõsdeployment in health applications, and ongoing efforts to address them.consistent with the charge to the committee and the expertise of thecommitteeõs members, the chapter does not attempt to offer recommendations for resolving these issues. in many cases, additional study will berequired to delineate more fully the tradeoffs among possible solutionsand gather sufficient information to render reliable guidance. these issueswill need to be resolved if the benefits of the internet are to accrue to thehealth community.protection of personal health informationtechnology is, to a large extent, both the cause of and the solution toconcerns about the protection of personal health information. the capability to connect health information systems to the internet exposes personal health information to hostile attacks that can alter, delete, or divulgeit (see chapter 3). at the same time, technologies such as passwords,encryption, and firewalls offer reasonably effective means of protectinginformation systems and the data contained within them. nevertheless,the effective assurance of data and service protection ultimately dependson the implementation of policies and practices within the organization(see cstb, 1997). to whom should organizations be allowed to disclosepersonal health information with and without patient consent? underwhat conditions may such disclosures be made? what steps must organizations take to protect personal health information from loss, unauthorized editing, or mischief? what types of security technologies andadministrative policies will be considered sufficient protection?concerns over patient privacy are not new in the health sector. patientsand consumer advocate groups have long expressed concern about thecollection, use, and sharing of personal health information data and thepractices used to maintain its confidentiality. these groups view theinternet as further eroding patient privacy by making health informationmore easily available to a larger number of users (e.g., insurers, directmarketers, and pharmaceutical benefits managers) and more susceptibleto security breaches. health care organizations have been sensitive to thevulnerabilities inherent in the internet and have long used private networks for data exchange, both because products and services are availableto support such networks and because the organizations are confident ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 5.1other reports that identify policy issues related tohealth informaticsrealizing the information future: the internet and beyond (cstb, 1994). thisreport looked at the powerful potential of the emerging national infrastructure toòenrich peopleõs economic, social, and political lives . . .ó (p. 1). it went on to say,òtoday we lack a consistent technical, legal, and business framework for the dissemination of intellectual property over networksó (p. 100). noting the need tobalance public and private interests, the report called for a fuller consideration ofcompeting interests, particularly as they affect òdecisions relating to societal equityñincluding access to networks and the information resources available on themó(p. 211).telemedicine: a guide to assessing telecommunications in health care (iom,1996). noting that òmost clinical applications of telemedicine have not been subjected to systematic comparative studies that assess their effects on the quality,accessibility, or cost of health care,ó this report presented a framework for evaluating the practicality, value, and affordability of telemedicine. concluding a lengthychapter on the policy context of telemedicine, the committee noted: òthe task forthis committee was to develop an evaluation framework for clinical telemedicineñnot to develop policy recommendations. the committee recognized, however, thatpolicies related to licensure, malpractice, and other matters need to be considered. . . because they may affect the availability, acceptability, effectiveness, and costof telemedicine servicesó (p. 115).for the record: protecting electronic health information (cstb, 1997). thisreport looked at technical and nontechnical mechanisms and issues relating to theprivacy and security of health care applications of the national information infrastructure. it led off with a chapter on the public policy context. among other things,it said that òbetter protection of electronic health information will require efforts atthe national level. the lack of uniform national standards for the privacy and security of health information creates particular problems for health care organizationsthat serve constituents in multiple states and creates additional confusion forpatients regarding their rights.ó it then suggested that òconflicting views of dataownership and a lack of patient understanding of health data flows and of theirrights to privacy and confidentiality also need to be addressed . . .ó (pp. 4950).the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for healthcare (iom, 1997). updating and expanding the original report, published in 1991,this revised edition provides a scorecard on the implementation of the original recommendations. the original committee concluded that òcomputerization can helpto improve patient records and that improved patient records and information management of health care data are essential elements of the infrastructure of thenationõs health care systemó (p. 46). the authors of the revised editionõs progressreport noted: òsecurity, privacy, and confidentiality concerns have become majorbarriers to widespread implementation of [computerized patient record] systemsand [the] sharing [of] data. there is, as yet, no agreement on what must be doneto establish the balance between appropriate use of health care data and the individual patientõs rights to privacyó (p. 14).health data in the information age: use, disclosure, and privacy (iom, 1994).this report examined the potential of health data organizations to improve healthnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy205their ability to manage and protect the networks. although some organizations have taken steps to use corporate intranets or virtual private networks (see chapter 3 for a description of these technologies) for sharingpersonal health information among their affiliates, they have been reluctant to transmit such information over the public internet because of concerns about privacy and security. until key decision makers in healthorganizations are confident of their ability to protect the personal healthinformation for which they are responsible, opportunities to harness theinternetõs full potential in health care will be seriously constrained.2policy makers have already entered into the debate over privacy.numerous bills have been introduced in both houses of the u.s. congressrelating to the use of medical records and personal health information(box 5.2), but the enactment of legislation has been impeded by factorssuch as differences of opinion on the restrictions that need to be placed onthe ability of different stakeholders (e.g., pharmaceutical companies,direct marketers, and legal authorities) to access health information. themost notable advance was contained in the health insurance portabilityand accountability act of 1996 (hipaa, p.l. 104191), which gave thecongress until august 1999 to pass legislation regarding the privacy ofindividually identifiable health information. the hipaa also directedthe secretary of health and human services to promulgate regulations onthe topic by february 2000 if no legislation was passed by the augustdeadline. president clinton announced proposed regulations in october1999. these regulations (1) allow health information to be used and sharedeasily for the provision of care and payments for care, (2) establish procedures for disclosing health information without the patientõs consent forpurposes such as research, public health, and oversight, (3) require writtenauthorization to use and disclose personal health information for otherpurposes, (4) create a set of fair practices to inform consumers about waysin which their information is used and disclosed, ensure that consumershave access to information about them, and allow patients to proposecorrections or amendments to such information, and (5) require organizaand the performance of the health care system, as well as issues relating to thequality of health information contained in data repositories and protection of theconfidentiality of personal health information. as the report noted, ò[e]xisting ethical, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentiality and privacy of personal health data offer some confidentiality safeguards, but major gaps and limitationsremainó (p. 15). the report recommended preemptive legislation to fill these gaps.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 5.2legislation related to health privacy issuesby may 1999, more than 70 bills on privacy and confidentiality had been introduced in the 106th congress. some of these were related to health information,others to financial information or personal information collected by companies formarketing purposes. although obviously not exhaustive, the following three senateand house bills attest to the political importance of confidentiality and privacyissues as they relate to health:¥s. 881 (bennett): medical information protection act of 1999. the billrequires specified health entities in possession of protected health information toallow the subjects of the information to inspect, copy, and amend it. it directs thesecretary of health and human services to develop model notices of confidentiality.it also mandates (1) administrative, technical, and physical safeguards for protectedhealth information, (2) a record of any protected health information disclosures,and (3) identification of disclosed information as protected health information. inaddition, the bill prescribes guidelines for the disclosure of protected health information with respect to (1) authorizations for treatment, payment, and health careoperations, (2) the individualõs nextofkin and directory information, (3) emergencycircumstances, (4) certain oversight agencies, (5) public health authorities,(6)health researchers, (7) civil, judicial, and administrative procedures, (8) certainlaw enforcement procedures, (9) payment for health care by credit card or electronicmeans, (10) certain duly authorized representatives acting on behalf of a subjectindividual (including a deceased subject individual, or a minor), and (11) certainbusiness sales, transfers, or mergers. finally, it imposes criminal penalties forknowingly and intentionally disclosing protected health information and establishescivil monetary penalties for failure to comply with the act.¥s. 578: health care personal information nondisclosure act of 1999. thebill requires specified parties to permit an individual who is the subject of protectedhealth information to inspect, copy, and request amendment of the information (or,if amendment is refused, to permit appending the individualõs disagreement statement). it requires specified parties to maintain safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, security, accuracy, and integrity of protected health information. it alsorequires specified parties to maintain a disclosure record and prohibits them fromdisclosing protected health information. in addition, the bill requires (1) a singleauthorization form for each individual for disclosure in connection with treatment,payment, and health care operations and (2) a separate authorization for otherpurposes, including disclosure with intent to sell, transfer, or use protected healthinformation for commercial advantage. it requires the development of modelauthorizations for circumstances other than treatment, payment, and health careoperations. it also allows and regulates disclosure (1) to next of kin (or anotherperson identified by the information subject), (2) of directory information, (3) regarding a deceased individual, (4) in emergencies, (5) for oversight, public health, orhealth research, (6) in civil, judicial, and administrative procedures, and (7) for lawenforcement. finally, the bill imposes criminal and civil penalties.¥s. 573/h.r. 1057: medical information privacy and security act. the billrequires specified parties to permit an individual who is the subject of protectednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy207health information to inspect and copy the information. it sets forth rules concerning (1) supplements to protected information and (2) provision of notice of privacypractices. it requires specified parties to establish safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, security, accuracy, and integrity of protected health information. it alsomandates the development of model safeguard guidelines; requires specifiedparties to establish a record of disclosures not related to payment or treatment;prohibits specified parties from disclosing protected health information, except asauthorized under this title; and allows disclosure if authorized by the informationsubject. in addition, the bill sets forth rules governing authorizations for the disclosure of protected information for purposes other than treatment or payment. itallows any person to disclose protected health information (1) to allay or remedy athreat of imminent physical or mental harm to an information subject and (2) ifthere is an identifiable threat of serious injury or death to an identifiable individualor group and other requirements are met. it authorizes disclosure to (1) a publichealth authority, (2) certain protection and advocacy agencies if an individual isvulnerable to abuse or neglect by an agency providing health or social services,(3)a health oversight agency, under specified circumstances, and (4) on courtorder, a law enforcement authority. the bill also regulates disclosure (1) to next ofkin and (2) in directories of individuals admitted to a facility. it directs the secretaryof health and human services to report to the congress whether written informedconsent should be required and, if so, under what circumstances, before personallyidentifiable data can be used for medical research. it establishes the office ofhealth information privacy, including in its duties the receiving and investigating ofviolation complaints and providing for the conduct of audits. it imposes criminaland civil sanctions. finally, it amends the privacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93579) torequire an agency that receives protected health information to promulgate rules toexempt a system of records within the agency from all but specified provisions ofthat act.source: information derived from bill summaries contained on the library of congressõs thomas system, available online at <http://thomas.loc.gov/home/thomas.html>.tions to implement technical and administrative mechanisms to protectelectronic health information. as a general rule, the regulations limitorganizations to releasing the òminimum amount [of information] necessary to accomplish the relevant purpose.ó 3these regulations represent a significant step forward in the protection of personal health information and should reduce some of the uncertainty regarding allowable exchanges of health information and minimum levels of security protection. other issues remain to be addressed,however, because the regulations were limited in several ways by thenature of the hipaa legislation. first, the regulations apply only tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208networking health: prescriptions for the internetelectronic health informationñthey do not apply to paperbased records,which constitute the bulk of all medical records held by provider organizations. second, the regulations apply only to health care providers (thattransmit information electronically), health plans, and health care clearinghouses (e.g., thirdparty administrators who process health care bills);they do not apply to the many other organizations, such as other insurers,pharmacies, and direct marketersñor consumer health web sitesñthatroutinely handle health information. furthermore, the regulations leaveunanswered the question of whether consumers need an explicit privateright of action to enforce their privacy rights. accordingly, the presidentcalled on the congress to pass comprehensive health privacy legislationthat addresses these issues (white house, 1999).further uncertainty surrounds the development of unique patientidentifiers. the hipaa requires the secretary of health and humanservices to develop standard identifiers for care providers, health plans,and patients to streamline the electronic administration of health carebenefits and payment of claims. work on both the provider and planidentifiers has moved forward without great difficulty, but efforts todevelop a patient identifier have encountered resistance because of concerns that a unique identifier might facilitate the linking of personal information from different sources, thereby eroding privacy. the departmentof health and human services (dhhs) has been reluctant to specify andimplement a unique patient identifier before a consensus is reached onthe larger issue of protecting personal health information, but it is evaluating several alternatives.4 the outcomes of these initiatives will havelongranging effects on the health care providers, payers, and deliverysystems that must implement the recommendations.international actions may further affect the ways in which personalhealth information is transmitted over the internet. the european union(eu) data protection directive, which went into effect on october 25,1998, requires eu member states to block outbound transmissions of datato countries that do not have laws providing a level of privacy protectionsimilar to that in the country where the data originated.5 the directiveaffords the people to whom the data refer a host of rights, including theright to be notified of data collection practices, to access information collected about them, and to correct inaccuracies. the directive is meant tofacilitate the flow of information among eu member states, but its provisions threaten to cut off data exchanges with the united states, which hasno national law governing data protection (bna, 1998). the clintonadministration favors a safe harbor proposal that would allow firms toselfcertify privacy policies and has been working with the eu to find amutually agreeable solution to the problem. privacy rights groups see theeu directives as an opportunity to push harder for national legislation onnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy209privacy. the trans atlantic consumer dialogue adopted a resolutionthat called on the european commission to reject the u.s. safe harborproposal and recommended instead the establishment of an internationalconvention on privacy protection to address public concerns abouttransborder data flows. leading u.s. and european consumer organizations agree that neither the industry selfregulation nor the safe harborproposal would provide adequate privacy protection for consumers.6how this issue will be resolved is unclear.access to information infrastructurethe promise of the internet in health applications is related to itsability to interconnect the diverse members of the health communityñcare providers, insurers, consumers, researchers, educators, and othersñin a dynamic fashion that allows the sharing of information and resourcesin response to changing needs and affiliations. health applications of theinternet pose particularly challenging requirements for access. first, theydemand that access be widespreadñextending to the point of care,whether it be a major hospital, rural physicianõs office, a patientõs home,or a hotel room. second, to the extent that applications such as homebased patient monitoring and telemedicine to the home become moreviable, access links will need to provide highbandwidth connections toand from the end user. third, to the extent that the internet is used forconsumeroriented health initiatives, nearuniversal access to the information infrastructure will become important to avoid exacerbating existing inequalities in the access of different population groups to healthinformation and health care. as more health transactions move online,there will be strong incentives to ensure broadbased, universal access tothe internet for patients, providers, and administratorsñparticularlyamong disadvantaged groups, who are often those most in need of healthcare. furthermore, as different technologies for highspeed (or broadband) connections to the internet are deployed that cost more than astandard telephone line, concerns will arise about unequal access to theinternet by different population segments.technology and business trends will go a long way toward improving internet access. declines in the price of internet service and accessdevices, such as personal computers, promise to make connectivity moreaffordable. over the past five years, the average price of an internetcapable computer has declined noticeably, driving further penetration ofcomputingñand the internetñinto the home. statistics from the u.s.department of commerce indicate that roughly 42 percent of all u.s.households owned a computer in 1998, and 26 percent had internet access.these figures compare to penetration rates of 24 percent for computers innetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210networking health: prescriptions for the internet1994 and 19 percent for the internet in 1997 (ntia, 1999). several companies have begun discounting the price of computers for customers whopurchase a contract for internet service. in addition, lowercost alternatives to the computers have already begun to enter the marketplace.webtv (now owned by microsoft) offers a device for as little as $99 thatenables users to send email and access the web through a standard television set, using a remote control or keyboard. the 3com corporationsells several models of the palm pilot, ranging in price from $100 to $700,which offer various degrees of connectivity to the internet but less functionality than a computer. less expensive products like these could helpovercome some of the existing economic barriers to internet access.despite these trends, the marketplace may not ensure equitable accessto information infrastructure across demographic lines. broadband connections to the internet are considerably more costly than traditional telephone line access and are not available in many parts of the countryñespecially in rural areas that might benefit most from delivery of medicalservices via the internet. in addition, many offers of discounted internetaccess require consumers to accept additional advertising or to allowgreater monitoring of online activities, a condition involving privacy thatnot all users are willing to accept. furthermore, department of commerce statistics indicate a widening gap between those with computersand internet access and those without, along a number of socioeconomiclines.7 in 1998, households at the lowest income levels were nine timesless likely to have internet access than those with incomes exceeding$75,000. fewer than 20 percent of americans with incomes of $25,000 orless have access to the internet either inside or outside the home (e.g., atwork), compared with almost 60 percent of those with incomes of $75,000or more (ntia, 1999). caucasians were two to three times more likelythan blacks or hispanics to have internet access from any location (e.g.,home or office), and rural residents lagged their urban counterparts byseveral percentage points at all income levels, although the differenceswere most notable at lower incomes. in sum, the department of commerce figures reflect increased internet access at all income levels over thepast few years but show growing gaps based on income, education, andrace. a similar study conducted in the emergency department of a largeurban pediatric teaching hospital found similar results (mandl et al., 2000).considerable public debate centers on the best way to provide universal, lowcost access to the internet. many observers argue that thefederal government should stay out of this matter, that the marketplacewill take care of consumer needs. however, telecommunications companies point out that they have little financial incentive to lay the infrastructure in locations where populations are sparse (i.e., rural areas) orproperty costs are prohibitive (i.e., urban areas). consumer groups havenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy211emphasized a need for increased pressure on telecommunications andcable companies to ensure equitable access to broadband internet service(see cfa, 1999). given the prevalence of mergers, takeovers, and partnerships that bring together cable, telephone, and wireless companies withinternet service providers (isps) to forge single entities, the issue is murkyat best.8 the resolution of this debate certainly will affect the size andscope of, and the need for, special programs such as those described in thepresent report. numerous strategies have been proposed for expandingconsumer access to the internet for health purposes specifically. theseideas range from encouraging health plans to offer their members (or thegeneral public) access to online health resources and to subsidize the costof internet access for their members to providing such support via themedicare and medicaid programs, which work with populations thatmight benefit substantially from improved internet access (eng et al.,1998).the federal government has long played a critical role in promotinguniversal access to basic telecommunications services. the notion of universal service was first promulgated in the communications act of 1934(p.l. 73416), the goal of which was òto make available, so far as possible,to all the people of the united states a rapid, efficient nationwide andworldwide wire and radio communication service with adequate facilitiesat reasonable charges.ó these words continue to provide the ideologicaland legal basis for numerous telecommunications practices and programsaimed at ensuring ubiquitous, affordable access. prior to 1983, attemptsto ensure universal service were pursued through at&tõs internal ratestructure, which effectively subsidized the extension of telecommunications services to rural areas. with the breakup of at&t, the universalservice fund (usf) was established to keep telephone service affordablein a competitive telecommunications market. telecommunications companies operating in the united states (including local and longdistancephone companies, wireless and paging companies, and pay phone providers) contribute to the usf, and companies can draw money directlyout of it to defray the cost of delivering discounted service to both lowincome communities and rural areas, where the cost of providing serviceis high. the telecommunications act of 1996 (p.l. 105125) also mandated that the usf provide support for schools, libraries, and rural healthcare providers.9 the universal service administration company (usac),under the direction of the federal communications commission, nowoperates three programs that can support internet connections: the highcost and low income program, the rural health care program, and theschools and libraries program. each of these programs provides affordable access to modern telecommunications services for schools, libraries,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212networking health: prescriptions for the internetrural health care facilities, and consumers, regardless of geographic location or socioeconomic status.usacõs rural health care program is only one of several programssponsored by the federal government that subsidize telecommunicationsservices for health care applications. other programs are operated by thedepartment of commerceõs national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) and the u.s. department of agriculture (box5.3). although these programs make significant strides toward improving the access of health care organizations and consumers to the information infrastructure, they do not necessarily provide sufficient incentivesto ensure connectivity from all home and health care settings or adequatelytarget the full range of participants in health care. for example, the ntiaõstechnology opportunities program (top) provides project funding for alimited time, after which the project is expected to become selfsustaining.a 1998 survey found that 70 percent of the demonstration and accessprojects initially funded in 1995 were still in full operation or serving analtered or expanded function (westat, 1999). the remaining 30 percenthad either been scaled back or terminated. lack of maintenance fundingwas cited as the primary threat to the sustainability of these projects.projects funded for 21 months or longer were more likely to have expanded to serve additional end users than were shortterm projects, evidence of the need for longerterm support.ironically, the dhhs does not, itself, have ongoing programs toensure internet access for care providers, consumers, or other members ofthe health community. the national library of medicine (nlm) doesprovide small ($30,000) grants for internet connections to public andprivate nonprofit institutions (or consortia) engaged in health sciencesadministration, education, research, and/or clinical care and to consortiaof healthrelated institutions. however, these grants do not subsidize thesubsequent operational costs.10 in december 1999, the clinton administration directed federal departments and agencies to take a number ofsteps aimed at improving access to the internet and narrowing the gaps inaccess across demographic groups. the dhhs was charged, along withthe education, labor, and housing and urban development departments, with expanding the nationõs network of community technologycenters to provide access to technology for lowincome americans andencourage the development of information technology applications thatwould enable those populations to start and manage their own smallbusinesses (clinton, 1999). the provision of internet access at public sitessuch as libraries, schools, and community centers may suffice for somefederal missions (e.g., education), but to serve health purposes adequately,connectivity must extend to all likely points of care, including homes.many healthrelated inquiries are too personal to be made in a publicnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy213box 5.3federal programs that support healthrelatedaccess to the internetrural health care programthe universal service administration company (usac) supports internetaccess for health care providers through the rural health care division (rhcd,formerly rural health care corporation), which was formed to ensure that healthcare providers in rural areas obtain the benefits of current telecommunicationstechnology. the universal service support program established a fund of up to$400 million annually to ensure that rural health care providers pay no more thantheir urban counterparts do for telecommunication services, including internetaccess. in particular, the rhcd aims to provide support to rural health care providers for services related to the delivery of telemedicine. initially, the rhcdexpected thousands of physicians to apply for this program. for a variety ofreasons, however, the program has not been as successful as counterpart programs that support schools and libraries. in 1999, the rhcd approved and fundedthe first applications for physician access to the internet through this program. onmay 2, 1999, the federal communications commission established $12 million asthe collection level for the second funding year of the rhcd support program(july1, 1999, to june 30, 2000). as of october 1999, the rhcd had committedtotal funding of only $1.2 million to 223 rural health care providers (usac, 1999).1although the fcc modified the collection level, it did not revise the $400 millionannual cap for the rural health care support mechanism. among their drawbacks,the rhcd programs support internet access by physicians but not midlevel practitioners or allied health professionals. furthermore, the application process isburdensome, certain telecommunications companies are excluded from participation, and the program does not underwrite bandwidth above t1 capacity. withoutchanges, the rhcd program cannot possibly meet its intended goals.2technology opportunities program3the technology opportunities program (top) is a competitive, meritbasedgrant program run by the u.s. department of commerceõs national telecommunications and information agency. the top provides matching grants to nonprofitorganizations such as schools, libraries, hospitals, public safety entities, and stateand local governments. the grants are intended to fund projects that improve thequality of, and the publicõs access to, health care, education, public safety, andother communitybased services. the funds can be used to purchase networkingequipment, including computers, videoconferencing systems, network routers, andtelephones; buy software for organizing and processing all types of information,including computer graphics and databases; train staff, users, and others in theuse of equipment and software; purchase communications services, such as internet access; evaluate the projects; and disseminate the projectõs findings.continuednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214networking health: prescriptions for the internetfrom its inception in 1994 through october 1999, the top had awarded 421grants totaling $135.8 million and leveraging $203 million in local matching funds.many grants supported projects in rural areas. sixtysix of these grants, totaling$25 million in funding, supported healthrelated projects, ranging from efforts todevelop a digital, wireless home health care service network, to the coordination ofresponses from health and emergency services to highrisk patients in the pineridge reservation, to the creation of a network linking 11 county health departments in california, through videoconferencing and data communications. nevertheless, the top has been able to fund only a small percentage of the proposedprojects. more than 5,300 grant proposals were submitted between 1994 and1998, requesting $2.1 billion in funds; only 378 of these proposals were funded,using $188 million in federal funds.distance learning and telemedicine grant and loan programthe u.s. department of agricultureõs distance learning and telemedicinegrant and loan program (dlt) was established to encourage, improve, and makeaffordable the use of telecommunications, computer networks, and related technologies for rural communities to improve their access to educational and/or medical services. the dlt helps rural schools and health care providers invest intelecommunications facilities and equipment to bring in educational and medicalresources that might not otherwise be available in rural areas. demand for thedlt has been high. approximately 500 rural medical facilities will access improvedmedical care through linkage with other rural hospitals and urban medical centersfor clinical interactive video consultation, distance training of rural health care providers, management and transport of patient information, and access to medicalexpertise or library resources.the program is intended to fund projects that deliver critically needed educational and medical services in rural areas through structured, interactive educational training and/or medical professional presence over distance. it facilitates thenetworking of multiple sites dispersed over a large area rather than single, standalone entities. the dlt covers capital costs of acquiring and installing telecommunications hardware at schools, hospitals, and other eligible sites. it alsocovers other nonrecurring capital costs of establishing a distance learning andtelemedicine system; software, training, and technical assistance are among theitems that may be purchased. funded projects are required to become selfsustaining through mechanisms such as user fees, tax assessments, or schoolbudgets. fiftytwo grants totaling $13 million were awarded in 1999.1detailed information on the awards is available online at <www.rhc.universalservice.org>.2presentation by william england, director of operations & systems, rural health careprogram, universal service administrative company, at the emerging health information infrastructure conference (hii99), april 27, 1999, washington, d.c.3the telecommunications and information infrastructure assistance program was renamed the technology opportunities program in january 2000 to reflect the opportunities new technologies provide for economic advancement.box 5.3 continuednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy215arena (e.g., a library or community center), and many health care emergencies would require rapid access to the internet outside the normaloperating hours of public facilities.it may be possible to encourage organizations to enable this type ofaccess or find mechanisms to pay for internet access for health applications. for example, incentives could be designed to entice health plans(public or private) to support some of the costs of internet access for theirpatients. isps and cable companies could be given access to usf funds(assuming they also contribute to the fund) to encourage them to expandtheir service markets. programs similar to those of the department ofagriculture and the rural health care program (see box 5.3) that targetremote and rural areas could be created for health care providers anddelivery sites in underserved and impoverished urban areas. the feasibility of the usfõs high cost and low income program, providing a basiclevel of internet service to individuals, could also be examined. could thesame economic principle that makes telemedicine an affordable solutionfor prison health care also apply to homebased telemedicine services?greater involvement by dhhsñand othersñin these initiatives may benecessary to ensure that internet access programs meet the needs of allparties in the health community, including consumers.intellectual property protectionthe laws and practices that cover the creation, storage, dissemination, and use of intellectual property shape the way in which digitalknowledge resources can be used in health professional education, biomedical research, health care, and the information systems that supporthealth care. considerable experimentation is under way to develop newmodels for distributing electronic media over the internet as the technologies for disseminating and protecting healthrelated information mature.these trends have implications for both the publication of such information and the practice of distance education in the health sector.electronic publishingthe health community has long been among the most active scientificprofessions in developing online resources providing access to currentinformation (e.g., the nlmõs medline, which predated similar bibliographic resources for other scientific communities), in part because of therapid growth in biomedical knowledge. thus, the health community(biomedical researchers in particular) has a special interest in the evolution of electronic publishing and the mechanisms by which scientists andpractitioners, as well as the public, will be able to gain unfettered access tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216networking health: prescriptions for the internetinformation on research, health care, and disease. publishers also have aspecial interest in the evolution of electronic publishing, which is seen asboth a blessing and a curse. for example, once an electronic book isproduced, the cost of distributing copies is small compared to the cost ofprinting and distributing the print equivalent (see shapiro and varian,1999). but this very quality of electronic publishing is also its burdenñpublishers fear that their revenues will shrink as readers simply òcut andpasteó the information they want, rather than purchasing the rights to useit.the remarkable expansion of webbased publishing and the proliferation of internet information centers, such as america online andmedscape, have altered the expectations of consumers, health care providers, and biomedical researchers concerning their rights to use andretain information available on the internet. these expectations sometimes conflict with publishersõ controls. technology offers a partial solution by providing the means to protect digital content, but its use canchallenge fundamental notions of concepts such as fair use. for example,simple access controls can enable distributors to implement licensingagreements that restrict the use of internetbased health informationresources to a set of users or a specific ip domain. such agreementswould not permit physicians and other health care providers to deliverinformation or virtual library services to their patients in the course ofdelivering health care. digital rights management technologies, such asthose offered by intertrust corp., ibm, and xerox, also enable producersto specify rules for the use of information products, but they do not necessarily ensure fair use.11as health professions, schools, and research centers build internetbased curriculum materials and databases, they become publishers themselves, subject to many of the concerns that commercial publishers face,and they become involved in a competitive marketplace that strains traditional agreements about the free exchange of scientific information amongpeers. recently, the national institutes of health (nih) proposed theestablishment of pubmed central, a repository for the barrierfree electronic distribution of life sciences research reports.12 if implemented asproposed, the site would alter the way scientific information is exchangedamong colleagues, bring biomedical research reports within easy reach ofconsumers, and raise additional questions about the best way for universities to manage and market intellectual property. electronic publishingñwhether it be article preprints posted on pubmed central, laboratory data deposited in international scientific databases, or a research setof health outcomes information (scrubbed of personal identifiers) distributed to colleagues from oneõs personal desktop workstationñchallengesmany existing practices. if the full potential of the internet is to be realnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy217ized, public and private agencies will need to rethink the principles ofownership, authorship, and priority that have guided scientific communication for centuries (cstb, 2000).distance educationtwo types of intellectual property issues arise out of attempts to usethe internet to deliver distance education, which is becoming increasinglypopular in the health sector. for many years, a large group of stakeholders participated in the conference on fair use (confu), which sponsored discussions on topics such as intellectual property protection andcopyright as applied to digital images, distance learning, educationalmultimedia, electronic reserves, interlibrary loans and document delivery,and inlibrary use of computer software. the groupõs final report, issuedin november 1998, contained voluntary guidelines covering several issuesbut no consensus that led to action.the issue has been brought to the fore again by passage of the digitalmillennium copyright act (dmca, p.l. 105304), which became law inseptember 1998. the dmca directed the registrar of copyright to consultwith copyright owners, nonprofit educational institutions, and nonprofitlibraries and archives and to submit recommendations to the u.s. congress on how to promote distance education through digital technologies,including interactive digital networks.13 the recommendations mustmaintain òan appropriate balance between the rights of copyright ownersand the interests of usersó and may include legislative changes. the u.s.copyright office issued its report in may 1999.14 the fair use issue needsto be resolved in a way that enhances the ability of health professionaleducators to take full and fair advantage of the internet.the second problem area concerns the rights of teaching faculty toretain the products of their intellectual work. traditionally, universitieshave allowed faculty to retain intellectual property rights (and royalties)for the textbooks and monographs they write as part of their scholarlywork. but patents that result from laboratory research have been handleddifferently; faculty members have been allowed to retain only a portion ofrevenues that result from the sale and marketing of their inventions. theincreasing market for computerbased learning tools and courses offeredacross the internet has sparked debate over whether electronic curriculum materials should be treated as textbooks or patents. because theproduction of multimedia resources and webbased course materialsoften involves many staff members, some universities have declared thesematerials to be work for hire, such that revenues are to flow to the institution rather than to any individual faculty member. a sharedownershipapproach for multimedia works, based on the patent model, has beennetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218networking health: prescriptions for the internetimplemented at some universities as an alternative to the workforhireapproach.several options could be pursued to resolve these issues. first, consideration could be given to the development of fair use provisions withinthe health domain. a set of practical guidelines and licensing exceptionscould encourage and facilitate the use of information for health care whileprotecting the rights of the owners of that information. this approach hasworked well in the educational sector, where agreement was reached onthe degree to which students and researchers can reproduce copyrightedmaterial for educational purposes.second, a distance education framework could be put in place thatremoves barriers to the delivery of instruction over the internet. withouta set of clear, workable guidelines, schools that educate health professionalsalso are unlikely to develop electronic courses and learning resources thatcome up to the standards of the courses and resources available to students in the traditional classroom. the same can be said for the societiesand associations that provide continuing medical and professional education to their members and health care organizations that wish to providepatient education programs over the internet. demonstrations of thepractical application of the confu guidelines in several health settingscould help assess the adequacy of the guidelines for health professionseducation.third, universities could develop a standard approach to the ownership of electronic curriculum materials that balances the rights of theinstitution with those of the creators of the materials and is compatiblewith other intellectual property policies. if the proposed pubmed centralmakes access to scientific knowledge truly barrierfree for both physicians and their patients, then it could fundamentally reshape the wayscientific information is brought to bear on health. however, the mechanisms for assuring the quality and scope of materials published inpubmed central have not yet been developed. the health care community needs to take an active role in devising these mechanisms.congressional activity may affect the use of distance education materials. for instance, a bill in the house of representatives, the collectionsof information antipiracy act (h.r. 354, coble), proposes copyright protection for owners of collections of electronic information. the bill ismodeled on eu law (the data directive) that protects those who makeòsubstantial investmentó in developing databases, giving them protection against extraction or reuse (without permission) for a 15year period.to obtain protection under the eu law, the united states must passequivalent protections. opponents of the bill see the proposed legislationas an infringement of existing fair use rights and believe it will have achilling effect on scientific research.15networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy219regulations affecting electronic delivery ofhealth servicesvarious communications technologies (e.g., telephones, satellite links,and private networks) have long been used to deliver health services at adistanceñthat is, telemedicine. but a number of regulatory issues haveimpeded the expanded use of information technology for telemedicine.ongoing issues include payment policies, especially those used in federalprograms (medicare and medicaid); professional licensure requirements;and standards for malpractice liability, which have impeded attempts todeliver services across state lines. the difficulties that have arisen in theregulatory environment are indicative of the broad range of potentialobstacles that could arise as the internet becomes more widely used forthe delivery of health services.payment policiesthe lack of suitable mechanisms of payment for telemedicine sessionsis a significant impediment to the use of information technology withinthe feeforservice environment that still dominates much of health care.traditional feeforservice insurers pay for health care in accordance withspecialized rules outlining the particular services that willñand will notñbe reimbursed. this model stands in contrast to capitated care systems, inwhich providers are paid based on formulas such as the number of patientsunder their care rather than the individual services rendered. providersin captitated systems have incentives to use efficacious and costeffectiveapproaches, without regard to specific reimbursement policies. they canbe expected to view internetbased service delivery not as competingwith facetoface service delivery but as a tool to reduce the customerservice burden on their facilities and confer a competitive advantage.hence, payment policies are not a significant obstacle to telemedicine incapitated care systems. however, private insurers that rely on a feeforservice model will need to revisit their payment policies.existing payment policies within the feeforservice framework haveonly begun to expand coverage into the telemedicine arena.16 prior to thebalanced budget act of 1997 (p.l. 10533), the health care financingadministration (hcfa), which pays for medicare and medicaid servicesand thus has a significant effect on payment policies throughout theindustry, reimbursed only consultations that occurred in real time andinvolved facetoface encounters between physicians and patients(although diagnostic teleradiology and telepathology were covered). theact required hcfa to expand its coverage of telemedicine services underthe medicare program beginning in january 1999, but critics contend thatnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220networking health: prescriptions for the internetbecause the new rules fail to recognize telemedicine as just another wayof delivering existing health care services they make artificial distinctionsbetween telemedicine sessions and traditional facetoface encounters.17under its new rules, which are still being evaluated, hcfa will reimburse telemedicine services according to the following criteria:18¥the medicare beneficiary (i.e., patient) must reside inñor bepresented fromña designated health professional shortage area (hpsa),typically rural or inner city locations that have difficulty attracting andretaining physicians and other health professionals. hpsas are designated based on the total number of physicians practicing in a geographicarea. the rules do not distinguish between a patientõs access to primarycare physicians vs. specialists and may not allow for reimbursement ofremote consultations by specialists in some areas.¥services delivered through telemedicine are limited to initial,followup, or confirming consultations in hospitals, outpatient facilities,or medical offices. reimbursement is not available for all the services thatare reimbursable in a facetoface encounter. moreover, the rules do notspecifically address telemedicine delivered to the home.¥services must delivered in real time through interactive audio andvideo telecommunications systems. with encouragement from the congress, hcfa is expected to consider the use of storeandforward technologies in the future, but services delivered in this form are not currentlycovered. storeandforward may be especially valuable in locations thathave limited access to affordable broadband technologies.¥the professional providing the teleconsultations must be a physician, physicianõs assistant, nursepractitioner, clinical nurse specialist, ornursemidwife. clinical psychologists, physical therapists, occupationaltherapists, and speech therapistsñwho may be reimbursed in facetofaceencountersñmay not be reimbursed for telemedicine.¥the referring professional must be a physician, physicianõs assistant, nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, nursemidwife, clinicalpsychologist, or clinical social worker. another professional may act inplace of a referring professional to present the patient to the consultant,provided that the professional is employed by the referring professionaland is a practitioner as defined in the regulation. registered nurses,licensed practical nurses, and others (including family members for homecare) are not allowed to present cases to consulting practitioners.¥as specified by the balanced budget act, the regulations require fees for telemedicine encounters to be shared by the referringand consulting practitioners. hcfa will make a single payment tothe consulting professional, 25 percent of which is to be paid to thereferring professional.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy221these rules have allowed greater experimentation with telemedicinereimbursement programs. as of july 1999, medicare teleconsultationdemonstration projects in georgia, iowa, north carolina, and west virginiawere allowing more than 100 hospitals to receive reimbursement for outpatient services involving specialist telemedicine. reimbursement oftelemedicine providers under the medicaid program was ongoing in atleast 11 states, with several others considering such programs. but, asoutlined above, the rules do not yet address payment for all the diverseforms of telemedicine that could arise in an internetmediated environment. for example, they do not cover storeandforward systems formedical images (either still or video), videoconferencing to the home, orprovision of services outside designated shortage areas. payment policiesmay have to be modified further to enable these applications as othertechnical and organizational impediments are overcome and the applications themselves are demonstrated to be efficacious and costeffective.a primary requirement for paymentñand a current obstacle to itñisfirm evidence of the efficacy of telemedicine services. a number of pilotprojects have demonstrated the technical feasibility of telemedicine, butrigorous evaluations of the outcomes of care remain sparse.19 without abetter evidentiary basis and more supportive policies, institutions andproviders are understandably reluctant to invest in the equipment andtraining needed to provide highquality telemedicine services. furtherstudies are under way to scientifically evaluate telemedicine applications.the nlm is funding dozens of demonstration projects and has explicitlycalled for evaluations of efficacy.20 other demonstration projects fundedby federal agencies such as dhhs, the veterans administration, thedepartment of defense, and the national aeronautics and space administration may help create a stronger scientific basis on which to determinethe efficacy of various telemedicine services, leading eventually to moreliberal reimbursement policies.liability and licensureuse of the internet creates a host of new issues regarding licensureand liability. for instance, it is not clear what rules and regulations control the online prescription of medications or confer credentials on remoteinterpreters of radiographs. some people fear that the internet couldallow quacks to masquerade as credentialed physicians. at the sametime, existing licensure and liability rules do not adequately cover currentand potential internet applications in the health sector. statebased liability for malpractice poses an additional barrier to widespread use of theinternet for telemedicine services across state lines. under the principleof longarm jurisdiction, any state court can claim authority over transnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222networking health: prescriptions for the internetactions in another state if it can prove that it has jurisdiction over thattransaction (alberts et al., 1998). the internet confounds the matter ofwhich state has jurisdiction in the delivery of health services and information because the transaction is distributed among two or more locations.for example, if a patient undergoes a remotely managed surgical procedure at a medical center in a neighboring state, which state has jurisdiction if there is a malpractice claimñthe patientõs home state, the state inwhich the medical center is located, or the surgeonõs home state? mustthe surgeon be licensed in all three states? a mechanism is needed forcrafting creative solutions to situations such as these.similarly, under the present rules, care providersñwhether physicians, nurses, or physical therapistsñare licensed to practice in individualstates. with telemedicine or internetbased health care more generally, itbecomes practical for providers to practice across state lines. but thiswould be illegal, and telemedicine programs that do cross state lines mustensure that a licensed physician is located at both ends of the transaction.this practice not only raises the cost of telemedicine consultations orprocedures (and all of the cost may not be reimbursed, as noted above)but also makes it difficult to implement telemedicine services in smalltowns that have other health professionals but lack physicians. these areoften the very areas that have the greatest need for telemedicine services.indeed, one of the reasons the telemedicine program at east carolinauniversity has been so successful is because it operates only within thestate of north carolina, thereby precluding the need to engage two physicians simultaneously. the university employs specially trained nursesand physician assistants in rural clinics to present telemedicine cases,helping to reduce costs and extend the reach of the telemedicine services.at the same time, local jurisdictions face strong political pressures tomaintain strict licensure provisions. allowing the interstate practice ofmedicine could make it easier for larger, more prestigious health careinstitutions to win business from local institutions, hurting the localeconomy.a number of mechanisms have been proposed to address licensingconcerns. the western governorsõ association, for example, proposedseveral options that states could pursue voluntarily, including explicitexemptions for remote consultations under specific conditions; participation in a uniform regional licensure program that would provide a limited license valid in any of the participating states; or institutional ornetwork licensure for all network physicians (gilbert, 1995; wga, 1995).an alternative that has been proposed is the development of model legislation for encouraging uniformity in state licensing rules (iom, 1996). amore recent report from the southern governorsõ association called forcontinued examination of the licensure issue to develop a strategy fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy223evaluating interstate licensure (southern governorsõ association, 1999).clearly, continued effort is needed in this area.the congress and executive branch agencies continue to expressinterest in telemedicine. the information infrastructure task force andthe joint working group on telemedicine are chartered to considertelemedicine applications. accordingly, the congress has begun to consider corrective legislation in some of the pertinent areas (see box 5.4).other groups, too, have begun to address regulatory issues associatedwith telemedicine. the southern governorsõ association, for example,identified payment and licensure as two of the primary impediments totelemedicine and called for the establishment of a national licensing system, although not necessarily one run by the federal government (southern governorsõ association, 1999). regardless of the particular mechanisms used, it is clear that regulatory barriers such as liability andlicensure need to be remedied before the internet can be exploited fully toexpand the availability of health care.federal support for healthrelated informationtechnology researchthe combined efforts of both private and public organizations will berequired to ensure the robust development of health care applications ofthe internet. to date, federal health agencies have exhibited uneven interest in pursuing internetbased applications or in funding information technology research that could support health applications. by comparison,the department of defense and the veterans administrationñboth ofwhich operate large health care delivery systems but are not federal healthagenciesñhave invested considerable resources in the development oftelemedicine programs and infrastructure for sharing patient healthrecords.21 some entities within the dhhs, most notably the nlm butalso other elements of the nih and the agency for healthcare researchand quality, have invested in research on healthrelated applications ofcomputing and communications technologies, but dhhs itself has notmade use of the internet in healthrelated activities a priority. as onedhhs official noted, the department has considerable expertise in information technologies, but that expertise is dispersed throughout its manyagencies, with no formal mechanisms for crossfertilization and exchangeof ideas. no clear advocate exists within the dhhs for internetbasedapplications.22 as a result dhhs and its constituent agencies sometimeslag behind the institutions they serve (e.g., they do not accept medicareclaims via the internet) and sometimes mirror the same conservative approach that is characteristic of many health care organizations. for example, hcfaõs strategic plan for information systems, dated july 1998,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 5.4legislation related to telemedicinea number of bills related to telemedicine were introduced in the 106th congress. among those most relevant to the present report are the following:¥s. 770: comprehensive telehealth act of 1999. this bill would providepayment under the medicare program for telehealth services and for other purposes.it amends the balanced budget act of 1997 with respect to medicare reimbursement of telehealth to (1) include reimbursement for storeandforward technologies;clinical psychologist and physical, occupational, and speech therapist practitionerservices; and items and services covered under medicare part b (supplementarymedical insurance) that are provided via telecommunications systems, (2) extendtelehealth coverage to all rural areas (currently, only those designated as healthprofessional shortage areas under the public health service act are covered),(3)allow any health care practitioner acting on instructions from the referring physician or practitioner to present the medicare beneficiary to the consulting physician or practitioner for the provision of items and services, (4) prohibit the referringphysician and the practitioner from receiving any reimbursement for such presentation other than the payment that the referring physician shares with the consulting physician, and (5) provide that payment for items and services shall includepayment for all current procedural terminology billing codes covered under medicare. it also directs the secretary of health and human services to study, andreport to the u.s. congress on, issues associated with crossstate licensure ofhealth care providers (e.g., numbers of crosslicensed practitioners, status ofreciprocal agreements, and stateled efforts to ease licensure burdens) and toprovide specified financial assistance to eligible telehealth networks to expandaccess to health care services for individuals in rural and frontier areas. the billwas referred to the senate finance committee for consideration in april 1999. nofurther major action had been taken as of february 2000.¥h.r. 1344: triplea rural health improvement act of 1999. this bill wouldpromote and improve access to health care services in rural areas. title v amendsthe balanced budget act of 1997 with regard to telehealth services, among otherchanges, to (1) extend medicare reimbursement for such services to all rural medicare services, including services by physical, occupational, and speech therapists,(2) revise related payment methodology, and (3) add congressional reportingrequirements pertaining to the telehealth services program. it also changes thename of the joint working group on telemedicine to the joint working group ontelehealth and establishes the mission of the working group, among other things,as identifying, monitoring, and coordinating federal telehealth projects and programs. the bill directs the secretary to provide specified financial assistance forexpanding access to health care services for individuals in rural frontier areasthrough the use of telehealth. the bill was referred to the committee on ways andmeans and the committee on commerce in march 1999. as of february 2000, nofurther action had been taken.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy225mentions the internet only twice in passingñdespite the reportõs focus onenhancing timely access to information for a variety of users (hcfa,1998).some signs of change are visible. since issuing its strategic plan forinformation technology, hcfa has revised its security policy to allowinternetbased exchanges of information among its own entities after theinformation has been received from care providers and health plans.hcfa also is sponsoring an ongoing pilot program to compare severaldifferent alternatives for internetbased submission of claims. depending on the findings of the pilot study and the results of a costbenefitanalysis of claims transmission, hcfa will decide whether to allowinternet transmission on an operational basis.23 the centers for diseasecontrol and prevention (cdc) recently initiated a project to use theinternet as part of a health alert network to detect and respond tobioterrorist attacks, although some staff contend that this project is significantly underfunded.24federal health agencies have played only a limited role in supportingresearch and development (r&d) for new internetbased capabilities.many r&d and demonstration projects have been funded by the nlmand other nih institutes, but investigations of new computing and communications technologies that are motivated by healthrelated goals havebeen only a minor element in the portfolio of the u.s. biomedical researchcommunity. indeed, the biomedical research community in general, andthe nih in particular, have been accused of failing to provide their fairshare of support for fundamental research in information technology,especially in comparison with other missionoriented federal agencies(pitac, 1999). of the $2.3 billion spent by the federal government oncomputer science research in 1999, just $120 million came from dhhs,and none came from the department of veterans affairs (table 5.1).25the commerce, defense, and energy departments and the nsf eachfunded more computing research, despite the fact that dhhsõs overallresearch budget of $13 billion exceeds the research budgets of the fourother agencies combined.26 this funding imbalance provides further evidence that federal health agencies have been far less active than theircounterparts in the education, defense, scientific, and library communities in pursuing initiatives related to the internet.27the reasons for the comparative lack of support for computer scienceresearch within the dhhs are manifold, but perhaps the underlying problem is that the department as a whole has not embraced informationtechnology (it) as fundamental to its mission. federal agencies that haveallocated major portions of their r&d budgets to fundamental it researchtend to view it as an integral part of their particular missions, whethernational security, scientific research, or industrial competitiveness. manynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226networking health: prescriptions for the internetdiscoveries funded by dod, doe, and nsf have found their way intosystems applied in the health disciplines. almost all of dhhsõs researchfunding is obligated to biological and medical sciences; it is seen primarily as infrastructure to support these other activities. a recent nih reporton biomedical information science and technology recognizes the importance of computing in biomedical research (nih, 1999), but it assumesthat computer science is a source of tools for enabling biomedical researchrather than a field of intellectual inquiry worthy of further investigationby biomedical researchers. until government and industrial researchorganizations see the health disciplines as a potential source of innovation for new information technologies, fundamental informatics researchis not likely to emerge from the traditional biomedical sciences; instead,health informatics research probably will continue to emphasize demonstration projects and applications.there are several arguments for involving health agencies moreclosely in information technology research that is motivated by healthneeds. as noted throughout this report, it is increasingly critical to thecontinued success of the nationõs health enterprise. achieving the goal ofpromoting a healthy citizenryñas well as assuring equitable access toaffordable, highquality health careñis likely to depend on the effectiveuse of new and emerging information technologies, including the internet.although the capabilities required of the internet for health applicationsdo not differ significantly from those for applications in other areas wherethe government has a mission, research programs motivated by healthneeds probably would emphasize characteristics and capabilities thatwould not otherwise receive sufficient attention but that could be widelyapplicable, just as earlier work in expert systems that was motivated bytable 5.1 estimated federal funding for research by selectedagencies, 1999computercomputer scienceall fieldsscienceresearch as % of(millions of $,(millions of $,agencyõs researchdepartment/agency% of total)% of total)in all fieldsdepartment of health and human services12,982 (39.3)120 (5.3)0.9department of defense4,089 (12.4)864 (38.3)21.1department of energy4,128 (12.5)656 (29.1)15.9national science foundation2,655 (8.0)395 (17.5)14.9department of commerce850 (2.6)85 (3.8)10.0all federal agencies32,992 (100)2,255 (100)6.8source: national science foundation (2000), table c22.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy227health needs resulted in important advances that have proven widelyapplicable (box 5.5).efforts to involve the dhhs and its constituent agencies more closelyin internetrelated research will require careful thought. structuring mission agency research programs in information technology is vexing, especially given the history of successful research support by the dod andnsf.28 the dhhs could initiate its own network research program, butit would most likely need to coordinate its activities with other agenciesto avoid unnecessary duplication. lack of experience could be a barrierto this approach; the department has not been active in basic network (orcomputer science) research for some time, so it may lack the ability toidentify relevant and challenging research areas, to select promising proposals, and to manage the research. an alternative approach would befor dhhs to encourage and foster collaborative r&d between healthinformatics investigators and technical experts in communication and information technologies who are actively engaged in networking r&d.this approach is more likely to lead to solutions that advance the information technology infrastructure in general and less likely to strand healthinformatics in an isolated technological corner.workforce issuesif governments, health care organizations, academic institutions, andprofessional groups need to attract more effective leaders in the strategicuses of information technology, where will they find them? the numberof individuals who understand both the biomedical milieu and the technologies relevant to computing and the internet is remarkably small. thelack of trained individuals at the interface may also help to explain whythe biomedical community has lagged other fields in understanding andadopting computing and communications technology, especially whendirect use by health professionals is required. although the nlm hasfunded graduate training programs in informatics for more than twodecades and some computer science departments and library schools haveset up programs to train health technology specialists, the supply of medical information scientists and professionals from these programs does notmeet the demand. directors of the current medical informatics trainingprograms find that their graduates are highly sought after by industry(e.g., the pharmaceutical and health information system industries), healthcare organizations (e.g., managed care groups, hospitals, and multispecialty practices), and academic informatics groups with training orresearch missions.the problem is not necessarily unique to health care computing. companies in all sectors of the economy report difficulties in attracting andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228networking health: prescriptions for the internetbox 5.5medically motivated research on expert systemsthe health community played an important role in the rise of expert systems,which are software environments that analyze data and give advice based on theinternal encoding of human expertise (duda and shortliffe, 1983). although earlywork involved applications in a large number of fields, work on medical expertsystems starting in the 1970s had a particularly important impact. this work notonly developed technologies and systems that were beneficial to health care andbiomedical research but also pushed the frontiers of computer science, developingnew knowledge and technologies that could be incorporated into systems for arange of other applications. the medical focus of this work uncovered realworldproblems that could be solved only through fundamental computing research.the realworld issues that arise in medicine pressed the limits of existing software technologies in challenging ways (clancey and shortliffe, 1984). for example, medical applications required new approaches to managing and modelinguncertaintyñspecifically, the uncertainties associated with causality, diagnosis,and treatment. biological systems were not as well understood as the engineeringsystems being analyzed by expert systems at the time. furthermore, because ofthe diverse types of data that must be considered in diagnosis and the complexityof patient records, medical expert systems could not rely on a simple questionandresponse approach to data gathering in support of decision making (an approachthat suited many simpler systems). hence, medical informatics researchers pioneered the integration of expert systems with large databases, such as computerbased medical records. the complexity of medical decision making and thedifficulties involved in embedding decisionsupport tools into the work flows of practicing medical professionals drove further advances in the representation of largeand complex knowledge bases and acceptable modes of interaction with users.the work simultaneously forced the community to take a fresh look at the psychological underpinnings of human problem solving in medicine, leading to productivecollaborations among physicians, cognitive scientists, and computer scientists.ultimately, many of the techniques developed by the medical computingresearch community, generally with funding from the national institutes of health(nih) or the predecessor to the agency for healthcare research and quality(ahrq), were adapted for use in other application areas. in fact, during the 1980s,interest in expert systems soared, largely in areas outside of medicine (computerscience and telecommunications board, 1999a). it is clear that the results ofearly nih and ahrqsupported research in this area had a major impact on corporate america and the economy in the decades that followed (feigenbaum et al.,1988)ironically, the adoption of expert systems in health care has been slower. onlynow is an infrastructure, culture, and healthfinancing climate emerging that is likelyto allow expert systems to have a substantial impact in the clinical setting. therecent emphasis on the implementation of clinical guidelines, reduction in practicevariations, and adoption of evidencebased practice has made expert systemsseem more attractive. in addition, the introduction of electronic medical records,distributed computing, and networking within institutions has made it possible tointegrate decisionsupport tools in ways that do not require the standalone consulnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy229tation model typical of the earlier medical expert systems. thus, the true payoff, interms of the mission and goals of nih and ahrq, will have occurred 25 to 30years after they began to support research in this area, although there have beeninterim spinoffs in other areas. if the biomedical research agencies of the 1970shad demanded a 2year turnaround time for their investments in information technology research, the work that has produced so many benefits today never wouldhave been initiated.retaining sufficient numbers of information technology workers. a recentreport by the presidentõs information technology advisory committee(1999) contends that the supply of information technology workers doesnot meet the demand in almost all segments of society.29 the computerscience and telecommunications board of the national research councilhas been charged by the congress to more fully evaluate the issue.30 asthe advisory committee report argues, òit is crucial that we produce acontinuous supply of welltrained, highquality professionals in engineering and computer and information science, not merely skilled users, butresearchers, creators, and designers of advanced technologyó (pitac,1999). as with information technology fields in general, niche areasrequiring expertise in health care, biomedicine, computing, and communication also appear to be undersupplied. there are important scientificissues to address, practical systems to be built, and strategies to be put inplace. health care will be constrained until there are many more individuals with these combinations of talents.one option for addressing this concern is to expand educationalopportunities in healthcare computing and communications. existingtraining programs in health informatics could be expanded, and newemphases or tracks could be developed in related disciplines. alternativetraining tracks in areas of application ranging from clinical medicine andnursing to bioinformatics and health system management also could bedeveloped. at the same time, educational opportunities could be createdwithin schools of the health professions and computer science departments. beyond such training programs, which would be designed todevelop a cadre of researchers who operate at the nexus of health andcomputer sciences, initiatives could be taken to infuse some degree ofinformatics training throughout the health sciences curricula. health professionals need to become part of the information culture that will definethe century ahead, and their educational opportunities, in both professional school and continuing education programs, must be responsive tothat need. such training needs to emphasize areas of overlap amongnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230networking health: prescriptions for the internethealth care, biomedicine, computing, and communicationsñnot simplycomputer literacy as traditionally, and narrowly, construed.31conclusionas this chapter illustrates, the availability of useful information technologies is not enough to ensure their effective application in health care.myriad policy issues will most likely need to be resolved concerningpatient privacy, access to health care and internet services, intellectualproperty protection, payment mechanisms for telemedicine, and humanresources. the effective implementation of new information technologiesin complex environments such as the u.s. health care system will requirevision, commitment, and leadership at the highest levels; a wellfundedresearch agenda; effective policies for developing the necessary workforce;and a grassroots community of capable participants. to make decisionsrelated to internet technologies in health and health care, public and private policy makers need sophisticated analyses and information that goesbeyond traditional reporting on a narrow set of facts. the issues areemotionally and politically charged. their resolution will require theconcerted efforts of many public and private sector organizations, including government agencies, companies, and professional associations.without deliberate, sustained action, the fundamental conflicts seen inthese policy debates will keep the internet from fulfilling its promise inhealth care.referencesalberts, r.j., a.m. townsend, and m.e. whitman. 1998. òthe threat of longarm jurisdiction to electronic commerce,ó communications of the acm 41(12):1520.appavu, s.i. 1997. analysis of unique patient identifier options. report prepared for thedepartment of health and human services, november 24. available online at <http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/app0.htm>.bureau of national affairs, inc. (bna). 1998. òeu privacy directive will take effect evenwithout implementing legislation,ó electronic commerce and law report, november17. available online at <http://zeus.bna.com/elaw/articles/top0335.html>.clancey, w.j., and e.h. shortliffe, eds. 1984. readings in medical artificial intelligence.addisonwesley, reading, mass.clinton, w.j. 1999. narrowing the digital divide: creating opportunities for all americans inthe information age. memorandum to executive departments and agencies, december 9.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997. for the record: protecting electronic health information. national academy press,washington, d.c.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy231computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999a. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999b. being fluent with information technology. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.2000. the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age. national academy press, washington, d.c.consumer federation of america (cfa). 1999. transforming the information superhighwayinto a private toll road: the case against closed access broadband internet systems. cfa,washington, d.c., september. available online at <http://www.consumerfed.org/broadbandaccess.pdf>.duda, r.o., and e.h. shortliffe. 1983. òexpert systems research,ó science 220:261268.eng, thomas r., andrew maxfield, kevin patrick, mary jo deering, scott c. ratzan, anddavid h. gustafson. 1998. òaccess to health information and support: a public highway or a private road?ó journal of the american medical association 280(15):13711375.feigenbaum, e.a, p. mccorduck, and h.p. nii. 1988. the rise of the expert company: howvisionary businesses are using intelligent computers to achieve higher productivity andprofits. times books, new york.gilbert, f. 1995. òlicensure and credentialing barriers to the practice of telemedicine,ópp. 2735 in telemedicine action report: background papers. western governorsõ association, denver.goldberg, a.s. 1999. òtaking healthcare to the patientñtelemedicine delivers,ó healthlaw digest 27(7):310.gotcher, r. 1999. òendtoend epublishing service announced,ó infoworld electric, november 10. available online at <www.infoworld.com/dgi/bin/displaystory.pl?991110.icpublish.htm>.health care financing administration (hcfa). 1999. fact sheet: medicare payment forteleconsultation in rural health professional shortage areas. hcfa, baltimore, md., may.health care financing administration (hcfa). 1998. hcfaõs information technology vision.hcfa, baltimore, md., july.institute of medicine (iom). 1997. the computerbased patient record: an essential technology for health care, rev. ed. r.s. dick, e.b. steen, and d.e. detmer, eds. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.institute of medicine (iom). 1996. telemedicine: a guide to assessing telecommunications inhealth care. national academy press, washington, d.c.institute of medicine (iom). 1994. health data in the information age: use, disclosure, andprivacy. molla s. donaldson and kathleen n. lohr, eds. national academy press,washington, d.c.mandl, k.d., s. feit, b.m.g. pena, and i.s. kohane. 2000. ògrowth and determinants ofaccess in patient email and internet use,ó archives of pediatrics and adolescent medicine, in press.mueller, milton l., jr. 1997. universal service: competition, interconnection, and monopoly inthe making of the american telephone system. aei press, washington, d.c.national committee on vital and health statistics. 1999. second annual report to congresson implementation of administrative simplification. july 22. available online at <www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/yr2rpt.htm#progress>.national institutes of health (nih). 1999. the biomedical information science and technologyinitiative: report of the working group on biomedical computing. june 3. availableonline at <www.nih.gov/welcome/director/060399.htm>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232networking health: prescriptions for the internetnational research council (nrc). 1999. a question of balance: private rights and the publicinterest in scientific and technical databases. national academy press, washington,d.c.national science foundation (nsf). 2000. federal funding for research and development:fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000. early release tables, national science foundation,arlington, va.national telecommunications and information administration (ntia), u.s. department ofcommerce. 1999. falling through the net: defining the digital divide. available onlineat <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/>.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. report to thepresident, information technology research: investing in our future, february. availableonline at <http://www.ccic.gov/>.shapiro, c., and h.r. varian. 1999. information rules: a strategic guide to the networkeconomy. harvard business school press, boston, mass.southern governorsõ association, task force on medical technology. 1999. from promiseto practice: improving life in the south through telemedicine, final report, washington,d.c., september.strode, s.w., s. gustke, and a. allen. 1999. òtechnical and clinical progress intelemedicine,ó journal of the american medical association 281(12):10661068.tracy, joe, thelma mccloskyarmstrong, rob sprang, sam burgiss, jim reid, and donnahammack. 1999. òmedical reimbursement for telehealth encounters.ó positionpaper available from the university of missouri health sciences center, columbia,mo., october 11.universal service administrative company (usac). 1999. report to the fcc: evaluation ofthe rural health care program. universal service administrative company, madison,wisc., march 5.u.s. copyright office. 1999. report on copyright and distance digital education, may. available online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/cpypub/derprt.pdf>.westat. 1999. evaluation of the telecommunications and information infrastructure assistanceprogram for the 1994 and 1995 grant years. report prepared for the u.s. department ofcommerce, national telecommunications and information agency, february. available online at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/otiahome/tiiap/index.html>.western governorsõ association (wga). 1995. telemedicine action report. western governorsõ association, denver, colo.white house, office of the press secretary. 1999. òremarks by the president on medicalprivacy,ó press release, october 29.notes1.as a reviewer of an early draft of this report noted, issues other than technology,organizational uncertainty, and public policy will determine the degree to which theinternet finds application in the health sector. the internet must be applied properly tocreate solutions that work in health applications before wide adoption can be expected.the internet has been accepted by the public as a tool for gaining insight into illness andhealth issues because it delivers value. clinicians use the world wide web for medlinesearches because they obtain some value from it. on the other hand, clinicians do not usethe internet to deliver care because valuable, usable, affordable, and practical internetbased solutions have yet to be built. in other words, public policy is a very important factorin the acceptance of internet technology in biomedicine and health care, but it may not bethe first hurdle or the highest.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.issues for public policy2332.one of the primary benefits that could be lost because of concerns over privacy andsecurity is the capability to compile comprehensive health records of individual patientsfrom a number of different sites at which they were treated. at present, personal healthinformation usually resides at the health care provider organization. for many people,there is no comprehensive health record that merges information from numerous care sites,a gap that can compromise the quality of care received subsequently. such longitudinalrecords also would have value in public health and health services research.3.the text of the proposed regulations, as well as a summary of their contents, isavailable online at <http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/>.4.for additional information on the privacy implications of universal health identifiersand standardssetting activities in this area, see appavu (1997), cstb (1997), and nationalcommittee on vital and health statistics (1999).5.the full title of the directive is directive 96/9/ec of the european parliament and ofthe council of 11 march 1996 on the legal protection of databases, 1996 o.j. (l77) 20. thefull text of the directive is available in nrc (1999), appendix d.6.see <http://www.epic.org>; main news feature (accessed may 5, 1999). for information on the safe harbor proposal, see <http://www.ita.doc.gov/media/419data.htm>.7.this gap has been characterized as a òdigital divideó between òinformation havesóand òinformation havenots.ó see ntia (1999).8.the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the nationalresearch council has a project under way to examine technology, business, and policyissues affecting the deployment of broadband technologies for the socalled òlast mileó tothe home. additional project information is available online at <www.cstb.org> and at<www.nationalacademies.org>, under the heading òcurrent projects.ó9.the 1996 act was the first to codify the notion of universal service (mueller, 1997).10.the nlm grants cover gateway and associated connection hardware; internal accessequipment, such as personal computers and local area network costs, are expected to beprovided by the institution(s). in 1999, seven awards were made for $232,000. the nlmalso has awarded approximately $6.7 million to nonprofit health centers since 1996 fortelemedicine and next generation internet projects. additional information on nlmõsinfrastructure programs is available online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ep/connect.html>,<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/telemedinit.html>, and <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/ngiinit.html>.11.for information on xeroxõs rights management technology, see gotcher (1999). information on intertrustõs products is available at <www.intertrust.com>.12.information on this announcement is available online at <http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/ pubmedcentral/ pubmedcentral.htm>.13.the dmca brings the united states into closer compliance with the world intellectual property organization (wipo) treaty. it has numerous provisions. first, it assignsliability to online service providers for acts of subscribers who infringe on the intellectualproperty rights of others. universities, some of which have medical schools, are determining how best to comply with the act in a way that enables them to qualify for liabilitylimitations. second, the dmca outlaws the circumvention of technical protection systems.exceptions to the act are permitted for educational fair use, reverse engineering to supportinteroperability, protection of personal privacy, and security testing. third, the dmcarequired the u.s. copyright office to determine whether any adverse effects on fair use hadbeen observed after a 2year moratorium.14.see u.s. copyright office (1999), available online at <http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/cpypub/derprt.pdf>.15.concerns regarding the possible effect of the eu directive on scientific research arediscussed in a 1999 report from the national research council. see nrc (1999).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234networking health: prescriptions for the internet16.blue crossblue shield plans in iowa, kansas, and montana have already developedpayment policies for some forms of telemedicine, and north dakota has announced payment plans that include telemedicine, but even these policies may need to be revised as newapplications emerge (goldberg, 1999).17.for further elaboration on these points, see tracy et al. (1999).18.this summary of coverage rules is derived from goldberg (1999) and from hcfa(1999).19.for a discussion of the history and challenges of evaluating telemedicine applications, see institute of medicine (1996) and strode et al. (1999).20.additional information on the nlmõs telemedicine programs, including descriptions offunded projects, is available online at <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/telemedinit.html>.21.the department of defense has investigated technologies for remote treatment ofsoldiers and developed telemedicine systems for military personnel and their families, andthe veterans administration has developed technologies for sharing medical records amongits health care facilities. in addition, nasa has invested in technologies for remote consultation and treatment of astronauts.22.margarate hamburg, dhhs, presentation to the committee on march 1, 1999, washington, d.c.23.further information on the pilot can be obtained from either <www.wedi.org> or<www.afecht.org>.24.william yasnoff, associate director for science and acting director, information network for public health officials in the cdc public health practice program office, in hispresentation to the committee on march 1, 1999, estimated that $200 million would beneeded, in addition to the $28 million already appropriated, to get the health alert network up and running.25.of the $120 million in computer science research funding from dhhs, $110 millioncame from the nih and $10 million came from the ahrq.26.in 1999, research funding for the departments of defense, energy, and commerceand for the nsf totaled $4.1 billion, $4.1 billion, $808 million, and $2.7 billion, respectively.these figures include funding for basic and applied research but not development (nsf,2000, table c22).27.thomas kalil, national economic council, presentation to the committee onmarch 1, 1999, washington, d.c.28.two forthcoming reports from the cstb will address issues of structuring federaland nonfederal support for missiondriven information technology research: meetingsocietyõs needs: expanding the scale and scope of information technology research and the finalreport of the cstb committee on computing and communications research to enablebetter use of information technology in government. for additional information on theseprojects, see <www.cstb.org>.29.gauging the supply of and demand for information technology workers is a difficulttask, and several analysts have noted faults in data given out by industry groups and thedepartment of commerce. the cstb has initiated a study of information technologyworkers that is expected to shed more light on this subject.30.information on the cstb project workforce needs in information technology is available online at <www.cstb.org>.31.insight into the scope of an expanded definition of computer literacy can be gleanedfrom a report by the cstb (1999b).networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2356conclusions and recommendationsensuring that the internet becomes a suitable, ubiquitous medium forsupporting health applications is a challenging task. not only must theinternet provide connectivity among the participants in healthrelatedinformation transactions, but it must also ensure that such transactionscan occur predictably, efficiently, and without endangering patient safety.consumers must be able to determine the quality and provenance of theinformation they retrieve from the internet. care providers who accesspatient records remotely must be assured that the network will be available when and where needed. administrators must be sure that billpayment and enrollment information is not corrupted as it crosses theinternet. without proper security protections, use of the internet to transmit medical records could make personal health information more susceptible to breaches of confidentiality and loss of integrity. withoutadequate assurances of network reliability and quality of service (qos),use of the internet for remote monitoring of patients, controlling remotemedical equipment, or conducting remote medical consultations couldimpair rather than facilitate the delivery of quality health care. addressing these concerns demands efforts in many areas, both technical andnontechnical.this chapter summarizes the committeeõs main conclusions andrecommendations for making the internet capable of supporting a widerange of health applications. drawing upon the material presented inchapters 2 and 3 of this report, it identifies the technical capabilities theinternet must possess in order to provide the security, reliability, andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236networking health: prescriptions for the internetquality of service that health care applications demand. but it does notstop with recommendations on technical requirements. it also discussesthe policy and organizational issues that must be resolved to make thehealth community more capable of adopting internet applications in boththe short and long term. the capabilities the internet offers to consumers,care providers, public health officials, health care administrators, andresearchers promise to reshape the landscape of the health sector. accommodating these changes will require actions within individual organizations and across them, enlisting the support of technologists, practitioners,legislators, and the general public. this chapter, accordingly, makesrecommendations in areas ranging from identification of the needed technical capabilities of the internet to specification of the organizational andpolicy issues that constrain its use in health applications. the recommendations are targeted at policy makers, the networking research community, researchers in healthrelated fields, health care administrators, andmanagers of healthrelated organizations. taken together, the recommendations aim to provide guidance both on shortterm measures thatcan set the process in motion and on longterm and continuing needs incommunications, information technology, and health care.conclusionsconclusion 1. the internet can support a wide range of applications in consumer health, clinical care, health care financial andadministrative transactions, public health, professional education, and biomedical research. the networking capabilitiesneeded to support these applications are not unique, but theydo reflect distinctive characteristics of the health environment.in each of the domains examined by the committee, the internet couldbe used to facilitate communications among parties in ways that canimprove quality and efficiency. for example, in the clinical care domain,care providers already use the internet to search the professional literature for information on particular diseases or to examine evidencebasedpractice guidelines for managing a particular disorder. as ongoing projectsdemonstrate, the continued research, development, and deployment ofinternet applications will allow care providers to more routinely accesselectronic medical records held by an affiliated health care organizationor to interpret medical images (such as mammograms) sent to them froma remote mammography center. they will be able to offer remote medicalconsultations to patients in rural areas or to adjust settings on remotedosimetry equipment or pacemakers without establishing fixed, dedicated connections between sites. they will increasingly participate innetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations237online discussions with other care providers to consult on particular cases,sharing medical records and images as needed.the success of any of these applications depends on a variety of factors, including their costeffectiveness, ease of use, and ability to improveon existing processes. while some applications are already being used inoperational environments across networks other than the internet, manyrepresent new capabilities that have no parallel on other networks or thathave not been fully implemented on a large scale, such as remote medicalconsultations. as a result, not enough information has been gathered toallow evaluation and comparison, and continued experimentation will beneeded to explore and evaluate their true potential, their technical needs,and their realworld operational requirements. a preliminary assessment(table 6.1) shows a diversity of technical needs, with some commonality,at least within a particular domain (e.g., clinical care, public health) orclass of application (e.g., realtime video, file transfers, collaboration).consumer applications, for example, tend to demand high levels of security to protect confidentiality; clinical applications require a combinationof security (to protect confidentiality and data integrity), reliability, andqos. virtually all collaborative applicationsñregardless of whether theyare in clinical care, public health, biomedical research, or other domainsñdemand high levels of qos, and file transfers in any health applicationtend to strain technologies for authenticating the identity of communicating parties. determining which technical capabilities health applicationswill demand must be viewed as an ongoing process as workers envision,develop, and evaluate new applications.the technical capabilities demanded by a number of health applications of the internet exceed those provided by the current internet, butthey are not necessarily unique. applications in other sectors (e.g., defense,entertainment, financial services) also require better security, reliability,and quality of service. however, when these technical characteristics arecombined with factors such as the distributed nature and economic structure of the health industry and the constraints of operating in a healthcare environment, it can be seen that health does occupy a distinct, if notunique, position. solutions to problems of authentication and qos, forexample, must scale sufficiently to support the activities of numerousindependent health organizations and hundreds of millions of potentialusers. this argues for full participation by the health care community indefining the research agenda and contributing to its resolution, as theinternet moves forward with new architectures and technical capabilities.conclusion 2. security and availability are critical technicalneeds for health applications of the internet and are notadequately met by todayõs internet.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238networking health: prescriptions for the internettable 6.1 primary technical challenges and limiting technicalfactors in selected health applications of the internetclass of applicationrealtime videotransmissionstatic file transferremote controlapplicationdomainconsumer healthremote medicalaccessing personalremote control ofconsultations tohealth records online.patient monitoringthe home, office,downloadingequipment.or wherever theeducational videos.patient is located.sending periodicreports on healthconditions to acare provider.clinical careremote medicaltransfer of medicalremote and virtualconsultationsrecords and imagessurgery (a longbetween clinician(e.g., x rays, mri,term possibilityand patient orct scans).being examined bybetween twothe defense andclinicians.space communities).administrativevideoconferencingpayment of services,n/aand financialwith realtimeenrollment oftransactionssharing ofpatients, qualitydocuments.reviews, etc. largemedical records andimages may betransmitted insupport of someclaims.public healthvideoconferencingincident reporting.n/aamong publiccollection ofhealth officialsinformation fromduring emergencylocal public healthsituations, such asdepartments andchemical orlaboratories.biological attackssurveillance forby terrorists.emerging diseases orepidemics. transferof epidemiologymaps or other imagefiles for monitoringthe spread of adisease.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations239information searchrealtimeand retrievalcollaborationprimary technical challengesonline searching forcollaboration withprotection of sensitive patienthealth information orcare providers.information from breaches ofselfassessment guides.participation in chatconfidentiality and fromlooking for a doctorgroups and supportcorruption. ubiquity of access soor hospital.groups.that all health care consumers canbe reached at the location atwhich care is needed. tools andpolicies for validating the qualityof online information.practice guidelines.consultation amongaccess to sustained bandwidthsearches ofcare providers, suchand low latency for remoteprofessional medicalas for surgicalconsultations and collaboration.literature.planning, which maysecurity of clinical records.involve manipulationnetwork reliability. ubiquity ofof digital images.access for care providers.consumer access ton/asecurity to ensure confidentialityinformation aboutand integrity of records. networkhealth plans,reliability sufficient to supportparticipatingregular use for businesspractitioners, eligibilitytransactions. standards for datafor procedures,exchange and definitions of datacovered drugs inelements.formulary.access to publishedvideoconferencingsecurity to ensure confidentialityliterature and researchamong publicand integrity of laboratory reportsresults as well ashealth officialsand other public healthepidemiological data.during emergencyinformation that may containdelivery of alerts andsituations, such aspersonal identifying information.other information tochemical ornetwork reliability. security frompractitioners or otherbiological attacksinformation warfare or attacks onhealth workers.by terrorists.the networkõs physicalinfrastructure.continuednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240networking health: prescriptions for the internettable 6.1 continuedclass of applicationrealtime videotransmissionstatic file transferremote controlprofessionaldistance education:accessing electronicsimulations ofeducationeither realtimemedical records fromsurgical procedures.transmission ofremote clinics.virtuallectures or ondownloading sets ofenvironments fordemand streamingreference images orexploration ofvideo withprerecorded videosthreedimensionalintegrated graphics.of lectures.environments.realtimeconsultations withexperts aboutdifficult cases.biomedicalvisual feedbacktransferring largecontrollingresearchfrom remotedata sets betweenexperimentalinstrumentation.computers for highequipment, suchonline conferences.speed computationas electroncollaborationand comparisons.microscopes.among distantreviewing results ofresearchers.remote experiments.searching archives ofthreedimensionalmedical images.limitingtechnical factorsavailability ofauthentication ofnetwork latencysustained,source and recipientand bandwidth.predictable,of information.ability to obtainhighbandwidthsecurity of personallyguaranteedconnections toidentifiablebandwidth formany locations,information in transitpredictable periodsincluding ruralacross the networkof time.health clinics andand in storage atpatientsõ homeseither end of the(to support remotenetwork. availabilityconsultations).of sustainedhighbandwidthconnections fortransfer of large,timecritical files.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations241information searchrealtimeand retrievalcollaborationprimary technical challengesaccessing referencevirtual classrooms.sufficient bandwidth tomaterials and coursedistributedaccommodate large numbers ofmaterials.collaborativetransactions from a singleprojects.educational institution or todistributedsupport access to remote scientificdiscussions.and clinical simulations. ubiquityof access for students in remoteclinical rotations and to supporteducational applications in thehome.searching remotecollaboration amongsufficient bandwidth to supportdatabases andresearchers. peerrapid transfers of large sets ofprofessional literature.review. interactivedata for distributed simulations.virtual conferences.low latency to accommodateremote control of equipment.tools for locatingsustained access toinformation of interesthighbandwidth,and for determininglowlatency networksthe quality of retrievedfor collaborationsinformation. means ofinvolving realtimeallowing anonymousvideo or manipulationsearches.of images. multicastprotocols to makemore efficient use ofnetworking resources.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242networking health: prescriptions for the internetall applications that involve the transmission of personal health information (such as data contained in electronic medical records, claims forpayment, prescriptions, or public health reports from testing laboratories)demand that information be kept confidential. furthermore, virtually allapplications in consumer health, clinical care, health care financial andadministrative transactions, public health, and biomedical research requirethat the integrity of information be assured and maintained both duringand after transmission. meeting these requirements demands a variety oftechnical supports (as well as policies governing the disclosure of information), including suitable encryption of information during transit andrigorous authentication of both the source and the recipient of information. access controls are also required to ensure that users can view onlythe information they are authorized to see; auditing technologies areneeded to ensure that successful attempts to circumvent access restrictions are identified so that violators can be punished.the need for data protection and access control is acute in healthapplications because some personal health information is extremely sensitive. not only can loss of confidentiality cause embarrassment andsocial stigmatization, but personal health information can affect anindividualõs employment and insurance coverage, especially for peoplewith private insurance or who work for selfinsured organizations. moreover, once health information is divulged, its confidentiality cannot beregained; there is clearly a difference between the prospect of losing $50when oneõs credit card number is stolen and losing privacy when oneõshiv status is revealed to friends and coworkers. confidentiality problems are compounded in health care because many people have a legitimate need to see sensitive patient information. these include workersinvolved, for example, in the provision of care, payment for services, andfilling of prescriptions. in addition, legitimate access may be needed bysomeone with whom the patient has had no previous relationshipñperhaps a physician at an institution that the patient has not visited before(e.g., in an emergency room situation).although technologies have been widely deployed for encryptinginformation transmitted across the network (e.g., secure socket layerencryption), technologies for authenticating the identity of users at bothends of a transaction are not in widespread use, especially among consumers. this approach is effective in electronic commerce applicationsbecause most vendors can obtain certificates to authenticate themselvesto consumer web browsers, but despite some early efforts no effectivemechanism yet exists for providing authentication devices in large numbers to consumers, including patients. this is not an impediment toelectronic commerce because most merchants are willing to authorize atransaction once a valid credit number is presented, but an artifact such asnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations243a credit card may not be suitable to allow access to an online healthrecord. in telemedicine applications or the retrieval of medical records, acompelling need exists to identify the end user reliably. there are comparable circumstances in which an authenticated third party needs to gainaccess to information via the internet, such as an emergency room physician accessing a patientõs health record that is stored at another institutionconnected to the internet.in addition to security, high levels of network availability are neededto support many healthrelated internet applications, particularly in clinical care, in finance and administration, and in public health. health careorganizations must be assured that the network will be available almostaroundtheclock if they become dependent on using the internet for accessing electronic medical records, for remote monitoring of patients, or forclinical decision support. payers and administrators will also demandhigh levels of availability if they are to use the internet instead of privatenetworks for important transactions. the network must be made robustagainst failure and against hostile attacks, whether directed at its physicalinfrastructure or at denying its services to end users by flooding its capacity(denialofservice attacks).the need for security and availability is compounded by the fact thatin many clinical applications of the internet, human life and health maybe at risk. errant decisions based on incorrect informationñwhether indiagnosing a condition or filling a prescriptionñcan be harmful or fatal.hence, ensuring data integrity and properly authenticating individualsare even more important than in many other spheres of application.inability to access patient information (such as from an electronic medicalrecord), to complete a distant consultation, or to control remote monitoring and dosimetry equipment can also undermine the quality of care and,thus, the health of the populace. internetbased applications, includingthe physical networks on which they run, must be robust in the face offailures. a broken fiberoptic cable should not prevent an applicationfrom running when an alternative path exists. remotely controlledinstruments should not perform any damaging action if they lose contactwith the controller as the result of a network interruption. guarantees ofnetwork performance must be extremely robust in order to prevent statistically unlikely events from having serious consequences.conclusion 3. the quality of service needed by a number ofhighend health applications will not necessarily be deployedsoon across the internet in a form that meets the needs of thehealth industry.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244networking health: prescriptions for the interneta number of potential health applications of the internet demandguarantees on the quality of service they get across the internet. the needfor qos derives from the frequent need for smooth and responsiveinteractivity. for example, care providers engaging in remote video consultations with patients or other care providers need sustained access tohighbandwidth connectivity (roughly 384 kbps for simple interactionsand 768 kbps for higher quality video) for the duration of the consultation. so do molecular biologists who wish to control visually an electronmicroscope located at a remote facility, or medical students who wish topractice a surgical technique using multimedia simulations that are available on remote servers, or groups of surgeons from different parts of thecountry who wish to collaborate in planning a difficult procedure. qos isalso needed for making practical the realtime exchange of large images,whether medical images such as x rays and mammograms or anatomicalimages for educational purposes. qos would not only need to ensurethat adequate bandwidth is available to provide timely delivery of imagesbut would also need to offer realtime interaction to allow a primary careprovider and a consulting specialist to point out specific items of interestin the image.whether the internet will provide the needed capabilities in the nearfuture is uncertain. the protocols currently deployed across the internetfor routing packets do not contain mechanisms to support guaranteedqos; rather they provide besteffort service, in which packets are delivered as best the networkõs resources and traffic levels will allow. internetservice providers (isps) are attempting to improve service quality acrosstheir networks by deploying additional bandwidth, but this approachdoes not allow explicit guarantees to be made on bandwidth, latency, andjitter. protocols have been developed to support different forms of qosacross the internet (e.g., the differentiated service and integrated servicemodels described in chapter 3), but they have not yet been deployed, andeven if deployed, they may not fully support health applications. forexample, the differentiated services (diffserv) standard does not includemechanisms for providing qos guarantees for packets that must traversethe networks of different isps. hence, individual isps may be able tooffer improved qos to customers attached to their networks, but theycannot provide guarantees related to traffic flows among organizationsconnected to different isps. because the health industry is highly decentralized and individual care providersõ offices may need to interact with anumber of different managed care organizations, insurers, and other careproviders, interisp mechanisms will be important for health applications. the challenge of providing qos in a health environment is furthercomplicated by the extremely variable qos needs of individual healthorganizations over time. the kinds of information exchanges in which annetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations245organization engages typically vary considerably in the course of a day,from simple exchanges of information regarding a patientõs coverage by ahealth plan, through transfers of medical records with affiliated organizations, to the exchange of large medical images for interpretation and diagnosis. the bandwidth needs of a small medical clinic could, accordingly,vary enormously during the course of a day, ranging from near nothingone minute to several megabits per second the next. finding ways tosatisfy such variable demand for bandwidth economically represents asignificant challenge. the integrated services (intserv) approach to qoscan support variable bandwidth needs through protocols for reservingcapacity, but such protocols may not be sufficiently scalable to supportwidespread deployment across the internet, as health applications coulddemand. nor can it be assumed that qos mechanisms that are optimizedfor content distribution (i.e., information flows that are predominantlyoneway) will be effective for the more symmetric transactions typical ofmany health care applications.conclusion 4. ensuring widespread access to the internet isessential to achieving its promise in health applications.one of the most dramatic effects of the internet is its ability to engagepatients and consumers more actively in health issues. as the amount ofhealthrelated information on the web increases, patients become moreactively involved in maintaining their health: seeking information relatedto specific ailments or topics of interest, discussing medical problemswith peers in online chat groups, emailing care providers with questionsregarding symptoms or treatments, assessing their health, schedulingappointments with care providers, and maintaining their own healthrecords online. these actions are reinforced by a number of fundamentalfactors in the nationõs health care system, including greater consumerchoice in selecting among alternative health plans, concerns about thequality of care provided by health care organizations in an increasinglycompetitive environment, and pressures to shift the site of care awayfrom the provider location and to the consumerõs location and to shiftfrom unilateral to shared approaches that bring patients into the decisionmaking process. all of these factors encourageñand in fact requireñconsumers to become more educated about their health and health care.as these trends continue, the internet will probably play a more central role in supporting the processes of health care, reinforcing the callsfor expanding consumer access to internet resources. persistent inequalities of access to the internet could exacerbate existing inequalities of accessto health care. strong social pressures exist to ensure some degree ofequity in access to health resources. recent statistics show that thosenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246networking health: prescriptions for the internetmost in need of health care and who could benefit most from internetmediated careñsuch as those in rural and inner city areasñare also thosewith the least access to the internet. furthermore, many of the localstrategies used to expand access, such as the provision of internetenabledcomputers in libraries, classrooms, and community centers, may not be aseffective in addressing consumer health needs. access may be neededoutside normal business hours (especially if the internet becomes a mediumfor providing care or realtime advice on medical emergencies), and manyusers might feel uncomfortable researching or discussing personal healthproblems in a public venue. they will increasingly want such access intheir homes and may come to view it as a necessary component of acomprehensive health care system.access concerns will not be limited to consumers, however. careproviders, too, will need simplified, highspeed access to the internet fora range of information services and to provide clinical services. in ruralareas, in particular, it is not always easy for local care providers to accessthe internet, and they often need more advanced networking servicesthan consumers do. as health education shifts its focus from hospitalsand medical centers to local offices and remotepractice clinics (both fortraining students and residents and for continuing medical education),ensuring broad access to internet resources will become increasinglyimportant. the same internet that delivers health care to the home andcurriculum materials to students in the health professions (e.g., doctors,nurses, and pharmicists) can also deliver information resources for patientand consumer education. the issue of access becomes even more complex for health applications that demand high bandwidth, because broadband technologies are still not widely deployedñespecially in places suchas rural areas that could most benefit from remote consultations. accessconcerns also have implications for quality of service. high qos cannotbe provided costeffectively to all internet traffic, and many applicationsdo not require it. cost is one mechanism that is generally considered ashelping to control demand for high qos capabilities, meaning that qoscould be limited to those who are willing (or can afford) to pay for it.conclusion 5. technical advances are needed across many areasof information technology (not just networking) if the potentialof the internet is to be achieved in support of health applications.networking capabilities are not the only technical impediments tomany health applications of the internet. for example, there is greatconcern regarding the quality of health information on the internet andthe inability of many consumers to assess adequately the credibility ofinformation provided on different sites. while a number of nontechnicalnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations247approaches can be taken to rate the quality and provenance of information and to determine whether it comes from an authoritative source,there is considerable room for technological solutions as well. otherhealth applications demand different technological advances. remotemedical consultations (to rural medical clinics or the home, for example)will demand medical instruments (e.g., stethoscopes, blood pressuremonitors, and respiration monitors) that are suitable for personal use andthat can interface with home computing devices.conclusion 6. health care organizations are illprepared toadopt internetbased technologies and applications effectively.a number of transformations in the health care industry are drivingthe use of the internet as a medium for sharing information among providers, patients, and administrators. new internetbased health companies are being established to offer consumers medical information, toolsto help them to monitor their care more effectively, and other medicalproducts and services. existing organizations are using the internet toalter their position, relationships, role, and power in the health careindustry by moving into new areas, often ones that involve their reachingout directly to patients. the more innovative care organizations are providing customers with internetbased resources to help them to betterassess their medical needs and to seek appropriate advice. these trendsreflect and reinforce ongoing attempts to reduce medical costs by reducing hospital stays and outpatient care, especially in the emergency room,and by promoting prevention through better monitoring of wellness,chronic disease, and behavior.nevertheless, the health care industry as a whole is illprepared toaccommodate this change. despite continuing consolidation among providers, insurers, and managedcare companies, health care is still largelya decentralized industry populated by diverse organizations with different motives, resources, and incentivesñit is sometimes referred to as aòtrillion dollar cottage industry.ó it comprises thousands of hospitals andhundreds of thousands of physicianõs offices and includes academic medical centers, community hospitals, large physician groups, solo physicianpractices, home health agencies, health centers, and rehabilitation hospitals. other participants are pharmaceutical companies, managed careorganizations, and traditional indemnity insurance companies. this diversity brings with it different degrees of sophistication and a diverse setof challenges, resources, and missions but makes it difficult to speak witha unified voice or to adopt a critical mass of technology. recent consolidation of the industry has somewhat improved the industryõs ability toachieve critical mass more quickly, but much of the consolidation (e.g.,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248networking health: prescriptions for the internetthe formation of integrated delivery systems that link different types ofcare provider organizations under a single organizational umbrella) tendsnot to remove the diversity as much as mask it behind single organizational identities.current fiscal constraintsñon care provider organizations, in particularñfurther hinder the industryõs ability to make major investmentsin information infrastructure and applications unless these investmentscan be shown to lead to significant and lowrisk returns. informationtechnology will be adopted rapidly if it results in a material and obviousadvance in medical practice (such as magnetic resonance imagingmachines), but adoption is more difficult for technologies with less quantifiable benefits, such as the security technologies that control access tomedical records. the internet itself is such a new phenomenon that itseventual contribution to the delivery of care is poorly understood by theindustry as a whole. it is unrealistic to expect that the industry willrapidly overcome its fragmentation and diversity to speak loudly andwith one voice. the traditional conservatism of the health care industry inthe face of information technology is likely to persist in the face of theinternet.in addition to these larger structural problems, impediments existwithin individual health organizations. provider organizations lack information about the potential benefits and effectiveness of internetmediatedhealth interventions in terms of both cost and quality, making it difficultfor them to make decisions about internet investments. industry reference models have yet to be developed, and not much information hasbeen developed or shared about the kinds of internetbased systems thatare demonstrably effective in improving care. organizations also lackauthoritative guidelines to help them develop formal policies related tointernet applications, such as rules for email exchanges between patientsand providers and for monitoring sponsored discussion groups. reflective of a tight labor market overall, health care organizations also oftenhave difficulty attracting qualified engineers and programmers to developinformation technology systems for use in healthcare settings.conclusion 7. a number of difficult public policy and regulatory issues constrain the adoption of internetbased healthapplications by health organizations and consumers. some ofthese issues are specific to the health sector; many others extendbeyond the health sector but require the health communityõsactive participation in their resolution.many of the same issues that have slowed the growth of traditionalforms of telemedicine (using private networks) will continue to impedenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations249the expansion of internetbased medicine. for example, health care providers are currently licensed by individual states and are generally prohibited from providing care across state linesña clear issue when a patientis in one state but the physician at the other end of a telemedicine link is inanother. liability claims are also handled at the state level, with considerable variation among states. such policies have made it difficult, if notimpossible, for physicians to practice telemedicine across state boundaries. so has the lack of means for paying for a full range of remotemedical consultations in the medicare program and in many traditionalinsurance companies.1 these policy issues limit the returns that healthcare organizations can expect to receive from investments in networkbased health care solutions. they also affect the willingness of physiciansto adopt new technologies and practices.other policy concerns also threaten to slow the spread of healthrelated applications of the internet. concerns over the security of personalhealth information continue to dampen consumersõ enthusiasm for internetsystems that share such information. the department of health andhuman services has promulgated draft regulations governing privacyand security of electronic health records, but these provisions have yet tobe finalized and will not cover all exchanges of information among themany kinds of organizations that collect, process, and distribute healthinformation. beyond the issue of medical records privacy lies the largerissue of the privacy of online searches and transactions that has arisen inmany forms of electronic commerce and web browsing. what kinds ofinformation can be collected about individuals online, and how can thatinformation be shared? recent accusations that several healthrelatedweb sites have not adequately disclosed their informationgathering anddatasharing practices have brought renewed attention to this issue(clausing, 2000). other issues associated with the protection of intellectual property on the internet also have repercussions for health care, especially in regard to the dissemination of professional literature and educational courseware designed for use over the internet. efforts are neededon the part of governmental, industrial, and provider groups to craft aneffective solution.recommendationsenhancing the internet to support the health community more effectively will require active stewardship on behalf of health organizations,the information technology industry, the research community, and government. these groups must attempt to ensure that the internet evolvesin ways that support health care and that the health sector is prepared toincorporate the internet into its processes for delivering care, paying fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.250networking health: prescriptions for the internetcare, conducting research in biomedicine and health services, improvingpublic health, and providing health education. action is needed in fourareas, as outlined below: (1) ensuring that suitable technical capabilitiesare developed and deployed in the internet, (2) demonstrating and evaluating internetbased applications in the health and biomedical sectors,(3)educating the health community on ways to incorporate the internetsafely into their routine activities, and (4) resolving policy issues thatimpede use of the internet in health.research, development, and deployment ofneeded technical capabilitiesto ensure that the internet has the ability to support health applications, additional technical capabilities need to be developed and deployed.although some existing technologies could be deployed in the next generation internet (ngi) to facilitate experimentation with and evaluationof health and biomedical applications, other technologies will requirefurther research. the health community must articulate its needs to theinformation technology research community and must actively engage indeveloping internetbased systems. the goal is to assure that developersbetter understand the ways in which the requirements needed for healthcare applications of the internet diverge from, or converge with, thoseneeded to support internet applications in other sectors. to this end, thecommittee makes four recommendations.recommendation 1.1. the health community should ensure thattechnical capabilities suitable for health and biomedical applications are incorporated into the testbed networks being deployed under the next generation internet (ngi) initiative andeventually into the internet.the ngi testbed networks being deployed by federal agencies suchas the defense advanced research projects agency, the national sciencefoundation, the national aeronautics and space administration, and thedepartment of energy will provide a basic communications infrastructureon which a number of highend health applications could be demonstrated and evaluated. to help the health community experiment withnew networked applications, these testbed networks must be deployedwith the technical capabilities to support a range of highend health applications, such as medical consultations at a distance, remote control ofresearch equipment, surgical simulation, and collaboration amongresearchers and clinicians. the networks are expected to be deployedwith bandwidth that can support a wide range of health applications,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations251although other technical capabilities will need to be deployed as the technologies become sufficiently stable:¥quality of service mechanisms. qos mechanisms should be deployedin the ngi to support applications that require, for example, the rapidtransfer of digitized medical images (or medical records), the use of realtime video for remote medical consultations, and the control and receiptof imagery from remote experimental equipment, such as electron microscopes. remote videoconferencing, for example, may require less than1mbps of bandwidth to be effective, but that bandwidth must be predictably and reliably available for the duration of a clinical consultationñperhaps 30 minutes or more. in addition, low latencies will be needed tosupport more natural, realtime interaction among participants. the differentiated services (diffserv) and integrated services (intserv) modelsfor qos can each support a range of anticipated health applications. bothshould be deployed across the ngi to allow further experimentation withtheir capabilities and their limitations. deployment of the diffserv modelwould be a valuable first step because it would allow users to experimentwith applications that demand quantifiable qos guarantees and todevelop policies for determining which types of data traffic need a higherlevel of service and which can be satisfied with lower levels of service.deployment of the intserve model could expand the number of enduserorganizations that take advantage of qos capabilities because it wouldallow them to reserve premium services for use when needed, rather thanhaving to subscribe to a premium service that they may leave unusedmuch of the time. deployment of intserv across the ngi testbed networks would also allow researchers to better investigate the ability of theprotocols to accommodate large numbers of users in an operational environment; issues of scalability have yet to be resolved with intserv. moreover, deployment of diffserv and intserv protocols in the ngi testbedswould enable the health community and isps to investigate effective business for financing the widescale deployment of qos mechanismsthroughout the internet. considerable work must be done to find a wayof creating an incentive for isps to deploy qos capabilities in a way thatis consistent with the health communityõs needs.¥ip security. deployment of ip security (ipsec) protocols wouldallow further experimentation with virtual private networks among healthcare organizations involved in the ngi program and would allow furthertesting of the ability of the protocol to scale sufficiently to support effective interchanges of information among health organizations. the use ofipsec across the internet could allow secure communications betweenfixed sets of health organizations and permit the transfer of health recordsamong affiliated care providers or the exchange of payment, enrollment,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.252networking health: prescriptions for the internetand other administrative information between care provider organizations and thirdparty payers and administrators. while secure socketlayer (ssl) protocols can also support confidential transactions acrossthe internet, the use of ipsec could simplify security administration byproviding a central point at which all traffic can be encrypted and authenticated as it leaves one site destined for another. it could further mitigateconcerns regarding the authentication of individual users, as discussedbelow.¥public key infrastructure. the use of ssl encryption across theinternet already enables a wide range of health applications, includingremote access to medical records. what is now missing from such systems is typically a secure way of authenticating end users. while mostonline vendors use cryptographic certificates to validate their identities,most implementations of ssl rely on simple password schemes to validate the identity of end usersñor they simply require a valid credit cardnumber to be presented for billing purposes. the ngi program offers anideal environment for experimenting on a limited basis with strongerforms of authentication, including the use of public key infrastructures todistribute and validate cryptographic certificates for individual end users.effective and scalable pki strategies could be developed to allow moreroutine sharing of information among more loosely affiliated participantsin the health community.recommendation 1.2. to ensure that the internet evolves inways supportive of health needs over the long term, the healthcommunity should work with the networking community todevelop improved network technologies that are of particularimportance to health applications of the internet.it is difficult to predict which particular technologies will be needed,but based on the evaluation presented in this report, several areas seemreasonable as starting points for continued research:¥more readily scalable techniques to provide bandwidth guarantees ondemand. techniques are needed for ensuring that individual organizations (or individual end users) can receive highlevel qos across theinternet on an asneeded basis. smaller health care organizations andindividual users in particular are unlikely to be able to afford to subscribeto statically provisioned premiumlevel qos offerings, but they may needon occasion to send large files quickly across the internet or to engage inremote video consultations. the diffserv model that has been standardized by the internet engineering task force (ietf) does not yet incorporate mechanisms for providing premium services on demand. nor havenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations253standards been defined for the provision of endtoend qos acrossmultiple service providers using diffserv. the intserv model, whichdoes provide such reservation mechanisms, may not, however, be sufficiently scalable for widespread utilization across the internet backbones.there are also concerns that the level of qos assurance provided by thediffserv model are not strong enough for missioncritical applications.research programs are under way to develop scalable mechanisms forproviding qos on demand across the internet and must continue to besupported.¥stronger forms of authentication. additional research is also neededto develop methods for authenticating users of networked applications toease the problem of reliably identifying individual consumers and allowing secure communications between parties that have not establishedrelationships beforehand. technologies and processes must be developed for key and certificate management systems that can be used byindividuals and small organizations to authenticate their identities inonline transactions. solutions must be capable of scaling up to the size ofthe entire population and must address the issues of delegation of trustthat certification hierarchies face. work on smart cards, tokenbasedauthentication, and biometric authentication devices would seem to beespecially useful in serving health needs.¥symmetric or dynamically reconfigurable broadband technologies for thelast mile. techniques are needed to enable consumers to transmit information at data rates similar to those at which they can receive it. currenttechnologies for highspeed internet access tend to be configured to allowmuch greater bandwidth into the home than out of it. for many healthapplications, however, it is conceivable that consumers will send as muchinformation into the network as they retrieve from it (homebased remotemedical consultation is an example). this capability might be achievedby deploying more symmetric forms of broadband access (e.g., symmetricdsl or cable modems that allocate more bandwidth to upstream capacity) or by developing ways to allow end users to use some downstreambandwidth for upstream communications when needed.¥hardened qos guarantees. mechanisms are needed to ensure thatcritical health care applications do not lose their qos guarantees as aresult of link failures across the internet, except in those cases in whichthe network suffers catastrophic failures that leave it without connectivitybetween desired points of communication. part of this effort will requirework on techniques for rapid reconvergence after link failures. approachesare needed to ensure that internet routers can determine updated communications paths across the network should a particular link fail and toensure that data are not lost during the reconvergence period. applications such as remote control of experimental or clinical equipment andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254networking health: prescriptions for the internetpatient monitoring may not be able to tolerate the brief loss in connectivity(and perhaps loss of packets) that characterize reconvergence efforts ontodayõs internet. in particular, efforts are needed to address disruptionsin service between two isps, where existing link recovery schemes maynot be effective.¥disaster operations. techniques are needed to ensure delivery ofhighpriority traffic (including, but not limited to, health information) inthe event of a natural or manmade disaster that disrupts large segmentsof the nationõs information infrastructure.recommendation 1.3. the national library of medicine shouldforge stronger links between the health and networkingresearch communities to ensure that the needs of the healthcommunity are better understood and addressed in networkresearch, development, and deployment.to date, interactions among members of the networking communityand the health informatics community have been minimal. the healthsector is generally underrepresented in standardsmaking bodies such asthe ietf, and few research projects attempt to explicitly forge alliancesbetween networking researchers and health researchers. bridging thisgap would help networking researchers and standards developers tobetter understand the challenges that health applications pose for networking infrastructure and would help the health informatics communityto learn how to incorporate new networking technologies more effectivelyinto their applications. one way of encouraging more crossfertilizationbetween these communities would be for the national library of medicine to encourage or require recipients of its contracts and grants fornetworkingrelated projects to participate in meetings and conferences ofnetworking researchers and standardsmaking bodies. it could explicitlyindicate that it would support travel and related costs for such endeavors.the nlm could also explicitly require collaboration among networkingresearchers and health researchers in some of its awards. it could alsoitself play a more aggressive role in establishing contact between thehealth community and the networking community. it could speak for thehealth community in conveying needs to networking researchers and inreaching out to isps, presenting health care as a cuttingedge example ofa peertopeer application that demands networking capabilities beyondthose now being deployed (e.g., qos throughout the network and symmetrical forms of broadband access for residential use). the nlm couldalso establish an ad hoc task force to explore other ways of communicating healthrelated needs to the networking community.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations255recommendation 1.4. the national institutes of health and itscomponent agencies should fund information technologyresearch that will develop the complementary technologies thatare needed if the health community is to take advantage of theimproved networking technologies that can be expected in thefuture.as noted above, putting adequate network infrastructure in place isnot sufficient for enabling internet applications in the health domain;other information technologies are needed to enable networkbased applications to develop. the medical service arena is a problemrich one withconsiderable need for research into new technologies and new networkcapabilities. the department of health and human services (dhhs), byvirtue of its broad purview over healthrelated efforts in the federal government, should play a leading role in funding research on informationtechnologies of particular importance to the health community. atpresent, dhhs provides only a small portion of the federal governmentõsfunding for computing research (the vast majority of funding comes fromthe defense advanced research projects agency and the national science foundation, with other significant contributions by the nationalaeronautics and space administration and the department of energy).two recent reports encouraged dhhs (or elements within it, in particularnih, ahrq,2 and nlm) to become more actively engaged in information technology research. a report by the working group on biomedicalcomputing (1999) of the national institutes of health, for example, callsfor increased basic research on information technology tools to supportbiomedical computing and for the establishment of national programs ofexcellence to advance research in areas of biomedicine where computation is increasingly important. similarly, the presidentõs informationtechnology advisory committee concluded that òthe national institutesof health (nih) should support biomedically motivated basic research ininformation technology and view it both as important information technology research and as fundamental biomedical researchó (pitac, 1999).it is not possible to identify in advance all areas in which the healthcommunity needs to become engaged, but the analysis in this report identifies the following topics as pertinent preliminary areas of inquiry:¥validation of online information. effective techniques are needed tohelp consumers to judge the quality of the health information they retrievefrom the internet and to give them more confidence in it. the goal ofthese techniques should not be to prevent dissemination of certain information via the internet but to ensure that consumers have a way of judging the quality of what they find there. different technical approachesnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.256networking health: prescriptions for the internetmay be effective in automating what is now a more or less manual processof labeling content to indicate its provenance.¥tools for protecting anonymity online. technologies are needed toimprove privacy on the internet, so that users may pose queries, receivereplies anonymously, and browse web sites without necessarily divulging their identities. use of the internet to retrieve health information or topurchase products can reveal much about a personõs health status andconcerns. a providerõs use of online clinical resources could also provideclues about his or her knowledge of a given subject area. such information could be used in ways that harm internet users. the health community therefore has a strong interest in developing tools to protect theidentities of online users.¥access controls. mechanisms are needed to limit usersõ access tojust the programs, databases, and data fields they need to perform theirjob function or play their role in an online transaction. development ofrobust access controls is especially difficult in health care because thereare many kinds of actors (care provider, educator, researcher, etc.), eachof whom requires access to information, and many kinds of information,most of which should be privileged. these problems are further complicated by the dynamically changing nature of the relationships in healthcare, e.g., between a patient just admitted to an emergency room and thehealth care providers at the admitting hospital.¥controls on secondary distribution of patient health information. researchis needed to develop effective mechanisms for managing the distributionof health information beyond the walls of the organization that originallycollected it. a number of technologies, such as digital propertyrightsmanagement languages and encrypted containers, have been developedto control the distribution of digital media and to ensure the adherence ofrecipients to particular provisions or use of the information (e.g., payment for access, limits on redistribution). additional work is needed,however, to extend such capabilities into the health environment, wherethe new technologies may be able to control the distribution and use ofhealth records and other confidential information.¥improved audit capabilities. additional work is needed to developtools for reviewing audit logs that health care organizations could compile on accesses to electronic medical records. these tools would need toautomatically identify potential violations of confidentiality, drawingfrom external databases such as scheduling calendars and referrals todifferentiate between legitimate and illegitimate accesses.¥qos policies that are suitable to health and health care. policies areneeded to govern the provision of qos in hightraffic environments toensure that critical healthrelated messages receive their requested qosin emergency situations. mechanisms for defining and propagating qosnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations257policy across a network are currently being defined, and it is importantthat such mechanisms are developed in a way that meets the needs of thehealth community. work is also needed to establish guidelines for determining which packets sent by particular institutions will receive the highest priority.¥qosaware applications. work is needed on networked applicationsthat are tightly linked to the underlying qos capabilities of the network.only by creating networked applications that leverage emerging qoscapabilities can the shortcomings of those capabilities for health applications be determined and requirements for new qos capabilities be established. furthermore, by demonstrating the utility of such capabilities in ahealth care context, it may be possible to influence the deployment of newqos capabilities by isps in a direction that is useful to health care.demonstration and evaluation of health applications of the internetcontinued experimentation and evaluation is a central component ofefforts to understand better the kinds of health applications that maybecome more widespread across the internet and the technical capabilities they demand. by demonstrating health applications such as distantconsultation, remote control of experimental equipment, and online accessto electronic medical records, members of the health community will havea better opportunity to examine their relative costs and benefits, the business models needed to support them, and the kinds of organizationalpolicies that are needed to govern their use. a number of public andprivate organizations have supported demonstration programs to allowsuch exploration. these efforts need to continue as new internet technologies become available and new applications are envisioned. theywill be increasingly important to the health community if it is to establisha dialog with the larger internet community about its evolving needs.the efforts will allow continued identification of technical requirementsthat the networking community can address and of other problems andissues for the health community. to provide the kinds of information thatwill inform this dialog, a number of parallel efforts will be needed, asrecommended below.recommendation 2.1. the department of health and humanservices should fund pilot projects and larger demonstrationprograms to develop and demonstrate interoperable, scalableinternet applications for linking many health organizations.public and private organizations have supported a range of pilotprojects and testbeds to demonstrate the capabilities of information technetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.258networking health: prescriptions for the internetnology in health organizations. most have tended to focus on standaloneapplications that operate within a single organization. many of the challenges of internetbased systems derive from the interconnection of manyorganizations to a large network. dhhs and its constituent agencies(nlm in particular) should fund pilot projects and testbeds that explicitlyconnect multiple organizations for purposes of information exchange.these projects are not intended to develop communitywide repositoriesof health information, as was attempted with community health information networks (chins), but should try to facilitate information exchangeamong limited sets of organizations, whether for clinical care (e.g.,exchanges of medical records, the sharing of clinical guidelines, or remoteconsultations between an urban medical center and several remote clinics)or administration (e.g., payment of claims). only by establishing testbedson a large scale can the issues of scalability and the effects of decentralization be identified and evaluated.these projects should explore the capabilities, limitations, and performance requirements for health applications in a highly networked environment with many participating users at different organizations. forexample, projects could be supported in application domains such as(1)public health surveillance, (2) clinical care, (3) homebased care,(4)remote consultations, and (5) payment for services. pilot projects thatintegrate entire vertical slices of the health care delivery process couldalso be tried. such projects would help private and public organizationsexperiment with possible applications of the internet and determine theways the internet can be used most effectively. by involving a largenumber of organizations, the projects will also aid in understanding issuesassociated with access to information resources, especially if the projectsinvolve outreach to individual consumers. they would look at whetherthe research efforts outlined in recommendation 1.1 had achieved theinfrastructure required for health networking applications. thus, demonstrations that show the effective use of advances in bandwidth, latency,qos, and reliability would be most appealing.recommendation 2.2. federal agencies such as the departmentof veterans affairs, the department of defense, the health carefinancing administration, the national institutes of health,and the indian health service should serve as role models andtestbeds for the health industry by deploying internetbasedapplications for their own purposes.the information technology and health care industries need to doconsiderable experimentation, standards development, and integrationwork before the internet can be used routinely for health care purposes.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations259the government could play a proactive, catalytic role in this effort. itoperates a substantial health care operation of its own, in the form of thehealth care systems operated by the veterans health administration (partof the department of veterans affairs, or va), the department of defense, and the indian health service. the health care financing administration operates an enormous system to pay for care provided under themedicare, medicaid, and related programs. by partnering with industry,these government agencies could use the internet aggressively in theirhealthrelated systems. hcfa could, for example, develop policies andstandards for the electronic submission of medicare claims and could actas the certificate authority for a public key infrastructure for authenticating people and organizations that submit claims. the dod and the vacould use their telemedicine programs and efforts to exchange medicalrecords as testbeds and demonstrations that could influence private sectorinitiatives. in effect, these would be pilot implementations and theywould help industry develop appropriate standards and software. anopensource model could be required, thus making the fruits of this effortavailable broadly to industry. this is an area where governmental leadership is likely to be crucial and where passivity on the part of the government will cause many lost opportunities.recommendation 2.3. health organizations in industry andacademia should continue to work with the department ofhealth and human services to evaluate various health applications of the internet in order to improve understanding of theireffects, the business models that might support them, andimpediments to their expansion.health organizations will adopt health care applications of theinternet largely on the basis of their ability to improve the quality of careand reduce its costs. deployment of needed infrastructure will be motivated by the development of business models for supporting the applications and paying for network services such as qos. to date, the healthindustry has had little guidance in these areas, and its adoption of theinternet will be slow without better information. work is therefore neededto determine the effect of internet applications on care quality and costs;organizational performance; job skills; relationships between participants(e.g., changes in the role of patients and responsibilities of patients); theeconomic or business models of care (e.g., use of the internet to establishcontractual relationships between affiliated care providers rather thanbuying them outright); provider workflows; and confidentiality and liabilityconcerns. across all of these areas, evaluations should seek to understand whether internetbased applications have a different impact onnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.260networking health: prescriptions for the internetquality, cost, and access to care than noninternet based applications (e.g.,are internetbased implementations of electronic health records materiallydifferent from noninternet implementations?). similarly, studies shouldidentify factors that hinder the expansion of health applications of theinternet from prototypes or demonstrations to broad organizational ornational use. additional work is needed to develop mechanisms wherebythe health industry can afford the investments in information infrastructure needed to enable more sophisticated applications. elements withinthe department of health and human services can continue to play avital role in providing financial support for these evaluations, as has beendone by the national library of medicine and office of rural healthpolicy.recommendation 2.4. public and private health organizationsshould experiment with networks based on internet protocolsand should incorporate the internet into their future plans fornew networked applications and into their overall strategicplanning.even though several years may pass before the internet can providethe qos, security, and reliability needed for healthrelated transactions,health care organizations need to start preparing now so that they will beequipped to use the improved capabilities offered by future generationsof the internet. they must develop an understanding of the ways theinternet can support their missions, prepare their infrastructures to becompatible with internet technologies, develop the human resourcesneeded to design, develop, and deploy effective systems, and put policiesin place to govern the use of the internet and internetrelated applications. individual organizations and professional societies have roles toplay in this endeavor.because the health care industry has limited experience with internetbased applications and because models for delivering and paying forhealth care continue to evolve, it is not yet clear how the internet can bestbe used to improve health and minimize costs. in the end, some balancebetween internetbased and private networks will probably emerge tomeet the full spectrum of capabilities needed by health care organizations. in the meantime, these organizations should take steps to understand better the benefits of internetbased systems and to have internetready resources in place. they should establish institutional connectivityto the internet and among their constituent organizations. they shouldestablish networkbased relationships with vendors that allow them toexplore electronic commerce opportunities. they should begin using networks that incorporate internet protocols such as tcp/ip, email, ftp,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations261and http for internal communications. and they should begin thinkingabout ways in which the internet can enhance and extend their missions.these represent relatively inexpensive steps for gaining critical insightinto the ways the internet may become more fully engrained in healthprocesses at a later date. without such experimentation, health organizations risk missing out on future opportunities.addressing educational needsin order for the internet to achieve its full potential in health applications, not only must it provide adequate technical capabilities, but healthorganizations also must be capable of adopting it. health organizationswill need the internal capability to envision ways in which the internetcould support their missions and to design, develop, and implement systems that fulfill those visions. the experimentation outlined in recommendations 2.1 through 2.4 will improve organizationsõ capabilities considerably, but additional efforts will likely be needed to bolster internalpolicy development and human resource development. efforts in threeareas are recommended.recommendation 3.1. professional associations with expertisein health issues and information technology should work withhealth care organizations to develop and promulgate guidelinesfor safe, effective use of the internet in clinical settings.improved information outlining best practices for using the internetin health applications would help individual organizations benefit fromeach otherõs experiences and develop informed policies and proceduresto guide their own efforts to harness the capabilities of the internet. professional associations have an important role to play because their membershipspans large numbers of organizations that face common challenges. professional associations with expertise in health care and information technology could help convene groups that would develop standards andguidelines based on the experience and expertise of their memberships.some associations have already taken productive steps in this direction.the american medical informatics association, for example, developed aset of guidelines for using email in clinical settings, and the associationof american medical colleges has initiated programs to evaluate the information technology needs of academic medical centers that could alsoproduce valuable guidelines. similar efforts are needed to develop guidance in (1) monitoring and conducting healthrelated chat sessions, bulletin boards, and forums, (2) remote education of health professionals,(3)disseminating information to a broad audience, (4) appropriate andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262networking health: prescriptions for the internetinappropriate creation of provider/patient relationships, (5) assurance ofthe integrity and accuracy of patientmaintained health records, (6) meansto assess tradeoffs between security, confidentiality, and access, (7) directmarketing to patients of health care services (e.g., pharmaceuticals, prostheses), (8) communication across traditional boundaries (e.g., patient toprovider), (9) clinical email, (10) web information services, and (11) privacy and security of electronic health information.recommendation 3.2. government, industry, and academiashould work together and with professional associations having experience in health and information technology to educatethe broader health and health care communities about the waysthe internet can benefit them.part of the inability of health organizations to aggressively pursueinternet strategies derives from a lack of appreciation among healthworkers about the potential benefits of internetbased applications. manyhave had limited formal education in computing and communicationstechnology and continue to have limited experience using it. educationalprograms could go a long way to overcoming institutional resistance andhelping workers to better use such systems. academic health organizations and professional associations have important roles to play in educating the health community at large about the potential benefits ofinternetbased systems in health care. academic health organizations areamong the leaders in applying the internet to health applications andeducate a range of health professionals. associations can draw upon theirlarge and diverse membership to pool ideas and reach out to individualorganizations. they must also work individually to assemble informationtechnologysavvy staff who can envision and develop internetbasedhealth systems. chief information officers and other highlevel information systems professionals should have expertise in both information technology and health care.recommendation 3.3. the department of health and humanservices should commission a study of the health informationtechnology workforce to determine whether the supply of suchworkers balances the demand for them, to identify the kinds oftraining and education that workers at different levels willneed, and to develop recommendations for ensuring an adequatesupply of people with training at the intersection of information technology and health.for health applications of the internet to be envisioned, developed,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations263and deployed, knowledgeable workers are needed who understand boththe technical capabilities of the internet and the nuances of operating in ahealth context. information technology firms perceive a distinct shortagein the number of qualified information technology workers they can hire,although a formal assessment of the situation is still under way.3 thesupply of workers with both information technology and health skillsmay be even tighter, but the situation has not been well investigated.impressions of supply and demand tend to be based on anecdotal evidence about the demand for graduates of existing programs. all healthorganizations will be affected by the internet and will need to developcompetencies to work with it. to date, support for training in areas suchas medical informatics has come almost exclusively from the nationallibrary of medicine, but it will soon need to come from other sources aswell if the pool of qualified workers is to grow. it is not clear what kindsof skills workers at different levels in a health organization will need.additional study is required to determine the extent of the problem andthe best avenues for addressing it.addressing policy issuesa number of impediments to internetbased health care must beaddressed at a policy level. while it is not possible to identify or predictall the barriers that will arise as the internet becomes more widely used inthe health sector, there is a need to ensure that regulatory barriers do notunnecessarily impede application of the technology as it evolves and thatall demographic groups are active participants in health on the internet.the impediments include issues such as payment for services deliveredvia electronic networks, licensure, and malpractice. these impedimentshave slowed past attempts to deploy telemedicine services more broadly;they exemplify the kinds of mismatches that may result from attempts touse laws and regulations created in the past to govern a growing range ofinternetmediated services. what were minor concerns in the past maybecome more important as the capabilities of the internet grow and itsapplications expand into health and health care. the committee notes thatit is not possible to enumerate all the ways in which the legislative andregulatory environment may need to be altered to accommodate theinternet in health and health care, but some of the areas that have beenidentified hint at the larger set of issues to come. although it is beyondthe scope of its charge and its expertise to provide recommendations forremedying these policy concerns, the committee notes that they pose asignificant barrier to the deployment of internetbased applications inhealth and health care and makes the following recommendation to hasten their resolution:networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264networking health: prescriptions for the internetrecommendation 4.1. the department of health and humanservices should more aggressively address the broad set ofpolicy issues that influence the development, deployment, andadoption of internetbased applications in the health sector.addressing the policy issues that are raised in this report will requirestrong leadership from federal health agencies. not only does dhhsneed to ensure that concerns and needs of the health community arereflected in attempts to address policy issues such as intellectual propertyprotection, privacy, and access to the information infrastructure, but itcan also help to ensure greater coordination of the efforts of federal healthagencies in these areas. elements of dhhs are involved in missions thatare affected by these issues and have taken steps to address them, and thedhhs itself has taken steps to address issues such as the privacy andsecurity of electronic medical records. additional focus would helpensure that these issues are suitably addressed by the policymaking community. dhhs could play a number of roles:¥providing strategic leadership for internetrelated programs within thedepartment and its constituent agencies and coordinating them with those ofother federal agencies. because the internet may transform a number ofaspects of health care, including many of those overseen by federal agencies, government would be well served by a process that would assess,manage, and monitor the implications of the internet for federal healthactivities. many of the agencies within dhhs, including the health carefinancing administration, the national institutes of health, and the centers for disease control and prevention, have ongoing plans to evaluateinternet applications in some of their missioncritical operations, but littlehigherlevel strategy exists within dhhs for better harnessing the capabilities of the internet throughout the organization.¥convening public and private bodies to identify and examine issues relatedto the internet and health care. these bodies could help federal agenciesidentify issues that need to be resolved, provide guidance on the kinds ofapproaches that might be most effective, and ensure greater coordinationof public and private efforts. the national committee on vital and healthstatistics (ncvhs) has been playing a similar role in the area of privacyand security of electronic health information and could serve as themodelñor the seedñfor other such groups.¥exploring crosscutting issues that affect a number of government healthagencies and developing programs for addressing them. for example, dhhscould examine ways to implement a public key infrastructure that wouldsupport a range of federal health activities, from provision of care in dodand va facilities to payment of medicare and medicaid claims.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations265¥encouraging sharing of information and perspectives among healthrelated agencies. development of a health information infrastructure willinvolve a multitude of participants with different responsibilities andinterests: provision of care, payment for care, monitoring of care, healthrelated research, public health, and others. because of its broad interestand activity in many of these areas, dhhs could serve as a focal point forencouraging dialog among these constituents and coordinating activities.¥advancing the national debate regarding key information technology issues that affect health care. as noted throughout this report, considerableuncertainty exists about the ways in which the internet is likely to influence the health sector and about the effectiveness of different applications. based on experience with its own systems, its interactions with theprivate sector, and its ability to serve as a neutral meeting ground, dhhscould help the entire health community become better informed aboutuse of the internet in health care and about the technical, organizational,and policy issues that must be addressed.¥creating organizational structures to ensure that issues at the nexus ofhealth and information technology are identified and addressed promptly andefficiently. the speed with which the internet and its applications areadvancing requires proactive consideration of opportunities and challenges and the structures that can respond to a rapidly changing environment. progress has been made along some of these lines by establishingthe dhhs data council and redefining the charter of the ncvhs. thencvhs has, in fact, begun to address the creation of a health informationinfrastructure (ncvhs, 1998), but additional effort along these lines willbe needed to ensure that adequate attention is paid to this emerging area.a final wordthe recommendations offered above are intended to set the nation ona course that will ensure that technology, organizational practices, andpublic policies converge in ways that will lead to broader deployment ofinternetbased systems in health applications (see box 6.1). undoubtedly,this course will have to be recharted over time to reflect progress madealong each of the fronts and as internetmediated health processes continue to unfold. changes in the structure of the nationõs health care willcontinue to drive the kinds of healthrelated systems that will operateover the internet, and the internet will, in turn, drive changes in thestructure and nature of health care. continued dialog between the information technology community and the health community will be centralto ensuring that the internet evolves in ways that meet the everchangingdemands and specialized needs of the health sectorñand to ensuring thatthe internet will support the health of the nation.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.266networking health: prescriptions for the internetreferencesclausing, jeri. 2000. òreport rings alarm bells about privacy on the internet,ó new yorktimes, february 7.health care financing administration (hcfa). 1997. telemedicine report to congress,department of health and human services, washington, d.c., december 4. availableonline at <http://www.hcfa.gov/pubforms/telemed.pdf>.national committee on vital and health statistics (ncvhs). 1998. assuring a healthdimension for the national information infrastructure, october 14. available online at<http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/hiinii.htm>.box 6.1a view of the futuretwo scenarios demonstrate the kinds of capabilities that could be achieved ifthe recommendations outlined in this report are implemented:1scenario 1: georgia johnson, a 64yearold widow with hypertension and congestive heart failure, lives in quincy, pennsylvania. her physician, dr. ramesh, islocated in baltimore, where she lived before her husband died. ms. johnson seesher doctor biweekly, through a videoconference visit that is hosted in her home bymarcus brown, a student in the university of virginiaõs distancelearning nursepractitioner program. during a routine video visit, dr. ramesh tells georgia thatshe needs to reduce her salt intake and gives her an information prescription.marcus fills the prescription by adding two new features to georgiaõs personalhealth web page: an interactive diary that she will use to track her own sodiumintake and a threepart multimedia series on living with congestive heart failure.during the visit, georgia hears the doctor suggest that marcus visit the nlmõsinternet library of chest sounds to learn more about how to recognize congestiveheart failure. at georgiaõs request, marcus shows her how to use this resourceand links it to georgiaõs web page, too. after showing georgia how to post a copyof the interactive diary to her electronic medical record, marcus heads out for hisnext home visit. as he walks to his car, marcus calls his etranscription service,logs in, and dictates visit notes into georgiaõs electronic medical record.scenario 2: juanita and santos del rios have lived in the united states for3years. they live in a large apartment complex in downtown miami with their fourchildren, who range in age from 2 to 9. they are learning english, but they alsodepend on their 9yearold, rosa, who learns english in school, to help translatefor them. last year, their health plan sent someone to deliver a home health kitconsisting of internet connectivity, a digital thermometer, a heart rate monitor, astethoscope, and a videocamera. the installer, who spoke spanish, showed themhow to use the equipment and to connect to the internet through their television.one night, juanita is awakened by the baby, who is coughing, wheezing, andcrying. she wakes up rosa and asks her to call the hmo for advice. hearing thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations267symptoms, the pediatrician on call asks to have a quick look at the baby. rosaturns on the set, while juanita sets up the health kit. rosa establishes an encryptedsession with the server and reserves a suitable level of bandwidth for a videoconference, using the òbandwidth wizardó on the server. when the connection iscomplete, rosa selects the òhabla espaœoló option for simultaneous subtitles, soher mother can communicate directly with the doctor, and pages the doctor.remembering a recent news item about a rash of respiratory problems in thisneighborhood, the pediatrician links to the local public health department echannelto check on specifics. while waiting for the doctor to finish her research, juanitascans the index of the hmoõs selfhelp library and downloads two items, lassyntomas de la asma and el gripe y su niœo, for later reading.these scenarios require advances in technology, organizational capabilities,and public policy in order to become commonplace in the future. the first scenariorequires dependable bandwidth on demand, authenticated remote access topatient records, and widely accessible internetbased collections of resources likethe multimedia series. it also requires crossborder licensing arrangements andhealth care reimbursement policies that cover this kind of service. the technicalrequirements for the second scenario include cable modems, reservable bandwidth, encrypted server access, digital instruments, and instantaneous languagetranslation. the nontechnical requirements include a health plan that supportshome telemedicine and online access to spanishlanguage consumer health information. most features of these scenarios exist now but are not widely available oreasily accessible to those who may need them. the expanded capabilities forhealth care outlined in these scenarios could be achieved in the near future givenaction on some of the recommendations outlined in this report. even more excitingare the applications that could be imagined if the nation were to begin to use theinternet to its full potential in health applications.1these scenarios were first described by valerie florance of the association ofamerican medical colleges in a public briefing to release a prepublication versionof this report. because of the interest they generated, they have been includedhere.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future, national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, arlington, va., february 24. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.working group on biomedical computing, advisory committee to the director. 1999. thebiomedical information science and technology initiative, national institutes of health,bethesda, md., june 3. available online at <http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/060399.htm>.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.268networking health: prescriptions for the internetnotes1.hcfa is already working to investigate means of reimbursing the costs of sometypes of remote consultation and has funded demonstration projects to explore alternativepayment schemes. for information on hcfaõs efforts on paying for remote health services,see hcfa (1997).2.the agency for health care policy and research was recently renamed the agencyfor healthcare research and quality (ahrq).3.the computer science and telecommunications board is studying workforce needsin information technology. additional information on this project is available online atwww.cstb.org.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.271appendix asite visit summariesas part of its datagathering activities, the committee on enhancingthe internet for health applications visited eight sites that were eitherdeveloping healthrelated applications of the internet or engaged inhealthrelated activities that could be transferred to the internet in thefuture. these visits, conducted between december 1998 and february1999, spanned half a day to one full day each. they provided committeemembers with a snapshot of the state of deployment of the internet in thehealth community at that point in time and an opportunity to betterunderstand the technical and other challenges associated with use of theinternet in support of health care.this appendix briefly summarizes the committeeõs eight site visits,including four in california, two in north carolina, and two in washington state. the sites were the laboratory for radiological informatics atthe university of california at san francisco (ucsf); kaiserpermanenteof northern california, oakland; stanford center for professional development, stanford university; the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) ames research center, mountain view, california; thecenter for health sciences communication at east carolina university(ecu), greenville, north carolina; the university of north carolina(unc), chapel hill; and the university of washington (uw) and regenceblueshield in seattle.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.272appendix alaboratory for radiological informaticsmembers of the study committee spent half a day at the ucsf laboratory for radiological informatics (lri) on december 16, 1999. h.k.(bernie) huang and his colleagues at lri demonstrated systems designedto share three different types of telemedical images: digital mammograms;cardiograms; and neurological images made by magnetic resonance imaging (mri) and computerized tomography (ct).1 for the most part, thesesystems make use of a picture archiving and communications system(pacs) at ucsf that stores digital medical images in several terabytes ofoptical disk storage and an asynchronous transfer mode (atm) widearea network (wan) that connects ucsf with nearby mount zion hospital. originally, the laboratory used a dedicated wan, but then the university installed a synchronous optical network (sonet) ring, which nowsupports the network. a t1 connectionñwhich supports data rates of1.544 megabits per second (mbps)ñlinks ucsf with stanford universitymedical center, an hourõs drive away.telemammographysteve frankel of the breast imaging section at ucsf and andrew louof lri provided an overview of the teleimaging system. ucsf now hastwo fullfield digital telemammography systems that produce images of40 to 60 megabytes (mb) compressed (using an acceptably lossless compression scheme). a typical study generates four such images, two ofeach breast, but also requires a historical set of equal size for comparison.images can be transmitted across the wan for remote interpretation anddiagnosis or realtime reading by expert mammographers. in the demonstration, staff physicians at ucsf sent images to mount zion for interpretation. physicians at both ucsf and mount zion used highresolution(2,000 2,000 pixel) monitors to view the images. using custom softwaredeveloped at ucsf, the referring and consulting physicians could use anonscreen dualpointer to identify objects of interest and change thebrightness and contrast of the images to aid in interpretation. an electronic magnifying glass enabled mammographers to examine portions ofthe image in greater detail.expert reading of mammograms in real time is not necessarily neededfor regular screenings, but it can be useful if potential abnormalities arediscovered. in such cases, remote experts can provide faster diagnoses orrequest additional images before the patient leaves the mammographycenter. busy centers may examine 80 to 100 women per day (20 per day ismore typical for an average center), with the expectation that images willnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a273be read the following day. longer delays are not uncommon; manymobile mammogram centers have 2week turnaround times.telemammography is viewed as a means of supporting increaseddemand for mammograms. the national cancer institute (nci) recommendation that all women over age 40 have an annual mammogramcould, if widely heeded, greatly increase the rate of mammography, ucsfsystem developers noted. they also said the nation has too few expertmammographers to handle the increased volume and, moreover, thatmany rural areas have no local experts. to provide teleradiology interpretation services for other health care organizations, ucsf has established a consortium with emory university in atlanta; wake forestuniversity in winstonsalem, north carolina; brigham and womenõshospital in boston; and the university of pennsylvania. the consortium,named telequest, accepts images over a dedicated t1 line and providestranscribed diagnoses. participating physicians must be crosslicensed inthe examination sites.cardiology teleconferencingtony chou, director of the catheterization labs, described a cardiology teleconferencing system linking ucsf and stanford university. thisapplication, which runs on a t1 line, is used as an educational tool toenable physicians to present cases to colleagues for postmortem reviews.it is not yet used for diagnostic purposes but it could be, once the institutions install digitized catheterization labs. the system has been used toreview angiography and intravascular ultrasound images, which are currently captured as analog video and digitized. digitized angiogram filesare roughly 60 mb in size; intravascular ultrasounds are about 50 mb.the size of these files is expected to grow by a factor of 10 once the fullydigital systems are installed. videos are displayed at a rate of 25 framesper second.in applications tested to date, digitized videos of angiograms andintravascular ultrasound have been transmitted across the t1 networkand replicated on both sides of the connection, a process that takesapproximately 5 minutes. in one case, images were transferred to a medical center in germany overnight. participants in the teleconferences canexamine images simultaneously, using onscreen pointers to note items ofinterest and zooming in on particular portions of the video. physiciansreport that the quality of the video is already sufficient for most diagnoses, but the system has been used only for reviewing outcomes andmedical decision making.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274appendix aneuroimagingbill dillon, chief of the neuroimaging department, provided an overview of the neuroimaging teleconsultation system linking ucsf andmount zion. the system is used primarily for mri and ct scans, whichusually are digitally captured and stored in the pacs. before the pacswas established, some 15 to 20 percent of films were lost and hundredswent unreadñmeaning that the hospital could not bill for the service.the pacs allows immediate access to images and was accepted rapidlyby physicians, who found that the system greatly increased the ease oflocating needed studies before meeting with a patient.the wan has enabled ucsf to offer image interpretation services.in fact, ucsf now has a resident on call to read neuroimages taken atmount zion. such centralization of interpretation skills helps accommodate the interests of the state of california, which is pressuring californiahospitals and medical schools to reduce the number of specialists andtrainees in specialty areas. similar pressures are being felt at the nationallevel as health care providers merge and attempt to consolidate servicesand eliminate duplicative capabilities across large health care deliverysystems.kaiserpermanente of northern californiathe study committee visited kaiserpermanente of northern california on the afternoon of december 16, 1999. kaiserpermanente is thenationõs largest health maintenance organization (hmo), with more than9.4 million members in 20 states. it has approximately 100,000 employees,including 10,000 physicians and 30,000 nurses and pharmacists, and itoperates some 30 hospitals with more than 8,000 beds. the hmo is not asingle entity but, rather, an affiliation of two separate organizations: thekaiser foundation health plan, which handles administrative and management functions, and permanente medical group, which consists of12separate groups of practitioners. kaiserpermanente has experimentedwith networkbased telemedicine applications, particularly in teledermatology and teleradiology. its most notable success was with a system forretinal screening of diabetic patients, which began when a clinic bought acamera and began sending images electronically to an expert reader forinterpretation. this simple procedure increased initial screening ratesfrom 30 to 93 percent of all patients who met the criteria in the risk guidelines.kaiserpermanente staff began evaluating different internet applications at the request of its chief executive officer. the result was a unified,threepronged strategy consisting of a provideroriented system; anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a275customerfocused system; and a common, shared database. developmentof the provider system and shared databaseñthe permanente knowledgeconnection (pkc)ñhas proceeded under the auspices of kaiserpermanenteõs care management institute. development of the consumercomponent, the kponline system, has proceeded separately. the discussions during the site visit focused on both the instituteõs efforts to developinternal applications for use by care providers and on the efforts ofkponline, a customerfocused system.permanente knowledge connectionpeter juhn, executive director, described the activities of the caremanagement institute (cmi), a national entity within kaiserpermanentethat operates on behalf of both the kaiser foundation health plan and thepermanente medical group. cmi was established in 1997 and employsapproximately 80 people, 30 of whom work in oakland and the rest ofwhom are distributed throughout the kaiserpermanente system. its principal function is to develop evidencebased approaches to care management. this work has three areas of emphasis: content, measurement, andimplementation. content work includes the development of management programs for conditions such as diabetes, asthma, and depression,as well as an overall compendium of clinical best practices. measurementwork encompasses largescale national studies of health outcomes andhas included studies of 200,000 diabetic patients, 320,000 cardiovascularpatients, and 90,000 asthma patients in the kaiserpermanente system.the implementation work builds on the content foundation, using thecollected information as a basis for clinical systems that can influence careat the point of delivery. the objective of these activities is to change careprovidersõ behavior to coincide with best practices developed throughoutthe kaiserpermanente system. such systems can have dramatic effectson care. over the previous year and a half, kaiserpermanente found a 10to 15 percent gain in the use of practice guidelines in some areas where ithad developed content.the pkc is a networkbased application that was developed to support the cmiõs objective of improving care. its primary function is toallow care providers to access current cmi content on best practices. thecmi staff realized that each kaiserpermanente site was gathering usefulinformation that could benefit other local and national care providers, butlittle of it was shared. using kaiserpermanenteõs national intranet, thepkc now has national and regional databases of bestpractice information that is vetted before it is entered into the databases. a board ofdirectors that represents all executive and physician groups approvesinformation for inclusion in the national database. twelve regionalnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.276appendix agroups establish approval processes for their own regions, and localoffices establish processes for local approvals. this structure balanceslocal freedom against the need for greater structure at the highest levels ofthe organization. the databases are linked together through the nationalofficeõs intranet web site, which makes the information searchable andreduces duplication of effort. in addition to linking care managementinformation, the pkc provides a centralized outlet for other informationresources of interest to care providers. it contains a section for continuingmedical education (cme) that allows users to look up their cme credits.it also provides access to online text books and journals and supportsdiscussion groups with threaded discussions. its workgroup functionsenable users to post material and conduct national meetings in a virtualmanner. workgroups can be designated for members only, with membership defined by the chair.the cmi staff plan to build on the pkcõs current capabilities to makepkc more useful to care providers. the staff will address topics such asimproving search capabilities, tailoring information to provider needs,and expanding access to affiliated care providers. the pkc can supportsearches across the national intranet using a commercial search engine,but the cmi is looking into ways to improve search capabilities and helpdifferent types of users find information they need, perhaps by addingòmetadataó capabilities. the staff also plan to use òpushó (as opposed topull) technologies and customization to provide users with informationrelevant to their immediate and longterm needs. plans for this enhancement are tied to efforts to place a computer on every physicianõs desktopand provide access to a clinical information system (more than 40 percentof kaiser physicians had desktop computers at the time of the site visit).overall, however, the kaiserpermanente staff do not consider technology a limiting factor. they have modest aims for now, and technology isoften a distraction from reaching other goals. they prefer to take knowntechnology and find ways of using it to support their business, rather thanpushing the technological envelope.nevertheless, determining how best to expand the pkc to affiliatedproviders will entail both technical and policy considerations. kaiserpermanente has agreements with approximately 40,000 affiliate providers in physician groups outside of california. how can kaiser convincethe affiliates to care for kaiser patients according to kaiser practices?should the affiliates have access to all the available knowledge, or shouldsome information be considered proprietary? how can information belayered and filtered easily to accommodate restrictions placed on affiliateaccess? how can firewalls be extended to include specific partners whilestill providing adequate protection for kaiserõs information systems? atpresent, the system does not contain patientlevel data, which alleviatesnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a277some concerns regarding security, but kaiser needs to evaluate alternative ways of providing security on an extranet and/or the internet. it alsoneeds to determine how best to blend public and proprietary informationto benefit its providers. kaiser officials do not consider their practiceguidelines proprietaryñand would even like to make them publicñbutthe tools for implementing these practices are unique and will be keptproprietary. kaiser would like to translate the guidelines into lay termsand make them available on its consumeroriented web site.the kaiser staff anticipate three types of outcomes from the pkc.first are the financial benefits. they want to leverage the size of theorganization while avoiding duplication of effortñsomething the pkccan facilitate. the staff will try to determine how much money was savedby not starting new programs or sustaining existing ones because pkcindicated that similar work may prompt changes in clinical decision making that yield improved clinical outcomes and use of facilities. otherbenefits will accrue from improved knowledge management, which shouldsucceed in educating care providers about new diagnostic approachesand new techniques. the kaiser staff hope to make the link betweensuccessful patientprovider interactions and the pkc system evident, todemonstrate the systemõs ability to support corporate objectives.if the system is to be successful, then usage rates must increase. atthe time of the site visit, 2,700 of kaiserpermanenteõs 10,000 physiciansused the system, but all were expected to use it by the end of 1999. toattain and maintain that level of usage, the system will need to proveitself capable of educating physicians about the new diagnostic approachesand clinical techniques. the system will also need to demonstrate itscapability to enhance the goals of the organization. management willneed to see a direct linkage between improved patientprovider interactions and the tools that support that interaction. privacy issues will alsoneed to be addressed so that providers know whether information will becollected on their searches of medical literature and whether such searcheswill be viewed as positive (i.e., the provider is engaging in continuouslearning) or negative (i.e., searches indicate gaps in a providerõs knowledge).kponlineannalisa silvestre and richard leopold described kaiserõs consumeroriented web site, the primary component of kponline. kponline is athreetiered system with a web page interface that interacts with legacysystems through an intermediate object layer. ms. silvestre views theweb site as a service for interacting with kaiserpermanente members. itis not a marketing tool or a mechanism for providing content. rather, it isintended to provide members with an alternative to telephone calls andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.278appendix aoffice visits. the site provides members with capabilities for messaging,scheduling appointments, and checking prescriptions 24 hours a day, 7days a week. eventually, the kaiser staff would like to integrate kponlinewith the pkc so they can take the information gathered from patientsthrough kponline and incorporate it into practice guidelines and, conversely, incorporate practice guidelines into chat rooms and email discussions with patients. the goal is to help patients better understandhealth information, tailor it to them, connect them with providers, and tohelp them make sound, coordinated decisions regarding their care.at the time of the site visit, approximately 16,000 registered users hadlogged on to kponline more than once. this number is just a smallfraction of kaiserpermanenteõs 9.4 million members, but the staff believesusage will increase as more of them gain internet access. the recentbiannual survey reported that 72 percent of members are adults, 53 percent of whom have internet access at home, work, or both. ten percent ofall members have requested a personal identification number (pin) to usewith the system. hence, kaiser expects hundreds of thousands of members to access the system simultaneously in the near future (the target was350,000 active users in 1999) and is in the process of procuring additionalservers to handle the load. the organization is still trying to learn howmembers use the site and what types of services they seek. kaiser isstarting to collect data on site usage (it does not track an individualõsmovements within the site) but does not yet have adequate volume toexamine usage by demographic category.consumers are coming online quickly, and kponline is expected tobecome a basic utility that will benefit both consumers and kaiserpermanente. a basic evaluation will be performed to determine who usesthe system, their level of satisfaction, and the overall utility of the system.more formal costbenefit analyses will also be conducted. a tangible costbenefit analysis will evaluate processes such as online pharmacy refillsand automated appointment scheduling and compare them to moretraditional, manual processes. the kaiser staff expects that online pharmaceutical services have the highest benefits per unit cost because fillingprescriptions becomes much less expensive when done in high volumes.other tangible benefits not associated with cost reductions, such as helping members make good decisions, will also be considered. some of thebenefits will be difficult to quantify, but there may be ways to determineif online material helped to prevent an unnecessary visit to a kaiser facility, improve the appropriateness of a subsequently scheduled visit, orincrease membership retention rates.early experience with kponline has uncovered numerous issues thatneed to be resolved. one of the main ones is the need for standards formeasuring the quality of online transactions. for example, with respect tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a279online questions to nurses, it might be desirable to track the time of receipt,the time at which the question was answered, the time at which themember retrieved the response, and whether the answer given was valid.similar standards are now in place to help train nurses who provideadvice over the telephone, but such situations involve nearrealtime feedback. in addition, nurses need training in how to provide care basedstrictly on text input (which creates a record of the interaction), with novoice or personal interaction with patients. at the time of the site visit, allof kaiserpermanenteõs care providers had email accounts, but patientswere not yet using them. the use of clinical email raises several questions, as yet unanswered, regarding medical records.other issues include the determination of rules for intervening insponsored chat groups. kaiserpermanente had a case in which amemberõs postings to a chat group suggested suicidal tendencies. theorganization had to decide whether and how to intervene. should it linkthe userõs anonymous login with the medical record database to check themedical history and find contact information? in this case, the kaiser staffdid just that, and an advice nurse called the patient and arranged anappointment, which revealed that the patient was indeed suicidal. eventssuch as this prompt policy reviews.kaiser has established a set of technical measures and administrativeprocesses to provide security on the web site. the site uses secure socketlayer (ssl) encryption to protect messages between members and kaiser,and members need a pin to access chat groups. members are required toprovide their membership number and address to obtain a pin. in addition, the manager of the business unit is a security trustee and has toensure that policies and procedures are in place. these policies arereviewed regularly and upgraded as needed, and attempts are made toachieve consistency between online and offline policies. for example,kaiser dropped the authentication requirement for scheduling an appointment online because such authentication is not performed when scheduling appointments via the telephone.members of the kaiserpermanente staff identified several technicalcapabilities they would like to be able to incorporate into kponline:¥authentication technologies that would allow multiple users within asingle household to use the same computer but keep their informationseparate. in the current kponline system, if users forget to log out of asession, then other family members can see what they did and what information they retrieved. the kaiser staff would like to obtain improvedtechnologies to identify users and authenticate their identities. one possible solution is biometrics, but this approach would be costly to implement across many computers.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.280appendix a¥higherspeed internet connections for end users. the objective is toenable members to have òa t1 experienceó while using a 28.8 kilobit persecond (kbps) modem. kaiser has its own widearea network that connects all kaiser facilities. should the organization become the equivalentof an internet service provider (isp) so that it can provide highspeedconnections and ensure security? should care providers act as isps themselves so that members can connect to the network using highspeed cablemodems or digital subscriber line technologies?¥a standardized web browser. the kaiser support staff spends considerable time helping customers configure their browsers to work withkponline. users sometimes confuse the application with the infrastructure and call kaiserõs support desk to report problems that are not associated with kponline but rather with their isp.¥a simple telemedicine terminal. a computer that supports videoconferencing, and sensors for collecting diagnostic information, wouldenable care providers (such as triage nurses) to interpret and evaluatecases based on more than just textbased information. a pilot programusing this technology is ongoing in the midatlantic region to monitordiabetic patients, and there are plans for another pilot program in thenortheast with congestive heart failure patients. telephone lines are usedto transmit information. the main problem experienced to date is notcapturing the information but incorporating it into the medical record.security issues also need to be addressed.stanford center for professional developmentcommittee members visited the stanford center for professional development on december 16, 1998, to meet with andrew dipaolo, its executive director, and members of his staff and learn more about the stanfordonline system. stanford online is the current webbased implementation of the stanford instructional television network, a system pioneeredby stanford universityõs engineering school to teach courses at a distance,largely (in the past) to employees in local industry. the system allowsstudents or employees to remain at their company sites while takingcourses. through the honors coop program, workers can maintain fulltime employment while studying to earn a fullfledged masterõs degree.the program focuses on engineering classes, but members of theuniversityõs section on medical informatics have taught courses using thesystem.the system started with live broadcasts over private systems betweenstanford and the subscribing companies, generally with twoway audiosupplementing oneway video so that students could ask questions of theinstructors and participate in discussions. subsequently, workersõ neednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a281for flexibility in scheduling of studies led industry to call for videotapesthat could be watched at the convenience of students rather than onlyduring live video feeds. the program was broadened into the stanfordcenter for professional development (scpd) when it became clear thatthe distanceeducation model would be more than simply broadcast television. anoop gupta, a computer science faculty member, had developed vxtreme, a technology for streaming video, which was experimentally adopted by the scdp as a means of distributing òvideotapesó by theinternet rather than by courier. vxtreme was later acquired by microsoftcorporation, and the scpd continues to use the microsoft streamingvideo products (which are incompatible with realvideo).today, stanford online has become an important means of disseminating videorecorded classes along with slides and photographs of blackboards or projection screens. videos are up on the web within 3 hours ofthe class. class videos are indexed into segments by undergraduate students, who manually perform this function immediately after the class.methods are being explored for automating the indexing and matchingthe video to the master copy of slides. a previous yearõs videos arediscarded because the courses are taught again and the lectures are continually updated.stanford online students see three things in their browser window: arelatively small video of the instructor giving the class; an index of topicscovered by the lecture (topics can be selected as the student wishes); andpowerpoint slides or, alternatively, photos of projected slides or blackboards, coordinated with the audiovisual track. even with a 28.8 kbpsconnection, students can work through a lecture and skip around basedon the indexing outline. the browser has a plugin for streaming video.the system is intended to be used asynchronously; students cannot askquestions in realtime via the internet, but they can send email to professors and participate in online discussion groups.students can take courses whenever they want if they are not seekingcredit. if they want credit, then it is best for them to take the courseduring the regular semester, at the same pace as oncampus students, totake advantage of resources such as teaching assistants who are availableto grade homework. class videos are also broadcast to dormitories atspecific times over the campus television system, enabling stanford students who live on campus to view lectures they missed or wish to view asecond time. television viewing does not allow usercontrolled access tospecific portions of the lectures, however, as does the stanford onlineversion. with the availability of both scheduled replays of lectures andstanford online video on demand, it is now possible for students to taketwo courses that meet at the same time. students like the asynchronousmethod because they can follow courses when they are away from thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.282appendix acampus. however, the online capability can reduce the number of students attending the live lecture; in fact, some students have opted not toattend class at all, especially early in the morning. the smaller number oflive participants can reduce class interactions and force changes in theway professors deliver lectures.file sizes for 10 minutes of video range from 1.6 mb to 38 mb depending on the bit rate at which they are sent (table a.1). the size of the file isminimally affected by the size of the video image on the computer screen.the image quality of the frame degrades as the number of frames persecond (fps) increases, even though the throughput (bit rate) may remainconstant. the frame rate depends on the video capture card that convertsvideo imagery into digital format and on the horsepower of the authoringworkstation.it is not clear whether there are unique networking requirements formedical education. some technologies may be more important for thedelivery of lectures dealing with medicine than of these dealing withother fields. for example, techniques are needed for tracking laser pointerson slides, an essential in teaching radiology classes. the scpd is trying todevelop techniques for overlaying the movement of a pointer on thescreen and ways of noting changes between or within items on the screen.it is conducting formal studies of performance and has involved theuniversityõs education school in the evaluation process. at present,stanford online is a technical implementation of current models of teaching; little thought has been given to changing the educational model to fitthe technology. this approach has at least one advantage: it allowslecturers to deliver courses online without changing their form or structure. some minor changes have been made, such as the use of biggerchalk to make writing more visible.the scpd makes money for the university, enough to pay for a largestudio and the operation of five channels. net income is roughly $4million per year, some of which is divided among university departments.faculty members have financial incentives to teach courses online: theyreceive a share of the tuition for online courses, as do their departments.table a.1 file size of 10 minutes of video at different bit ratesbit rate (kbps)2250100256512file size (kb)1,6563,7567,50719,01838,408source: michael rouan, stanford university, personal communication, january 18, 1999.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a283but new financial models may be needed to pay for new services. so far,offcampus services are offered only to òmember companies.ó thisapproach would need to change if the university decided to allow individual students to pay for their own classes, as they would for cme.the scpd programñthe online portion, in particularñis very popular. online participation may cut into the broadcast model. obviously,this could be a big business for stanford, a trend that threatens smallcolleges. scpd has the capability on existing servers to teach 2,000 simultaneous users; additional capacity could be brought online to expand itsscope.nasa ames research centerthe committee visited nasa ames research center on december 16,1999. committee members were hosted by muriel ross, then director ofthe ames center for bioinformatics, and her team of biocomputingresearchers. nasaõs space exploration mission, particularly the possibility of crewed flights over long distances, poses particular challenges innetwork communication. as space vehicles venture further from earthand for longer periods of time, it is unlikely that the crew will have all theneeded medical expertise. accordingly, the nasa team is focusing primarily on how to provide health care using telemedicine over long distances with high latency. the emphasis is on technologies that consumelittle power (such as personal computers) and that can leverage the powerof more costly hardware through network connections. they are addressingtwo particular aspects of this challenge: the need to support remote,collaborative medical assessment and treatment using the internet (as anapproximation of the network that would be available using wirelesscommunication) and the need to support rapid, accurate threedimensionalrendering of organs for assessment at a distance by medical professionals.as part of its preparation for remote medical consultations, nasaames has established a collaboration among inhouse staff and stanforduniversity scientists to experiment with the transmission of images, inparticular complex threedimensional models of hearts, skulls, and otherstructures. the challenge for nasa networking scientists is to send theimages simultaneously to multiple sites (i.e., multicasting, as opposed topointtopoint communication). they have created a testbed networkthat links nasa ames with stanford university medical center, thecleveland foundation clinic in ohio (through nasaõs glenn researchcenter), salinas valley memorial hospital (through the university of california at santa cruz), and the navajo nation at its northern navajo medical center in new mexico. the network is extremely complicated, linkinglocalarea networks (lans) at the participating institutions to a variety ofnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.284appendix ahighspeed wans, including the nasa research and educational network; abilene, a highspeed network backbone project of the universityconsortium for advanced internet development; and the very high performance backbone network service (vbns), a research network launchedthrough a 5year cooperative agreement between mci and the nationalscience foundation. connections to the navajo nation run through satellite and highspeed ground links.the threedimensional medical images used in nasaõs tests containseveral million polygons and are too complicated for typical computerworkstations to render. nasa therefore planned to perform volumerendering on a powerful central graphics computer and then transmit theimages (or changes in the images) to peripheral workstations at the remotesites. because the files would be too large for straightforward transfer ontodayõs internet, nasa planned to use the abilene network, which operates at 9,920 gigabits per second (gbps). limitations in bandwidth invarious parts of the network, however, precluded even this design. consequently, nasa designed a hybrid system in which highresolutionstatic images (containing roughly 1.2 million polygons) are transmittedfrom the centralized site and realtime rendering of object manipulationsis handled at lower resolution (approximately 20,000 polygons) by theindividual sites. changes are made visible to all participants, and at theend of a manipulation, the centralized nasa computer sends an updated,fullresolution image back to each of the remote sites using multicasttechnologies. users at the collaborating sites wear special glasses to viewthe threedimensional images. the images for cranialfacial surgery consist of skin and skull only, but future modeling will include brain tissueand blood vessels.the testbed provides simulations of remote medical care for earthbound patients as well as astronauts. if, for instance, it was suspected thata child at the navajo nation might have a congenital birth defect of theheart, a local physician and technician would send threedimensionalimages obtained with ultrasound or mri technology to consultants atstanford and salinas for opinions about treatment. the threeway collaborative environment would allow the specialists and caregivers toassess the situation quickly and weigh two options: local management ortransfer to a medical center.east carolina universitythe visit to east carolina university (ecu) on february 2, 1999,featured extended discussions of the universityõs telemedicine programas well as tours and demonstrations. the study team spent the day withdavid balch, director of ecuõs center for health sciences communicanetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a285tion and director of the telemedicine program, and gloria jones, thetelemedicine program coordinator. other staff members and affiliatedclinicians and educators participated in portions of the meeting.between august 1992 and february 1999, the ecu telemedicine program conducted about 2,500 realtime consultations in 31 different fields,using about 60 different doctors. the top five areas are dermatology;cardiology; neurology; gastroenterology; and allergy, asthma, and immunology. in addition, the program has conducted numerous radiologicalconsultations, many on a storeandforward basis. the telemedicine program also runs distance learning programs, the first of which began in1989 over a statewide network that links major universities in northcarolina.between 1991 and 1999, ecu spent about $8 million on local facilitiesand infrastructure for telemedicine and teleeducation. physical space isprovided by the school of medicine, and most equipment has been provided through grants from the office of rural health policy (orhp) andhealth care financing administration (hcfa). the site visit committeetoured the facilities and observed a telemedicine consultation to a ruralsite.telemedicineeast carolina university has two telemedicine suitesñan older oneand a newer oneñwith a total of eight rooms. each room has a telephone,a personal computer for displaying electronic medical records, a displayof the remote site, and a display of the consulting physician. the newerrooms are 6 by 8 feet and have a òsound domeó overhead to direct audioto the physician; the older rooms are slightly larger to accommodate alarger display and are soundproofed. the newer rooms were built forabout $8,000, of which $4,500 was spent on equipment (e.g., computers,monitors, stethoscopes) and $3,500 was spent on furnishings and construction. remote sites feature standard arrays of diagnostic equipmentthat can plug into the network.physicians typically schedule three or four consultations in a 2hoursession. the technical staff makes sure that all the equipment is workingand that patientsõ online records (if there are any) are available. aftereach consultation, the physician completes a report, which is entered intothe clinical database. cases are presented at remote sites by a nurse or aphysiciansõ assistant. a distant site provides a halftime dedicated employee who is trained by ecu to be a telemedicine presenter. the presenters generally train with the ecu specialists for a week and come in tothe center about every other week; in this way, physicians and remotepresenters learn to collaborate before being placed at opposite ends of anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.286appendix atelemedicine link. physician training includes a 1hour interview with asimulated patient. ecu charges outsiders for this training; the universityneeds to subsidize training for its own people. distantsite physicians arenot involved in the telemedicine consult unless they wish to be; onlyrarely do they participate.ecu centralizes the management of storeandforward consultationmessages, which typically consist of medical images attached to email.this process allows managers to control bandwidth, monitor usage andflow of information, maintain the equipment, and capture the demographic and survey data they need for their own purposes and to satisfyrequirements of the hcfa. ecu tried switching from motion joint photographic experts group (jpeg) to wavelet compression, but physicianswho were already trained did not like the resulting interface change.at distant sites, ecu pays for all equipment and 3 years of linecharges, taking this as a marketing and referral expense. standard installation costs $150,000 per site, including remote camera control, twowayaudio and video, and continuing medical education content. installationand bandwidth are sized to support echocardiograms and cineoangiograms, the most bandwidthintensive images. ecu tries to installidentical capabilities at all sites, to avoid creating secondclass sites withless expensive equipment.each telemedicine application supported by ecu has a different business model and a different networking infrastructure. some of the applications are moneymakers, whereas others are seen as loss leaders forfuture services and still others may not be sustainable after federal funding expires. for example, the state fully funds medicaid telemedicinesessions, but this arrangement is in jeopardy because of new nationalpolicies. ecu has a waiver from the hcfa and is receiving medicarereimbursement for consultation sessions, but the paperwork burden isheavyñup to a dozen forms filled out for each telemedicine session.many of these consultations are store and forward, and new applicationsin primary care (e.g., wellness) are not considered consultation, so there isno reimbursement potential for these sessions.the following five subsections describe the primary telemedicine services offered by ecu. the sixth subsection outlines how these servicesdiffer in terms of networking infrastructure.prison telemedicineecu has a contract with the state of north carolina for services to thestateõs central prison. the most popular applications include dermatology and endocrinology. this was ecuõs first telemedicine program, andit is a moneymaker. ecu bought the equipment and charged back for itnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a287over 4 years on a flatrate basis that included equipment costs and maintenance plus 10 free consultations. the breakeven point is 800 consultations per year. the state was able to document a per prisoner cost savingfrom avoiding transportation costs (it formerly cost about $800 per year totransport a prisoner to another site for health care). officials also noticeda decline in the number of medical complaints by prisoners, who can nolonger view a visit to the doctor as a chance to leave the prison. ecuprobably will expand this program to cover the entire north carolinaprison system.hospital to hospitalthe hospitaltohospital telemedicine link was funded initially by thehcfa but now is covered by ecu and the participating hospitals. thereare 20 hospitals involved, each with a t1 connection. no more than halfof the t1 link is needed for video, so the other half carries data. originally, the system used socalled triple integrated services digital network(isdn) at 384 kbps, but after the telephone company switched its billingpractices, ecu converted to t1 lines for both conferencing and data. forechocardiography, triple isdn might work in some situations, but it isnot adequate for cineangiography.the ecu hospital funds the program at $150,000 per partner. ecupurchases and loans the equipment to the site; sets up the router, computer, and coderdecoders (codecs); orders the t1; installs the equipment;and trains and supervises the halftime staff person (usually a nurse orphysicianõs assistant) who works the equipment at the remote site. thepartner has to agree to fund this position, provide space and insurance forthe equipment, and pick up the line charges after 3 to 5 years. the serviceis not a moneymaker for ecuñno one makes money from consultations.it is viewed as a marketing effort that may establish relationships thatbring in patients and eventually lead to procedures, which would generate income. for instance, the hospital might get more cardiac referrals asan indirect result of a wellbaby telemedicine program. such benefitswould be difficult to track, however. the financial gain would be virtually impossible to calculate because any lost business opportunities wouldneed to be figured in.home healththe home health program is funded by a grant from the orhp withinthe u.s. department of health and human services. the goal is to determine if hospitalizations can be avoided through better home monitoringof health indicators, such as blood pressure and heart rate. the programnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.288appendix aconnects 14 homes through ordinary telephone lines (sometimes referredto as òplain old telephone serviceó or pots), using two different vendors.at first ecu used two phone lines per home (one for transmitting audiofrom the stethoscope, the other to carry the patientõs voice), but they havesince found ways to compress the audio sufficiently to enable the use of asingle phone line. participants are selected on the basis of their frequentuse of hospital facilities (e.g., highrisk obstetrics patients or patients whoare seen more than twice a week in the emergency room) and their abilityto have the system installed in their home for at least 6 months. ecu hasapproval from medicaid for the program, but home health is not includedin the new regulations promulgated by hcfa regarding governmentpayment of health services delivered over electronic media.health screeninganother orhp grant is supporting two distributed networks (in contrast to the hubandspoke architecture of the other networks) that linkmental health centers and schools to ecu. over one network, ecu provides medical/psychiatric consultations to four mental health centers.the other network links four schools with the county health department,a mental health center, a local pediatrician, and ecu. the networks use128kbps isdn lines (socalled single isdn, which has proven to be morereliable than the tripleisdn lines used in other applications). it is hopedthat the networks will reduce travel for care providers.the connection to the schools is used to screen students for mentalhealth problems (25 percent were found to have such problems) and tohold wellness clinics and more general disease screenings. the projecthas a number of aspects: student health awareness (through focus sessions on topics such as peer relations, nutrition, and physical fitness);clinical consultations; continuing education in cultural sensitivity forteachers; clerkships for students in health professions; and health assessment in the schools. the schoolbased program sets up live videoconferencesbetween a doctor and school students for discussions of healthrelatedtopics.storeandforward email consultationsa storeandforward system is used for multimedia email consultations (using the visitran md application). the system uses the internetand pots dialup to a central server to connect a number of sites on theouter banks of north carolina with ecu. remote sites use standarddesktop computers (pentium class) to transmit image files averaging 3mbin size, a figure driven by technical limitations. nurses could easily takenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a289more images or add more video, but most gateways cannot handle fileslarger than 5 mb. the system loses money because of the hcfaõs reimbursement schedules, but income is generated by procedures that resultfrom referrals.variations in network infrastructurethe ecu program began in 1988 with a microwave network designedfor educational purposes. since then, the networking infrastructure hasevolved into an amalgam of components cobbled together over the yearsas telecommunications companies have offered different technologies.old networks have not been upgraded to provide greater uniformitybecause of the costs involved. instead, ecu officials have developed abridge to link their disparate systems. codecs pass signals from onemedium to another in a manner transparent to both ends. for example,the prison contract uses the state microwave system, but the signal isdigitized for delivery to ecuõs desktop workstations. the digital signal isconverted back to microwaves for delivery to the prison. all of ecuõstelemedicine activity takes place over leased lines rather than the generalinternet, although north carolina has built a fiber optic superhighwaythat links many of the stateõs universities.the infrastructural variations are not solely technologydriven,because, as david balch noted, one size does not fit all applications intelemedicine. different specialties require different amounts of bandwidth. echocardiography and cineangiography require the highestbandwidth, 784 kbps; cardiology, emergency room consultations, andneurology require roughly 384 kbps; and psychiatric consultations require128 kbps. static image specialties such as radiology, dermatology, andpathology are generally bandwidthindependent because images can besent in a storeandforward mode. home health requires just one telephone line. hence, various communication media are used, includingmicrowave, t1, single isdn (128 kbps), triple isdn (384 kbps), and pots.table a.2 summarizes the networking infrastructure for each of the systems ecu currently has in place.teleeducationeast carolina university has eight teleclassrooms on campus. thenetwork was originally built to deliver distance education in engineeringand is currently used for nursing classes. (the classrooms are too largefor doctorpatient telemedicine applications.) a standard room has allnetworking modalities available: the north carolina information highway(ncih) at 45mbps; t1 networking at 1.5 mbps, isdn dialup capability;networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.290appendix apots lines; and cucme (a software package for sending lowqualityvideo across the internet). the rooms hold 10 to 15 people each and havecameras aimed at each chair for video.there is also a larger lecture hall, similarly equipped, that is used forgrand rounds sessions. ecu provides grand rounds three times per weekto 20 hospitals. these sessions can be carried out using one 15personconference room and one small auditorium, both of which can connect to37 sites on the north carolina research and education network (ncren)at t3 speeds (or 45 mbps), 127 ncih sites at t1 speeds, and other sitesusing isdn. powerpoint slides are converted to video. grand rounds areseen as a loss leader designed to acclimate remote users to the equipmentand style of interaction, in the hopes that they will later try clinical consultations at the remote sites. scheduling is complex; ecu uses schedulingsoftware developed inhouse.ecu is using internetbased streaming media (realtime audio), a chatchannel, web pages, and animations (shockwave) for a small number ofnursing courses. both asynchronous and synchronous instruction areavailable (i.e., students can participate in lectures in real time or download the video for later viewing). the network was designed to accommodate 28.8 kbps modem speeds so that it could be accessed by a largenumber of users. that bandwidth is suitable for transmitting lecturersõslides, but it forces audio to be compressed into 6.8 kbps, making thevideo slightly choppy. the network determines the speed at which todeliver data based on the receiving studentõs access bandwidth.the asynchronous system incorporates 20 kbps video, which consumes most of the available bandwidth. powerpoint slides are convertedto html for use by both the nursing instructors and the students athome. audio is captured and sent in a 6.8 kbps stream to leave room forthe graphics. lecturers have added some small animations; it takes abouttable a.2 network infrastructure used for different east carolinauniversity telemedicine servicestelemedicine systemnetwork infrastructureprison1/2 t1 line, by microwavehospital to hospital1/2 t1 line or 384 kbps isdn dialuphome healthpots (one line)distributedsingle isdn (128 kbps)store and forwardvolumebased; internet, pots, isdn to raleigh,t1 from raleigh to greenvillesource: david balch, director of telemedicine at ecu, site visit by committee on february 2, 1999.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a2911 hour to create 10 seconds of animation. materials are available onlinewithin 24 hours after a class session. the system can handle up to 25 usersper class; 5 to 10second delays are considered acceptable.the synchronous system uses microsoft netmeeting or icq for interactivity. it takes advantage of the chat feature alongside powerpointslides for interaction between instructors and students, but little interactivity has been observed. in a large class, the professor might have anassistant answer the chat questions. problem areas include scheduling,preparing auxiliary materials, marketing, and meeting assessment deadlines. presenters must act as moderators and must learn to teach to anempty room or to a screen audience and a live audience at the same time.next steps: switching to the internetthe internet, especially the next generation internet (ngi), wouldoffer increased bandwidth and networking capabilities that would in turnenable a range of scenarios for telemedicine. one scenario might bephysicianfree medical practices in which nurses and physiciansõ assistants handle many patient complaints and consult with specialists onlywhen needed. in another scenario, centers such as the one at ecu couldbecome brokers between practices and specialists rather than hubs thatprovide the specialists. the center at ecu also could become a means ofproviding services to more affluent clients who opt to pay for their ownhealth care rather than relying on their health plan. realtime treatmentplanning, with its increased bandwidth requirements, is seen as unlikely.in the future, internet protocol (ip) video and web tv will be close toproviding telepresence.ecu is not currently slated to receive a connection to the ngi, butresearchers are trying to find a way to get a connection. in the meantime,telemedicine system developers have been thinking through the challenges inherent in moving their telemedicine network to an allip environment, which would provide more of a plugandplay capability. mr.balch has been working with the american telemedicine association tosort out which disciplines are most likely to be effective using telemedicineand the bandwidth and throughput required for each. table a.3 summarizes his conclusions, which divide telemedicine consultations into threebroad categories: (1) those in which highresolution, static images areneeded (such as in pathology, dermatology, or radiology), (2) those inwhich mediumresolution imagery is needed, with little motion (such asin psychiatry or internal medicine); and (3) those in which mediumresolution images are needed, but with a high degree of motion (such asin cardiology).ecu officials would consider switching from leased lines to thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.292appendix ainternet if there were evidence that it would reduce costs and lead toincreased access, which it currently would not in rural eastern northcarolina. they would like to outsource the networking part of the business to a company experienced in dealing with telephone companies (i.e.,an isp). they are moving to ipbased video, in spite of the cost and accessissues, to overcome the problem of heterogeneous systems. beyond theseissues, use of the internet would require attention to a variety of administrative and technological challenges.one challenge is rapid change in both health care models and technology. modes of health care delivery and payment are in flux, andprovider plans are becoming more integrated and national in scope. thisis not currently a problem for ecu because it serves only north carolina,so it is able to use physiciansõ assistants on the remote end and a physician on the central end. but working across state lines would require aphysician on each end and perhaps some type of crosslicensing arrangement. meanwhile, as noted earlier, rapid changes in technology have leftecu with a system that is cobbled together rather than designed foroptimum overall functioning.a variety of standards and quality control measures would have to beinstituted. a technical service broker would need to document the sessions, keep records, and keep track of the time. for the system to beefficient, participants would need to use standard historytaking procedures, standard clinical protocols, and standard tools for teleconsultation.triage and quality control would be needed on the storeandforwardsystems. a certification system would also have to be created for consultants, presenters, and, perhaps, for overall telemedicine programs.security also would need to be improved. security is an issue forboth data transmission and medical records, which must be kept securefrom unauthorized viewers, including technicians and hospital employees. currently, ecu faxes medical records and uses proshare, whichprovides encrypted mail, for the storeandforward system. each mestable a.3 bandwidth required for different types of telemedicineapplicationstelemedicine applicationneeded bandwidthhigh resolution, no motionstore and forwardmedium resolution, low motion128 kbpsmedium resolution, high motion384 kbpssource: david balch, director of telemedicine at ecu, site visit by committee on february 2, 1999.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a293sage is checked to be certain that all the parts are there, but this model willnot scale up. the ncren fiber network cannot be used for telemedicinebecause it passes through the telephone company, creating too manysecurity issues.quality of service (qos) is not an issue for ecu today because theprogram uses leased lines; servicelevel agreements (pacts between ispsand users on minimum bandwidth, maximum latency, etc.) to provideequivalent qos would be needed if the internet were used.university of north carolina, chapel hillthe site visit to the university of north carolina (unc) in chapelhill on february 3, 1999, featured two main activities: a visit to thecomputer graphics laboratory for demonstrations of telepresence systemswith potential applications to medicine and a meeting to discuss internetbased education programs in the school of medicine.uncõs computer graphics labguided by henry fuchs, the committee saw four demonstrations ofcomputer graphics and virtual reality systems with potential applicationsto medicine: the telepresent office, augmentedreality ultrasound, widearea tracking/walking, and imagebased rendering/depth extraction. allof these systems attempt to convey telepresence.telepresent office/office of the futurethe office of the future is an attempt to create an immersive environment that enhances the sense of participation in teleconferences by usingmultiple cameras and multichannel audio. the remote participant sits ata corner desk, and a 270degree image of the central conference facility (oroperating room) is projected on the walls of the room. realtime videoand audio are transmitted to the remote location. the setup requiresabout a dozen live video streams, which require substantial bandwidth(although bandwidth demands might be reduced). persons at the centrallocation see the remote participant on a video monitor and receive anaudio feed.much attention has been focused on image registration by camerasand projectors and on the mapping of images onto room geometries thatdiffer between sending and receiving locations. flight simulator datashow that occlusions and breaks must be kept at 50 msec to avoid interfering with a personõs conscious attention to the task (100msec breaks createa distraction). the 50msec figure is used as a point of reference in buildnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294appendix aing smoothness into the collaborative environment. the system has beenused with multiple ip video streams over the vbns. empirical observations suggest that it does not work very well in spite of apparently adequatebandwidth; there is not much emphasis, at present, on the efficient network transport of video and audio.latency and timestamping of different video streams are important,especially during the current transition from a twodimensional to a threedimensional system. a true sense of presence can be provided only ifthere is no latency. the system needs to factor in the distance betweenviewer and viewed and provide a 360degree view without breaks. in thedemonstration, two or three cameras were added to compensate for distance, and two or three more to ensure a 360degree view. then, all thevideo streams need to be delivered together and reconstructed into aseamless image. perfect timestamping, down to microseconds, is neededfor reconstruction. the time stamp could be a property of either thenetwork or the packet. there are problems with either approach: a timestamp in the packet helps with synchronization, for example, but it creates a latency problem.augmentedreality ultrasound visualizationthe augmentedreality ultrasound system consists of a headmounteddisplay that provides an òxray visionó view of a surgical patientõs abdomen. the user can visualize hidden structures reconstructed from ctimages and/or an ultrasound probe. the system is able to convertsequential twodimensional ultrasound into threedimensional objectswithin the abdominal cavity. it was developed in collaboration with alocal unc surgeon who specializes in minimally invasive procedures. itis not envisioned as a network application.widearea trackingthe widearea tracking system uses a threedimensional helmet display of a virtual architectural space. guided by position sensors in thehelmet, the system renders appropriate changes in perspective as theperson wearing the headgear walks through a room. it is supplementedby tactile feedback from styrofoam objects that correspond to threedimensional images. the system is tied to highspeed position detectionand threedimensional rendering of local objects, but it could be converted to a network application.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a295imagebased rendering/depth extractionthe imagebased rendering/depth extraction technology is a threedimensional modeling system in which architectural surfaces are scannedby a laser to acquire depth information, upon which surface informationfrom twodimensional images is mapped. the system produces photorealistic rendering on a computer display (requiring tens of millions ofimage primitives per second) with interactive joystick control. users canmove around the scene. it runs on a pixel planes computer and is boundto a central processing unit and local memory. the system is not envisioned as a network application.educational technologiesjohn loonsk, head of information systems for the school of medicineand the division of medical informatics in the department of biomedicalengineering, discussed the unc approach to technologybased curriculum support. the goal is to create an internetbased learning environment for medical education for both resident and nonresident students.the system incorporates standard offtheshelf software and a browserbased interface. it uses flat html for all pages, with url interlinking fornavigation. a staff of 45 handles all of the work; few faculty members areinvolved directly in creating materials.all medical students are required to purchase a specific laptop computer, which has standard software and preconfigured isp accounts forremote access. the staff transfers course notes from the live networkenvironment so that students can download the previous, current, andfollowing weekõs syllabus materials and use them offnetwork. a recentstudy of system use found that 136,000 pages were retrieved and videoswere played 4,300 times in a month (box a.1). students also are requiredto take a medical informatics course delivered online. before each classsession, the students receive an email message with html links to basicmaterials for that topic. then a lab session is held in the five rooms inwhich student carrels are located; each student has a carrel with networkaccess and power.the preclinical version of the educational system has five components. one is reference materials based on the universityõs uncle system, which includes links to (1) medline; (2) products from ovid technologies that contain links to 60 fulltext journals and textbooks; and(3)some uncspecific links to content. a selection/editorial committee,with members from various unc schools and run by the library, choosesand deselects materials.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.296appendix abox a.1use of uncõs webbased educational suitestudent use of the university of north carolina (unc) webbased educationalenvironment is very good and growing, according to data for september 1998.usage increased substantially over the previous year, as firstyear students appeared to use electronic resources much more often than any previous class.actual use is undoubtedly even higher than the figures suggest because uncenables students to download the most frequently used material (e.g., histologyimages, anatomy images, weekly syllabi), and downloaded material is not tracked.the september 1998 data are as follows:¥roughly 136,000 electronic syllabus pages were retrieved (if typical webhits were counted, then this figure would be about five times higher).¥computerassisted instruction (cai) and reference programs (separate fromuncle) launched from the web were run 6,000 times.¥digital videos and audio files were run 4,300 times.¥1,300 searches were conducted.¥uncle sessions numbered 33,400 (each session represents multiplepages).the users were varied. for electronic web pages, 74 percent of retrievalswere from student laptops and the remainder were from òpublicó student workstations and faculty/staff machines. almost all of the videos were run from studentlaptops. for cai and reference programs, about 35 percent of access was fromstudent laptops and the remainder was from public or faculty/staff machines.source: john loonsk, university of north carolina, site visit by committee onfebruary 3, 1999.a second component is teaching materials, beginning with the syllabus, which is distributed to students in both an online and a printedversion. traditional instructional materials (e.g., lecture notes and slideimages) are captured and integrated with common sources of publishedinformation to support reference/retrieval and problem solving. searchengines allow students to find material easily. typically, course materialsare provided two weeks in advance and left on the system until updatedor replaced. because the full 2 years of the preclinical syllabus are online,the school of medicine has abandoned its curriculum management database; faculty members simply search the syllabus using keywords.the third component is an image repositoryña collection of medicalimages with some text descriptors and titles. staff are trying to convertthese into flat html format. a directory structure exists, but there is nonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a297database structure for generating dynamic html pages. staff are alreadybuilding an image database and case repository using a standard format;they hope faculty will use the repositories to build instructional materialswith reusable components. for legacy applications (pcbased, computeraided instruction materials), a launcher was built that can be reachedfrom the browser.the fourth component is a case repository, which contains specificproblems that provide an òevocativeó presentation of a particular case.different classes may use the same cases. most cases are textbased; thereare no simulations yet.the fifth component is communications technology, consisting of astandard email client. dr. loonsk wants to make more use of email withembedded html and storeandforward capabilities. there was anunsuccessful attempt to provide threaded discussion lists; the studentscomplained of too many distracting messages.the clinical learning environment was developed for thirdyear students. it contains quick references on uncle as well as access to fulltextarticles; clinical support tools so that students can document patientencounters (e.g., problem lists); and learning frames, which provide background and instruction on particular clinical problems. a learning frameis developed for each topic on a problem list that students use as theycomplete clerkships. the frame keep the basic didactic information up todate and also includes canned searches against basic references and anumber of other custom views of the curriculum resources. access to theclinical database, a noncommercial application, is provided to both localand remote students.there are several constraints on the system. one is bandwidthñthesocalled last mile connectivity to studentsõ homes. there is no digitalsubscriber line (a digital telecommunications protocol for sending data athigh rates over copper telephone lines) or cable modem access in the area,and there are many different phone companies. if bandwidth were muchhigher and universally available, then unc would use teleconferencingfor student mentoring activities in which students start as a group oncampus and then disperse to community sites. another constraint issecurity, especially for clinical data. the hospital uses audit trails to deterimproper access to medical records. a related problem is the absence ofunique and secure ids for user authentication. on the other hand, the useof ip authentication by vendor products limits offcampus access to somereference materials, a growing problem because 50 percent of a studentõsclinical time is spent outside the hospital.other constraints include the demands of managing virtual privatenetwork (vpn) and extranet services; administrative structures are neededto establish vpns among sites and to distribute and revoke encryptionnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.298appendix akeys as needed. there is also inadequate qos to enable the provision ofvideo and publicnetworkbased telemedicine to academic health education centers. users cannot be assured of getting the requisite 128 kbps ormore consistently across the internet without some sort of servicelevelagreement. there is also a need for higher level standards (e.g., xml) tosupplement urls. finally, there is some faculty inertia in moving towardthe use of new communications methods (e.g., newsgroups, listservs).university of washingtonthe visit to the university of washington (uw) on february 10, 1999,consisted of a series of briefings on, and demonstrations of, a range ofprojects related to medical informatics and humancomputer interfaces, akey factor in making the ngi more accessible to health care. since the1970s, uw has engaged in a series of computing, informatics, and internettechnology projects that have built upon one another. the site visit teamheard about many of these projects as well as about changes in the pacificnorthwest brought about by information technology.computing activities at the university of washingtonand in the seattle areaed lazowska, chair of uwõs computer science department and amember of the computer science and telecommunications board, provided an overview of computing and internetrelated activities at uwand in the seattle area generally.over the past few decades, seattle has been transformed from alumber town into a community dominated by boeing corporation andthen into a much more diversified city. the uw medical center hasplayed a key role in that transformation, helping to spur the developmentof the local biomedical electronics, biotechnology, and software industries. washington state now has the largest concentration of hightechemployees in the nation (i.e., workers employed in companies with higherthan average levels of research and development). although the aerospace industry has leveled off in both dollar and employment terms, otherhightech areas are growing quickly.a recent survey by the washington software alliance found that software is a $20 billion industry in the state, with 2,500 firms employing47,000 permanent workers. employment has grown by a factor of fourover the last decade, and the software industry has an employment multiplier of 5.5 (meaning that each software job creates 5.5 additional jobs inother sectors), which is twice as high as that of the technology sector as awhole. the average annual wage in washingtonõs packagedsoftwarenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a299industry in 1997 was $198,000 (salary plus exercised options), not including the pay of 640 company officers. the average salary before optionswas $67,000. the software industry has 7,300 current vacancies andanticipates 64,000 new hires over the next 3 years. if these jobs can befilled, then the industry will generate an additional $12.8 billion in revenues over the 3year period. seventy percent of these jobs require abachelorõs degree or higher. these data have implications for local universities; namely, they find it difficult to recruit top people for academicjobs, and there is limited practical value in 2year academic programs,whose graduates fail to meet the employment criteria of much of localindustry.the arpanet was brought to the pacific northwest in 1979 by theuw computer science department. the nwnet (part of the nsfnet)later formed around uw. as of august 1997, the vbns was not designedto extend to the pacific northwest, even though there were somewhatredundant points of presence (pops) in regions with supercomputer centers. (a pop is a dialin site where a backbone network connects to accessnetworks and where internet service providers house switching hardware and transmission equipment.) now, the region has a vbns connection to denver and san francisco. plans call for the development ofregional collaborations, which are key to developing regional expertiseand will allow for regional peering and traffic aggregation through asingle point of connectivity. uw was one of the four original sites forabilene and worked with qwest, which is laying the fiber for abilene asit lays its own national network, to get hooked up early, so the universitynow has a 2.5 gbps fiberoptic connection. the pacific northwestgigapop, which includes abilene and vbns, is operated by uw, whichreceived money from the state legislature for equipment. (a gigapop is apoint of presence for accessing highspeed networks, sometimes calledgigabit networks.)a 10 gbps link connects uw to the westin building, where thegigapop is located, in downtown seattle. uw is working with microsoftand u.s. west on a regional bandwidth experimentation program. uwalso has requested national science foundation (nsf) funds for connections to regional universities, including oregon health sciences and oregonstate. the remaining challenge is to convince agencies other than the nsfto connect to the gigapop. private networks (such as those run by thedepartments of defense and energy and nasa) tend to serve the samegeographic areas, often missing the pacific northwest. if agencies carriedeach otherõs traffic, then aggregate demand could be considered in determining the need for network/pop connections. however, shared networks might pose availability and security problems.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.300appendix ainformatics and internetrelated activitiesbrent stewart provided a brief overview of the school of medicineõsinformatics and internetrelated activities. a number of early projectswere not discussed in detail during the site visit. for instance, uw wasone of the first sites in the integrated advanced information managementsystems program of the national library of medicine (nlm). it alsoparticipated in the advanced communications technology satellite program, a nasa effort that started in 1972 with a satellite providing aconnection to alaska. a project on ultrasound telemedicine, sponsoredby the defense advanced research projects agencyõs technologyreinvestment program, was designed to develop dualuse ultrasoundtelemedicine technologies that could be used in ambulances in both battlefield and civilian situations.other efforts included the benchtobedside project, which extendedthe reach of the uw school of medicineõs internet resources to community hospitals and libraries. it encompassed research, deployment, andtesting activities. bench to bedside and beyond (b3): building and testinga regional telemedicine testbed was sponsored by the nlm; it expandedthe original program to allow the sharing of clinical information amongparticipants in the washington, wyoming, alaska, montana, and idaho(wwami) rural telemedicine network. it includes a secure web interface to medical records, secure clinical email, and access to medicallibrary resources.projects that were discussed in some detail at the site visit are summarized in the following subsections. they include the distributed radiology oncology network, the mindscape interface to a clinical data repository, the wwami network, medical projects at the human interfacetechnology laboratory, the gigapop, ngi projects, biomedical libraryprograms, and the digital anatomist electronic repository of anatomicalimages and teaching programs.distributed radiation oncology networkira kalet, of the radiation oncology division, discussed radiationplanning software that he helped develop. it uses a clientserver architecture to enable collaborative planning of radiation treatments by physiciansin different locations. the software creates detailed threedimensionalvisualizations of cancerous regions of the body by building up sequencesof twodimensional ct images. the images can then be sent across thenetwork to be viewed and manipulated by the collaborating physicians.radiation oncologists can use the system to identify tumors and plantreatments in collaboration with dosimetrists. the collaborators can viewnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a301various radiation portals and beam trajectories to aid in planning treatments; the software synchronizes the images shown on each userõs screen.such collaboration formerly was possible only by faxing images to andfrom collaborating physicians. in its current configuration, the systemallows sharing of images across a lan. in the future, it will allow trueremote collaboration.system development poses a number of technical challenges. thedifficult programming task, carried out in collaboration with the computer science department, resulted in several papers published in computer science journals. latency is a significant concern, as it currentlyranges from 1 to 2 seconds and could increase across a wider area network. obtaining funding for continuing research on such projects is difficult. while health organizations such as the national cancer instituteunderstand the need for research on ways to calculate radiation doses, forexample, they generally fail to see why they should fund research oncollaboration software or new software design tools, according todr.kalet. industry resists supporting work like this, too, viewing it is astoo risky and as taking too long to produce results that can be commercialized.mindscapetom martin, director of systems development for uw medical centerinformation systems, demonstrated mindscape, a webbased interfacefor viewing a clinical data repository. mindscape is based on the medical information networked database (mind) data repository developedat the medical center between 1991 and 1994. the system contains about60 gigabytes of data, including clinical data (e.g., electronic medicalrecords), and offers links to library reference materials (e.g., drug databases, medline, laboratory tests reference data, and clinical guidelines)as well as other decision support tools. mindscape generates reminders about exams that patients will need soon, lists of medications, anddynamic reports for several measures, such as hemoglobin levels indiabetic patients. other reports also can be generated on a clinic orproviderspecific level. for example, the system can generate information about compliance rates of patients in a particular clinic or under aparticular physicianõs care. users can pull up patient records so they cancall and remind them to come in for appointments.terminals and/or computers with access to mindscape are locatedin all exam rooms at the medical center. the system is also accessiblethrough dialup modems. because it is primarily textbased, mindscapedoes not currently generate unusual requirements for bandwidth; however, images are being added to records, and that will increase bandwidthnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302appendix arequirements. mindscape uses commercially available webserverencryption technologies (128bit ssl) and server authentication for security, along with access controls. access to system information is grantedon a needtoknow basis, and overrides are in place to allow access inemergencies. all access can be audited to ensure compliance with confidentiality policies. the confidentiality and security policies are derivedfrom policies in place for paper records. all physicians and other staffmembers with access to the system must sign a confidentiality agreementand complete training on confidentiality policies.wwami rural telemedicine networkuw serves as the tertiary care center for the five member states of thewwami (washington, wyoming, alaska, montana, idaho) regionalmedical program and is the regional medical school for those states.wwami links the uw school of medicine, the uw medical center, theharborview medical center, and the childrenõs hospital sites and clinical teaching sites throughout wwami. the participating statesñwhichtogether cover about onefourth of the u.s. land mass but have sparsepopulationsñcreated an affiliated education and care program. studentscomplete their first year of medical school in their home states and thencome to washington for their second year. the third year is decentralizedrotations; about half of these students go out into the field. the residencyprogram places students in member states.wwami has undertaken many telemedicine activities since the 1970s,especially to alaska, to support its education programs. funds from therural health policy agency allowed the consortium to set up six telemedicine consultation sites in small communities. the local primary carephysicians are also preceptors for medical students, and an average ofone or two consultations, mainly specialty consultations, are held at eachremote site every month. psychiatry, cardiology, and dermatology arethe most common telemedicine specialties, although there is some use ofthe system with peripheral instruments and for trauma consults.telemedicine has not worked for rheumatology. the network also isused as an administrative link among the uw sites.the system uses a framerelay setup with 56kb switched lines to therural sites, which lack either the capacity or funding to get digital lines.communications are imperfect at this speed and produce video artifacts,for example. the local seattle locations have t1 linkages. for teledermatology, the participants use storeandforward capabilities; otherconsultations are synchronous. the telephone lines cost, on average,$3,000 to $5,000 monthly, which could not be covered without grantmoney. the system uses picturetel equipment.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a303the local physicians are satisfied with the program; they use thelibraryõs resources and learn to like the internet. but several issues mustbe resolved before the telemedicine program can be expanded. first, theprogram crosses state lines and requires licensed physicians at either end,so beginning students cannot present patients. when students do clinicalrotations in rural areas (as half of the students must do), they must getlicensed in both statesñunless they are participating in telemedicine programs operated by the federal government (such as the veterans administration), which are exempt from state licensure requirements. second,insurance is an issue; some patients will not use this medium for consultations because their insurance will not cover it. third, telemedicine canaffect local referral patterns. finally, reimbursement is a major problem.consulting doctors are currently paid from the grant money. the hcfaand the rural health policy agency support only 80 percent of a normalpayment, and the doctor has to split the fee with the referrer. montanaapproved telemedicine for medicaid because it saves money normallyspent on patient travel.medical projects at the humaninterface technology labthe humaninterface technology (hit) laboratory is a research unitin the uw college of engineering. it has a roster of 108 people; 18 areregular staff members and the rest are made up of faculty associates,visiting scholars, graduate students, and so on. the income of the laboratory is about $17 million, twothirds of which comes from grants andcontracts. forty companies participate as members of the virtual worldsconsortium, providing a little less than onesixth of the revenue. spinoffs from the laboratory include 13 different companies; 10 of these arestill active, including 3 created recently.suzanne weghorst, assistant director, introduced the hit laboratory,which has a goal of developing and demonstrating missiontransferabletechnology. tom furness, the director, elaborated on the laboratoryõshistory. he worked for many years at wrightpatterson air force base,designing humanmachine interfaces in airplane cockpits. he came toseattle in 1989 to found the laboratory, by which he hoped to extend thescope of his work, with the general goal of providing better coupling ofhumans to advanced machines.furness emphasized his view of the future as technology that simulates òbeing there,ó improving humansõ ability to transport themselves bymoving their eyes to different places and times. such experiences rangefrom teleconferencing to òtransportó through an endoscope to view hidden portions of the body. for instance, a videotape made 5 years agoshowed an interactive teleconference in which participants in the unitednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.304appendix astates and japan wore virtual reality (vr) helmets and cooperated in thetask of herding virtual creatures across a conference table with paddles.the telecommunications link consisted of four isdn lines. the imagesdisplayed were somewhat flat and cartoonish, but the interaction wassuccessful.the committee was shown three active laboratory efforts. in the virtual operating room, the participant wears a vr helmet and holds a control stick. the helmetõs location and orientation are sensed by a devicemounted on a fixed stand over the space, and this information is used todrive the displays to the video helmet (much in the manner of current vrgames). the environment is based on photographs and equipment fromharborview medical center. there is a patient on an operating table; byusing the control stick, the participant can manipulate displays, such asthe electrocardiogram output, and instruments, such an endoscope insertedin the patientõs lower abdomen. the displays can be controlled so thatthey are visible regardless of the participantõs perspective, or they can befixed at various positions in the virtual room. there were some noticeablelags in the following speed of the display if the participant turned quickly,and the overall precision of the location sensors appeared to be on theorder of inches rather than millimeters.the second active effort involved simulation of surgical suturingthrough a computercontrolled forcefeedback device. the user interactswith the environment through a pair of scissors holding a virtual needle.a standard video monitor displays the position of the needle relative to awound in a small area of skin. a finiteelement model of the skinñit hasabout 200 nodes, with a relatively higher concentration of nodes near thewoundñsimulates the restoring force of the skin against the needle andcontrols the force feedback. if the user inserts the virtual needle into theskin orthogonally to the skin surface, for example, then little force is felt,but if he or she holds it at an oblique angle, then considerable force isneeded to pierce the skin. the forcefeedback device requires updatesabout 1,000 times per second; the visual display runs at a standard 30cyclespersecond refresh rate.the third effort is the virtual retinal display. the idea is to paint animage directly on the retina with photons instead of projecting the display elsewhere and requiring the person to follow it visually. the imageappears only on the participantõs retina. the lab bench setup includedlowpower red, green, and blue laser light sources fed through an opticalfiber, with the fiberõs output scanned mechanically over the retina by amoving mirror. although the lab setup seemed cumbersome, a companycalled microvision was spun off in 1993 to commercialize this technologyand evidently has had some success in reducing it to a practical size andweight for portable use. because the image can be focused so that itnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a305passes through only a small part of the userõs cornea and can potentiallybe focused on a specific part of the retina, the technology holds promisefor assisting persons with impaired vision and providing bright, highprecision displays for vr applications. a number of surprising resultshave been found in experimental use. for instance, users do not perceiveflicker in the static images even at relatively low refresh rates (e.g., 15frames per second), meaning that the system offers twice the resolution ofother displays at the same bandwidth.seattle/pacific northwest gigapopjim corbato discussed the evolution, current architecture, and expected future evolution of highbandwidth ip network infrastructures foruw and its seattlearea health care partners, which include the harborview medical center, childrenõs hospital, and the fred hutchinson cancer research center. network interconnections in seattle are simplifiedby the physical proximity of data networks from various interexchangecarriers (e.g., qwest and us west) and isps at the gigapop facility indowntown seattle. the network connections have relatively poor sitesecurity (because they are in a generaluse office building) and present apotential singlepointoffailure for internet access for the entire pacificnorthwest.next generation internet projectsuw received a phase 1 award from the nlm to examine biomedicalapplications that would benefit from the ngi and has since received aphase 2 award from nlm to further this work. this project is titledpatientcentric tools for regional collaborative cancer care using thengi. brent stewart outlined the project, in which a highperformancemetropolitan area network is being designed to transmit clinical data,including radiology images (with a capacity to deliver eight simultaneous10mb image sets simultaneously, using a 622mb channel), to a plannedcancer care facility on the south shore of lake union. the center is scheduled to be completed within a year. the bandwidth requirement is basedon fully digital radiology, with interpretation of images by radiologists atuw and a digital archive at uw rather than at the clinic site.the development of this center is based on three hypotheses: thathealth care is becoming highly distributed and differentiated; that healthcare is operating in a resourcelimited environment; and that the ngi willenable more collaborative practice, regardless of where patients arelocated at a given time. the ngi will enable the formation of the cancercare alliance; facilitate teaching and research; enable a fully integratednetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.306appendix ateam approach to diagnosis, treatment, and management of cases; andaccelerate the discovery and dissemination of knowledge.the underlying technology will consist of the local gigapop as wellas a virtual, enterprisewide multimedia electronic medical record basedon mindscape. there will be a backup line in place, perhaps a leasedds3 line. the system will transmit realtime video (e.g., ultrasound,fluoroscope, and synchronous telemedicine consultations), storeandforward video, and interactive radiation oncology treatment planning(e.g., graphics, images, and video). additional multimedia knowledgeresources, such as the digital anatomist and streaming video for patienteducation, also will be available.technical requirements are based largely on the needs of remoteradiological image archiving and display. to allow the simultaneousdownloading of eight different 10mb images within one second, the system needs bandwidth of 640 mbps. the uw and harborview radiologydepartments are all digital now, but they use computed radiography (inwhich an imaging plate is scanned by a laser) rather than flatpanel digital.the centers will become fully digitized once the technology comes downin price. stewart envisions that a radiologist covering at a remote sitemight use the system to perform work that he or she would have done atthe home site, downloading images remotely.there are no formal plans for evaluating the technical infrastructure.because the internet today provides no qos, uw will put in place asmuch bandwidth as possible and use whatever service level results. dr.stewart viewed medicineõs demand for bandwidth as similar to that ofother industries; he compared multisite telemedical collaboration to automobile companies linking together their remote research and development sites.biomedical library servicesthe uw health sciences library is moving all of its services to webbased delivery (see <healthlinks.washington.edu>). geographic issuesrelated to supporting the wwami program (i.e., mountains, small towns,long distances between towns) make this transformation necessary. inaddition to the wwami medical education program, the pharmacy, nursing, public health, and social work programs have distance educationprograms. faculty want to deliver digital video to their wwamibasedstudents and provide them with access to course materials and the clinical digital library resources. this program will require high bandwidthand many servers. at present, the schools use scanned pdf format todeliver interlibrary loan and course materials (e.g., course notes andnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a307reserve materials) to distant students. the documents are an estimated300 kb in size each.the health sciences libraries offers over 1,400 fulltext online electronic journals to uw faculty, staff, and students. a major issue is compliance with licensing agreements. uw librarians negotiate aggressivelyfor licenses allowing digital materials to be available to faculty, staff, andstudents at any location. they control access with user ids and passwordsand uw ids and are increasingly making materials available through aproxy server. access is also a problem, because not all materials arelocally loaded, and network latency for materials stored at remote sites(nlm, journal publishers, etc.) is an issue. the plan is to support nomadiccomputing because students, faculty, and residents move around constantly. network latency is a serious problem for accessing remotelystored fulltext journals and other resources.uw was part of the nlm test on access time for pubmed over theinternet that was published recently in the journal of the american medicalinformatics association. nlm has tried to track the latency problem and3 years ago performed a minor test for the utah link for the online journals (because it intended to provide all resources remotely). users seereal degradation of performance from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. pacific standardtime, but that latency is due in part to issues within the uw network (inother words, the latency formerly observed in nlmõs medline for thattime period now is observed on the internet.) however, the latency depends on the connection. uw is upgrading the network to 10 mbpsethernet (10baset) to improve throughput; moving to 100 mbps ethernet(100baset) on every public library machine is a much more costly venture (about $400 per station). the uw health sciences library has manypublic stations, including about 150 in the microcomputer lab it managesfor the health sciences center and over 100 public workstations in thethree health sciences library sites. remote users may have trouble withcommercial connections to library online resources (e.g., through msn oraol), which can impose latency problems during certain time periods.digital anatomistthe digital anatomist is an nlmsponsored project to develop anelectronic repository of anatomical images. anatomy is, of course, fundamental to health sciences education, and it provides a framework fororganizing other biomedical information. jim brinkley presented thework of the uw structural informatics group. the group works in threeareas: representations of structural anatomical information, from the levelof individual cells to gross anatomy; methods for accessing and usingstructural information; and practical applications of their tools fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.308appendix aresearch, education, and clinical work. it tries to exploit opportunities foronline systems dealing with anatomical information. the key data structure for its work is an ontology of anatomy, developed by corneliusrosse, that serves as a common data structure for most of the applications. they call this the foundational model of anatomy.the system demonstrated for the committee provides authoring toolsusing both symbolic information (e.g., names, semantics, structures) andspatial images (typically threedimensional images) of anatomical structures. it consists of a symbolic information database and a separate threedimensional image database accessed through a single server. a numberof intelligent agents have been developed to assist in retrieving andassembling data sets and images. the agents have knowledge of both theinformation available on the system and the userõs level of sophistication.in response to the command òshow me the structures of the left lung,ó forexample, the system will check the symbolic database to find out whatstructures are in the left lung, then go to the image database to determinewhat images are available, and then use a scenegenerator to assemble thepieces properly. the user then can highlight particular elements of interest, rotate or zoom in on the image, and remove objects that block theview of other objects of interest. all processing is done on the server.on the authoring side, the system contains a knowledgebuilder foradding information to the symbolic database. it is a relational databasecontaining 25,000 terms describing all structures with dimensions of 1mmor greater in a particular set of organisms, including humans. for thespatial database, the system can create volumetric, threedimensionalmodels of anatomical structures from twodimensional images. it alsocan create and perform animations. a brain image demonstrated for thecommittee superimposed vascular structures onto the brain and containedsome 100,000 polygons. images can be annotated for clinical and educational purposes.on the user side, the system contains an annotated image server.users can call up images and click on individual structures within theimage. the system outlines the selected structure and generates its name.this system is used in anatomy education, but the images are so large andthe networks so slow that students tend to use a cdrom rather thanaccess the database through either campus or remote networks. thesystemõs quiz mode can test studentsõ knowledge of anatomy. a tutorialsystem can embed images from the atlas into other documents. the digital anatomist and interactive atlas get an estimated 10,000 hits per day.in a separate effort called the brain project, a digital neuroscientistsystem is being built that will overlay neurological images on images ofthe brain. the system will allow cutaways of volumerendered images.these data are collected operatively by neurosurgeons who do realtimenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a309stimulation and mapping of critical regions for various neurological functions, such as speech. ngi technology could streamline this process byenabling realtime superposition of neurological data on an open brain;the system then could sense the surgeonõs probes and automatically maintain information about the location of the probe and the result. thiswould require capabilities similar to telesurgery, but the system wouldalso be linked to databases for documentation and postmortem analysis.the ngi offers several other opportunities for applying this technology. one is anatomical education, in the form of virtual dissections andintelligent scene generation. another opportunity is brain mapping foreither research (e.g., language mapping to identify correlations betweenbrain structures and language skills/development) or clinical purposes,such as surgical planning. the technology also could provide structurebased visual access to biomedical information. indeed, some have suggested that the ideal user interface to biomedical information resources isa model of human structure, which can serve as the organizing principlefor this information.regence blueshieldthe visit to the corporate offices of regence blueshield, the largesthealth care insurer in the pacific northwest with annual revenues ofapproximately $2 billion, took place on february 11, 1999. the committeeheard presentations on internetrelated activities within regence as wellas related activities in the seattle area. the related activities include programs operated by the foundation for health care quality (fhcq); thewashington state department of public health; and the communityhealth information technology alliance (chita), working with a groupcalled agora.regence webbased servicessteve moe, manager of electronic business practices for the regencegroup, presented a webbased interface application called network dataexpress (ndex) for determining beneficiary eligibility and making referrals. the webbased system offers claim status inquiries, provider directories, reference materials (such as the formulary), email, and managedcare data and reports. it processes about 20,000 transactions per month(peak times are early in the day and during lunch), doing the work of twoor three fulltime employees who otherwise would give the same information out by phone (regence processes millions of claims a month).regence has deployed 1,500 workstations (including 800 intranet and 700dialup systems linked to a private web server), of which about 30 pernetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.310appendix acent are in use on a regular basis. all users are assigned an id andpassword and sign a confidentiality agreement. patient and customerinformation is indexed by social security number.kirk bailey, manager of security policy, stated unequivocally that theinternet is considered unsafe and will not be used for regenceõs electroniccommerce (ecommerce) transactions until it has sufficient security measures and functionality to meet the companyõs business requirements.the internet raises concerns about security, privacy, and reliability. otherfactors that have slowed the adoption and use of ndex are a lack ofcontent sponsors, especially among payers; the lack of web browsers inmany provider offices (they will get browsers during their next hardwareupgrades, but regence does not fund such upgrades); and user behavior(e.g., administrative workers are accustomed to using the phone insteadof the computer to get information).foundation for health care qualityrick rubin, president of the fhcq, gave an overview of the foundation, a notforprofit entity created in 1988 to meet the shared health information needs of the seattle region. the foundation serves as a neutralmeeting ground for providers, payers, plan purchasers, consumers, andothers involved in health care. it participates in or sponsors programs inthree areas. one area is ecommerce pilot projects, including a multistateeffort funded by the robert wood johnson foundation to define eligibility and referrals, and chita, described in further detail below. thesecond area is performance measurements for health plans and providers, and the third is consumer affairs.the fhcq, which views itself as an economic development agencyfor the region, has learned a number of lessons about operating in thehighly competitive health care marketplace. these lessons emphasize theimportance of (1) enabling instead of mandating standards, because mandates may change willingness but do not affect capabilities; (2) making abusiness case that differentiates needs (i.e., things that stakeholders arewilling to pay for) from wants (i.e., things they are not willing to pay for);(3) the internet, which is widely viewed in the region as a plausible meansof achieving longheld visions of seamless integration of informationacross organizations and which allows organizations to assume that networking capabilities will be in place so they can concentrate on higherorder functionality; (4) information security and privacy, which can beeither a barrier or an enabler, depending upon the circumstance; (5) thewidespread sharing of expertise and information; (6) education as a meansof facilitating the migration of information technology into health care,especially through efforts to reengineer the way organizations operate (anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a311process that can be more important than the technology itself); (7) working to refine national standards and develop implementation manuals;and (8) balancing competition and cooperation (firms can cooperate onsome subsets of issues but not on others that are seen as having greaterproprietary value).current or recent projects include an effort to standardize eligibilityinformation, for which there is agreement on data items but not on presentation. other regional projects are aimed at exchanging data on pediatric immunizations, referrals, claims, and lab transactions.community health information technology alliance projectwith agorapeter b. summerville, director of chita, and kirk bailey, manager ofsecurity policy for the regence group and founder of agora, presentedan overview of the threestate model security prototype. chita waschartered in 1997 and has 60 member organizations, including providers,payers, and state agencies. it is part of the fhcq but has a separate boardof directors. agora, a local group interested in computer security, hasabout 450 members representing 120 pacific northwest region corporations. it was formed by chief information officers and security officerswho became increasingly concerned about network vulnerabilities as theircompanies began to move online.chitaõs early work focused on eligibility and referral transactionsñnegotiating agreements on data fields and standards to facilitate the electronic interchange of information. chita and the fhcq worked withorganizations in massachusetts and minnesota on a threestate projectfocusing on electronic security. the goals were to determine how electronic security could be implemented affordably and to develop a businesscase for a communitywide, secure infrastructure for electronic business.the group worked with science applications international corporation(saic) to develop a security and risk management plan for businesstobusiness health information networks.the plan identifies seven levels of increasing health care security.together with agora, chita is working to implement health securitylevel 6 (hsl 6) within participating organizations. hsl 6 includes specifications for three networkbased information services: authenticated,secure messaging; authenticated, secure file escrow and transfer; andauthenticated, rolebased access. the security model has been developedand published, and chita is in the process of identifying a bridge operator organization that will function as a trusted intermediary to oversee aprototype implementation, followed by a wider pilot project in the region.issues to be addressed include the identification of a certificate authority,networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.312appendix awhich might be a nonprofit organization, the government, or a privatecorporation such as verisign.chita has no plans to attempt to change the internet or its directionsbut rather will attempt to accommodate whatever weaknesses it exhibitswith respect to information security. while asserting that businesses needto move too quickly to wait for the ngi, mr. bailey wondered if it wouldbe possible to allocate part of the internet 2 (perhaps one or two frequencies) for health care. he also would consider the formation of a separatehealth information network as a means of avoiding some of the securityconcerns associated with the internet.according to him, security officers in health care have responsibilitiesthat differ from those of their counterparts in other industries. the applicable state and federal laws are different, the privacy and security concerns are greater, and health care organizations must meet requirementsfor successful electronic data interchange. at the same time, the healthcare industry is driven by economics, not privacy.washington state laboratory reporting projectjac davies, representing the washington state department of health,described the electronic laboratory reporting system (elbrs) project,which involves the electronic submission and tabulation of reportableevents within the state, of which there are fewer than 100,000 every year.(physicians and testing laboratories are required to report certain conditions to their county health department.)such reports generally are sent by regular mail, fax, or voice mail.public health officials then are required to follow up with the doctor andpatient to further investigate possible causes, paths of contagion, and soon. often, reports are sent to the wrong county and/or are not subsequently forwarded to the state. furthermore, different states and counties tend to have their own lists of reportable conditions, which are tiedclosely to local concerns (the conditions vary, for example, between urbanand agricultural counties), and they have different rules for where to sendthe information. as laboratories (and health organizations generally)consolidate into national entities, tracking different reporting requirements has become timeconsuming. smithkline beecham, for example,operates a number of clinical laboratories and has three or four peoplededicated to tracking different reporting requirements.under washingtonõs planned system, lab reports would be sentdirectly to the state rather than to local health departments. the statethen would process the reports and forward information down to localcommunities and up to the centers for disease control and prevention(cdc), as necessary. such centralization would allow the state to betternetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a313track incidents across county lines. planners hope that the system willencourage greater communication between the state and local communities or the cdc and that it will improve compliance with reportingrequirements. several issues have informed the planning for this proposed system. one is the use of the internet, which is not only a logicalchoice but also the only viable option. another issue is the sensitivenature of the data; there is, for example, a state requirement for reportingaids cases. a third issue is privacy, which is a major concern of thegovernor and residents of washington.a pilot program is under way with group health of puget sound.labs encrypt their test reports and send them to the state healthdepartmentõs file transfer protocol server, which sits outside a firewall.state personnel move the file behind the firewall, check for errors, run itthrough an hl7 formatter, put the data on an sql database server, andsend them to the county. they use a public key cryptography system(pretty good privacy) described as minimal. there is no formal programin place for changing keys. according to a preliminary evaluation, thepilot program improved the completion and timeliness of reports. thetime required to send information to the local health office improvedmodestly (to less than 1 day) and the time required to send information tothe state improved by an average of 40 days (to about 1 day).note1.bernie h.k. huang relocated to the childrenõs hospital of los angeles and the university of southern california as professor and director of informatics effective january 1,2000.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.314appendix bnational library of medicine awards todemonstrate health applications of thenext generation internetthe national library of medicine (nlm) announced a new, threephase program in 1998 to develop innovative medical projects that demonstrate the use of the capabilities of the next generation internet (ngi),such as improved quality of service, security, network management, andsupport for nomadic computing. phase i awards were announced onoctober 14, 1998, and included 24 contracts totaling $2.3 million that wereintended to improve understanding of ways the ngi can affect healthcare, health education, and health research systems in such areas as cost,quality, usability, efficacy, and security. phase ii awards were announcedin late 1999 and consisted of 15 projects aimed at implementing capabilities in local testbed settings. some of the phase ii awards build on projectsbegun under phase i of the program, while others build on work originally conducted under other research programs. summaries of each ofthe phase i and phase ii projects announced to date are provided below.additional information regarding these ngi awards and nlmõstelemedicine evaluation program is available on the nlm home page at<http://www.nlm.nih.gov>.phase i awards1. pathology image database systemyale university is planning a pathology image database system, pathmaster, accessible via the world wide web. when a pathologist is connetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b315fronted with a slide containing a cell whose nature is uncertain, a digitalimage of the cell can be submitted to pathmaster, along with certainclinical information about the specimen. pathmaster will automaticallycompute descriptors and pass back images to the user, along with theircell types and diagnoses.contact: perry l. miller, m.d., ph.d.yale school of medicinecenter for medical informatics333 cedar streetp.o. box 208009new haven, ct 06520800920378567532. networked 3d virtual human anatomythe goal is to build a virtual human cadaver based on the visible humandata set. an online virtual cadaver would be available to a wide range ofstudents who could explore the virtual cadaver with a variety of tools.highend applications will have a haptic interface.contact: victor m. spitzer, ph.d.university of colorado health sciences center4200 east ninth avenuedenver, co 8026230327405013. rural health science educationthis project will develop a plan to evaluate the use of computer andinteractive compressed video technologies to support rural health scienceeducation. it will enable delivery of interactive educational programming,such as grand rounds and continuing medical education, clinical information systems, library services, and consultation. beneficiaries will be students, residents, and health care professionals.contact: dr. leo bairnsfather, ph.d.louisiana state university medical center1501 kings highwayshreveport, la 71130393231867565363186757757 faxnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.316appendix b4. biomedical teleimmersionby combining teleconferencing, telepresence, and virtual reality, teleimmersion enables teachers and students to interact with threedimensionalmodels. teleimmersion combines several virtual reality systems withadvanced network capabilities for learning especially in surgical education. ngi guarantees data privacy and security and will allow teleimmersive environments derived from models of patient data.contact: jonathan c. silverstein, m.d.university of illinois at chicagoschool of biomedical and health information services1919 w. taylorchicago, il 60612724931299651123129968342 fax5. national emergency medicine information extranetthe national emergency information infrastructure consortium (eiic)will create a plan for implementation of a secure national emergencymedicine information extranet to improve emergency care across thenation. the primary application to be developed will enable interlinkedstandardsbased emergency encounter registries, then feed back to providers justintime multimedia educational and treatment protocol services. the project will create an open architecture to enable other layeredapplications in the future.contact: edward barthell, m.d.infinity healthcare, inc.1251 glen oaks lanemequon, wi 5309241429067004142906781 fax6. personal internetworked notary and guardianthe personal internetworked notary and guardian (ping) project isdesigned to address the control of a personal record that can be integratedwith more traditional sources of clinical information for patient use in thehome, at work, and at school. in particular, ping is focused on (1) reconstitution of the patient longitudinal records from both providerbasedinformation systems and portable, personal record systems, on thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b317internet; (2) providing simple and secure authentication mechanisms; and(3) evaluation of the impact of ping upon the process of health care.contact: isaac s. kohane, m.d., ph.d.director, childrenõs hospital informatics program300 longwood ave.enders 150boston, ma 0211561735578216177300456 fax7. implementation to serve visible human datasetsthis project plans to implement an ngi production system to interactivelyserve visible human data sets and anatomical data evaluation software.the image and knowledge data objects will be accessed by ngienabledworld wide web users and evaluators. the system will provide to theuser multiresolution, anatomically labeled images within these visiblehuman data sets as requested.contact: brian d. athey, ph.d.the university of michigan medical school4771 medical science building iidepartment of anatomy and cell biology1335 catherine st.ann arbor, mi 48109061673476361507347631166 fax8. gcpr and the ngithe louisiana state university (lsu) medical center proposes to implement a system of longitudinal electronic health records over the ngi thatwill integrate its ten public hospitals. this project is based on the gcpr,or government computer based patient record, a collaborative effortbetween the department of defense, department of veterans affairs, indian health service, and the lsu medical center. the objective of thisproject is to enable secure access and sharing of clinical information.contact: richard ferrans, m.d.louisiana state universitymedical center department of public health1600 canal street, suite 800networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.318appendix bnew orleans, la 7011250458835075045883938 fax9. secure radiologic collaboration on the next generation internetthe goal is to plan the implementation and deployment of a suite ofcollaborative medical applications to provide a secure, realtime, interactive environment for viewing, analyzing, and comparing radiologicalimages in a clinical environment. this will provide clinicians and technologists the ability to share, in real time, diagnostic imagery and medicaldata.contact: douglas l. long, sr., principal scientistodyssey research associates, inc.cornell business & technology park33 thornwood dr., suite 500ithaca, ny 14850125060725719756072571972 fax10. open architecture multispecialty data and telemedicineintegration on the next generation internetthe purpose of this project is to plan the implementation of a multispecialty telemedicine testbed using ngi. the plan will identify existingand new multispecialty applications in patient care, continuing medicaleducation, and patient education to be integrated into this platform. theplanning activity is to be conducted by a team of scientists and cliniciansfrom all pertinent parts of the proposing organization.contact: joseph c. kvedar, m.d.corporate director partners telemedicine1 longfellow place, suite 216p.o. box 8941boston, ma 0211461772644476177267530 fax11. patientcentric healthcare management over ngithis project will demonstrate a patientcentric approach for health caremanagement over the ngi. the demonstration will build upon the elecnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b319tronic house call system developed by georgia tech and the medicalcollege of georgia to allow patients to videoconference with their healthcare providers and to monitor medical measurements over a secure network. a simple graphical user interface enables patients to control thesystem themselves. the system combines videoconferencing, vital signsmeasurements, patient education resources, and medical records, andenables patients to participate in their own health care.contact: mr. john w. peifersenior research scientistbiomedical interactive technology centergeorgia institute of technology250 14th st., nwatlanta, ga 30332020040489470284048947025 fax12. adopting the ngi as a tool for healthcare and information accessthis project will assemble a team of medical informatics users and networking advisors to analyze biomedical and healthcare information processes and select those that best demonstrate the application of ngitechnologies and tool sets, while simultaneously providing demonstrablebenefit to healthcare practitioners and end users. many information processes in health care clinical services, biomedical education, and researchwill be assessed. once applications have been identified, the assessmentteam will select viable candidates, then formulate an implementationstrategy for one application area.contact: brent k. stewart, ph.d.university of washington grant and contract services3935 university way neseattle, wa 9819520661613142065433495 fax13. the empathy network: improved healthcare delivery forsurvivors of mild traumatic brain injurythe objective of the empathy network is to employ virtual reality (vr)technology, high performance computing centers, and ngi capabilities todramatically improve the health care delivered to mild traumatic braininjury (mtbi) patients. vr technology will allow clinicians to construct anetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320appendix bvirtual world that simulates the cognitive and perceptual deficits experienced by an mtbi patient. vr and ngi technologies will then enable apatientõs other health care providers, family, friends and coworkers toexperience the mtbi patientõs problems in coping with everyday life.this will engender empathic insight, support, and understanding that arecrucial elements of an mtbi patientõs recovery and adaptation.contact: david l. zeltzersarnoff corporation201 washington roadprinceton, nj 0854060973429756097342662 fax14. remote, realtime simulation for teaching human anatomyand surgerythis project plans to demonstrate remote, realtime teaching of humananatomy and surgery, using the ngi. a simulator architecture will bedeveloped to deliver realtime simulation and visualization technologiesto a diverse audience. the client component is a desktop pc or workstation. the simulation server receives sensor and control input from theclient and transmits response streams. the ngi networkbased architecture will allow for a heterogeneous mix of client configurations rangingfrom simple mouse and color displays to multiple highresolution stereographic displays and haptic devices.contact: parvati dev, ph.d.stanford universityschool of medicine summit1215 welch road, modular astanford, ca 94305540165072380876504984082 fax15. interactive medical data on demand: a highperformanceimagebased warehouse across heterogeneous environmentsthe goal of this project is to determine the requirements of a system forintuitive, realtime access to patientspecific data records based onmultimodal images and multimedia. they will evaluate and select systemarchitectures, software, and network configurations to provide access overdifferent network bandwidths and platforms. this design will includenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b321scalability of the system and extensibility to other health care applications.contact: donald l. stredneyohio state universityresearch foundationhealth sciences offices, b030 graves hall333 west tenth avenuecolumbus, oh 4321061429292486142927168 fax16. ngiaware, scalable, secure, and adaptive technology for ruraltelemedicinethe goal of this project is to develop a plan to demonstrate telemedicineapplications that will utilize ngi infrastructure. telemedicine scenariosinclude (1) nomadic clinics; (2) a public health station; and (3) a consultinghealth station in rural clinics and hospitals. these systems will be configured with a set of videoconferencing, diagnostic, and patient monitoringequipment.contact: y.v. ramana reddy, ph.d.west virginia universityresearch corporation886 chestnut ridge roadmorgantown, wv 2650630429372263042937541 fax17. medical nomadic computing applications for patient transportthe goal of this project is to transmit multimedia diagnostic informationin real time from ambulances to receiving physicians using ngi technologies, thus enabling diagnostic and treatment opportunities during transport.contact: david m. gaglianotrw, inc.one federal systems park drivefairfax, va 220337033457497networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.322appendix b18. distributed revolutionary medical education environmentthe objective of this project is to develop a plan to implement and evaluatea distributed, medical education environment on a network testbed thatsimulates the characteristics of the ngi. these applications will be delivered across the spectrum of medical instruction, from undergraduate topostgraduate to continuing education.contact: lael c. gatewood, ph.d.university of minnesotaoffice of research and technology1100 washington avenue so., suite 201minneapolis, mn 5541561262549096126257166 fax19. radiation oncology treatment planning/care delivery applicationthe goal of this project is to develop, implement, and evaluate ngi capabilities for radiation oncology treatment planning and care delivery. theapplication will provide diagnostic support, treatment planning, and remoteverification of proper operation of treatment equipment from the comprehensive cancer center to a remote johns hopkins university treatment facility. the proposed project will have a strong evaluation component focused on quality of service, security, privacy, and data integrity.contact: joseph s. lombardojohns hopkins universityapplied physics laboratory11100 johns hopkins roadlaurel, md 20723609924022862872402286834 fax20. applications layer security solution for stationary/nomadicenvironmentsthis project will evaluate extant security techniques within the context ofan open security architecture. the solution is based on security sharedamong collaborating parties, nomadic computing, and the privacy ofmedical information. the architecture includes user authentication, remoteaccess to medical databases, nomadic computing, and confidentiality ofdata.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b323contact: brenda garmanmotorola space and technology group1190 winterson roadairport square #14, suite 350linthicum, md 2109041085947614108590787 fax21. human embryology digital librarythe goal of this study is to develop a research and education network formedical image acquisition and analysis. a highperformance optical network testbed will link government labs and universities with traditionalmedical research facilities. the focus of the project is on the analysis anddelivery of digital histopathology image data. the proposal includes thedefinition of a set of demonstration projects that use a collaborative consultation system for research, surgical planning, and basic research.contact: george s. michaels, ph.d.george mason universityoffice of sponsored programs4400 university drivefairfax, va 2203070399319987039931993 fax22. integration of security mechanisms for internet applicationsthe goal of this project is to develop a plan to integrate the pcasso(patient centered access secure systems online) with biomedical applications. it will be demonstrated through a testbed involving medical treatment facilities in delaware, pennsylvania, maryland, and new jersey andthe frederick (md.) biomedical supercomputer center in an informationtechnology infrastructure. the ngi infrastructure for this region is beingdeveloped under the hubs (hospitals, universities, business schools, andcommunities) initiative.contact: raymond e. cline, jr.science applications international corp. (saic)1710 goodridge drive, m/s 231mclean, va 2210270374986487038211134 faxnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.324appendix b23. telemammography using the ngithe goal of this project is to plan and implement a testbed to demonstratethe feasibility of a national breast imaging archive and network infrastructure to support telemammography using ngi technologies. the proposed infrastructure would support traditional breast screening; providethe opportunity to maintain and apply standard image processing andcomputeraided diagnosis software; permit access to breast imagingexperts for primary and secondary interpretations; and provide an opportunity to study and understand epidemiologic issues in breast cancer.contact: mitchell schnalluniversity of pennsylvaniaresearch services133 s. 36th street, suite 300philadelphia, pa 19104324621566272382156623013 fax24. teletrauma and the ngithe goal of this project is to plan the implementation of an integratedsystem of trauma care for southern louisiana using an ngi telemedicinenetwork. this network will provide instant access to the trauma team atthe medical center of louisiana at new orleans, which will provideonline assistance. distance education training for emergency personnel,network management, and quality of service issues are all elements of theproject.contact: richard ferrans, m.d.louisiana state universitymedical centerdepartment of public health1600 canal street, suite 800new orleans, la 7011250458835075045883938 faxphase ii awards1. personal internetworked notary and guardianthe personal internetworked notary and guardian (ping) proposal aimsto provide a patientcontrolled personal medical records system. thenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b325ping record is available to the patient from any internetconnecteddevice. it is encrypted and accessible only to authorized parties for healthcare and/or research or public health purposes. it will include integrationof data from two birth hospitals, a tertiary care pediatric hospital, a pediatric practice network, public health authorities, and the patients andtheir families. the goals of the ping project include (1) providing accessfor highly mobile postpartum mothers at work, school, and home to theirinfantsõ records; (2) enabling patients and families to manage a fundamentally collaborative process of clinical documentation over the internet;and (3) ensuring that all ping transactions provide the highest availableconfidentiality of the patientõs data, under their control.contact: isaac s. kohane, m.d., ph.d.director, childrenõs hospital informatics program300 longwood ave., enders 150boston, ma 0211561735578216177300456 fax2. biomedical teleimmersionby combining teleconferencing, telepresence, and virtual reality, teleimmersion enables teachers and students to interact with threedimensional models, point, gesture, converse, and see each other. teleimmersion combines cave and immersadesk virtual reality systems withadvanced network capabilities to make learning environments so compelling that people will use them even when they are in the same room.they plan to demonstrate and assess teleimmersive environments forsurgical education.contact: jonathan c. silverstein, m.d.university of illinois at chicagoschool of biomedical and health information services1919 w. taylorchicago, il 60612724931299651123129968342 fax3. patientcentric tools for regional collaborative cancer careusing ngithis project plans to investigate the application of collaborative tools in adistributed and differentiated medical enterprise, the seattle area cancernetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.326appendix bcare alliance (cca). the applications should (1) enhance the cca partnersõ existing clinical care programs into new highly collaborative patientcentered interdisciplinary efforts; (2) allow for a fully integrated teamapproach to cancer, i.e., stateoftheart diagnosis, treatment, and management of cancer patients through collaboration of distributed cancercare clinicians and researchers; and (3) accelerate the dissemination andapplication of new knowledge related to the diagnosis and the treatmentof cancer, both inside the enterprise and throughout the region. theypropose to examine the application of collaborative technologies to thethree areas of physician interaction with patient information in the diagnosis, management, and treatment of cancer: consultations between referring physicians and cca physician, including the patient; tumor boardconferencing; and radiation oncology treatment planning.contact: brent k. stewart, ph.d.university of washingtongrant and contract services3935 university way neseattle, wa 9819520661613142065433495 fax4. connectivity, security, and performance of an ngi testbed formedical imaging applicationsthe objective of this project is to implement an ngi testbed in northerncaliforniaõs san francisco bay area for medical imaging applications.the two regional sites are the university of california at san francisco(ucsf) and stanford university. this ngi testbed will be built on twoexisting highperformance networks. the goal is to provide insight intongi capabilities with respect to performance in a regional environment,potential for extension to the national level, and improvements needed.the clinical applications to be evaluated include telemammography consultation service in a regional compared with a local environment and howrealtime interactive teaching in breast imaging would improve the confidence level of generalpractice radiologists. the two characteristics ofngi that will be utilized include file size capability and nearrealtimetransmission.contact: h.k. huang, d.sc., frcr (hon.)childrenõs hospital of los angeles/university of southern californiadepartment of radiology, mailstop #814650 sunset boulevardnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b327los angeles, ca 900278188899411 (telphone and fax)5. indianapolis testbed network for ngi applications totelemedicineindiana university proposes to convert the indianapolis network forpatient care (inpc) into a testbed of ngi technologies including ip security (ipsec), quality of service (qos) in televideo applications at a nursinghome, and ip roaming capabilities with portable wireless workstations inclinical settings. the project plans to conduct randomized trials to test theeffects of nursing home televideo and nomadic computing in the clinicalenvironment. they plan to perform a trial to determine the effects ofpatientphysician videoconferencing and batch video applications (linkedto webbased electronic medical records) on health services utilizationand physician/patient satisfaction at a 250bed remote nursing home. theproject will also perform a crossover trial of handheld personal computers,evaluating the effects on physician behavior by timemotion studies, physician satisfaction, and patient encounter data. these handheld computerswill be equipped with capabilities for computerized orderentry, access topatient data, tasklist management, and email.contact: clement macdonald, m.d.regenstrief institute for health care101 west 10th street, rg 6th floorindianapolis, in 4620231763070703176306962 fax6. internet protocol video telemedicine and patient cardiologyeducationthe purpose of this project is to address the technical issues impacting thedelivery of telemedicine and sophisticated medical education using ipvideo over the next generation internet (ngi). ip video over ngi has thepotential to provide a common telecommunication infrastructure for realtime high bandwidth medical applications that cannot be supported bythe commodity internet. ngi solutions for realtime telemedicine withhighbandwidth video and audio requirements could eventually eliminate the need for expensive dedicated telemedicine networks and givebroader access to these services. as part of the project, extensive evaluation, including impact on patient care, will be done. technical and clinicalprotocols will be developed for all applications.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.328appendix bcontact: susan s. gustke, m.d.east carolina university school of medicinecenter for health science communicationbrody medical science building, 1s10600 moye blvd.greenville, nc 2785425281652192528168596 fax7. a multicenter clinical trial using ngi technologyngi technology will be applied to provide the infrastructure of a multicenter clinical trial of new therapies for adrenoleukodystrophy (ald), afatal neurologic genetic disorder. this project involves the formation of aworldwide imaging network of clinical institutions to evaluate ald therapies. this network is required to provide a sufficient number of patientsfor evaluating ald therapies. this can serve as a model for many otherdisorders. three centers will collaborate on this project. the imagingscience and information systems (isis) center at georgetown universitymedical center, the kennedy krieger institute, and the department ofradiology at johns hopkins university. ngi technology will be used tospeed the transmission and evaluation of high quality mri images.another important feature of this proposal is to gain insight into procedures that will ensure medical data privacy and security.contact: hugo w. moser, m.d.kennedy krieger research institute, inc.707 north broadwaybaltimore, md 2120541050294054105029839 fax8. pathmaster: a webaccessible cell image database indexed bymathematical descriptors and supported by parallel computationthe project will develop the pathmaster computer system as a testbed.pathmaster is designed to help the pathologist with the process of makinga diagnosis in a cytologic specimen. phase ii focus will be on the analysisof lymphoma touch preparations and thyroid aspirates. to usepathmaster, the pathologist creates digitized images of a selected set ofcells from a specimen and submits these to pathmaster over the web.each image is automatically subjected to a computational analysis tonetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b329determine more than 2,000 mathematically derived descriptors. eachimage will then be compared to a database using networkbased parallelcomputation. the analysis will produce ranked sets of images from specimens whose diagnosis is known. images will be returned to the user tohelp in making a diagnosis. a variety of ngi testbed evaluations will beperformed.contact: perry l. miller, m.d., ph.d.yale university school of medicinecenter for medical informatics333 cedar street, p.o. box 208009new haven, ct 06520800920378567532037856664 fax9. remote, realtime simulation for teaching human anatomy andsurgerystanford university proposes to develop two teaching applications and alocal ngi testbed network for evaluating their effectiveness. the firstapplication will support instruction in human anatomy and the secondthe performance of surgical manipulations. both applications will support synchronous collaboration through a shared virtual workspace anduse haptic feedback to augment the visual sense. this technology willallow the definition of new curricular elements including the repeateddissection of anatomical structures, the visual segmentation of raw datasets, the creation of threedimensional organ models, and the practice offundamental surgical skills. the investigators anticipate that a wide community of teachers and users will, through a distributed clientserversystem, share online, imagerich data and professional experiences.contact: parvati dev, ph.d.stanford university1215 welch road, mod bstanford, ca 94035540165072380876504984082 fax10. human embryology digital library and collaboratory supporttoolsgeorge mason university proposes to develop and demonstrate technologies to enable collaboration between multiple, distributed researchnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.330appendix bers and to make progress toward advanced clinical and educational goals.the offeror plans to integrate existing data capture and analysis procedures at the national museum of health and medicine (nmhm) into ahigh performance testbed network that will include a petabyte archiveand analysis capability. the project will use an existing, governmentfunded gigabit network to connect the nmhm to key sites across thenation. the testbed requires a minimum data transport rate of 622 mbpsin the key regional networks and quality of service.contact: j. mark pullen, ph.d.george mason universitycomputer science ms 4a54400 university drivefairfax, va 22030phone: 70399315387039931710 fax11. medical nomadic computing applications for patient transportthe objective of this project is the realtime transmission of multimediapatient data from an incident scene and during transport to a receivingcenter enabling diagnostic and treatment opportunities prior to arrival.the offeror will use the diagnosis and treatment of challenging clinicalmodelsñincluding acute ischemic stroke and trauma scene responseñtodefine a range of quality of service (qos) requirements for multiple critical care applications, evaluate the effectiveness of the system, and deriveprinciples of nomadic computing applicable in other time sensitive emergency care models in which treatment options are constrained by thedelay between onset/injury and definitive diagnosis. trw and the university of maryland, baltimore had previously developed a mobile telemedicine system for remote, realtime diagnosis using narrow bandwidthwireless technologies, but suffered from qos problems. phase iii willextend the trial in a larger regional setting.contact: david m. gaglianotrw, inc.one federal systems park drivefairfax, va 22033phone: 7033457497networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b33112. remote treatment planning systemthis proposal addresses the development, implementation, and evaluation of an application to support remote treatment planning for radiationtherapy. this application, remote treatment planning system (rtps),relies on network infrastructure technology for collaboration; on highbandwidth and qos to support interactive review sessions; and on dataprivacy and security to protect patient privacy, confidentiality, and dataintegrity. review sessions provide a collaborative environment fordosimetrists at the planning site, the oncologists at the care delivery site,and peer reviewers. it utilizes video teleconferencing and a shared viewof the images to support treatment planning. the evaluation will measureoutcomes at the care delivery site, process improvements at the treatmentplanning site, and estimate cost impact on the remote treatment planningprocess. phase iii is proposed to deploy the application and testbed features to peninsula regional medical center in salisbury, maryland. connectivity will be provided by the maryland state asynchronous transfermode (atm) backbone, network.maryland.contact: joseph s. lombardojohns hopkins university applied physics laboratory11100 johns hopkins drivelaurel, md 20723609924022862872402285026 fax13. next generation internet implementation to serve visiblehuman datasets phase ii: development of testbedsthe university of michigan (um) visible human (vh) project team willdevelop an ngi production system to serve visible human data sets. theseinclude a comprehensive set of interactive 2d and 3d vh browsers witharbitrary 2d cutting and 3d visualizations. an interactive web navigation engine will be deployed to create and visualize anatomic flythrough,under haptic control of the user, and to deliver flythrough developed byexpert anatomists and clinicians. anatomical labels will enhance thesevisualization sequences and enable realtime links with appropriate resources on the web using xml. the um ngi vh system will complement and extend currently deployed passive web information systemswith active computational services. this will allow for delivery of severalsimultaneous highquality digital streams, creating structured medicalknowledge using the vh datasets. an evaluation team will continuallynetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.332appendix brespecify and focus the testbed deployments and measure performanceand educational effectiveness.contact: brian d. athey, ph.d.university of michigan school of medicineann arbor, michigan 48109061673476361507347631166 fax14. networked 3d virtual human anatomy, phase iithe university of colorado health sciences center proposes to demonstrate and assess the use of webbased, 3dexplorable virtual humans toenhance traditional anatomic teaching. this will be accomplished withaudio, graphic, and haptic interfaces. the application will be assessed inanatomy curricula developed for undergraduate to postgraduate levels ofeducation. modules teaching the anatomy, function, and pathology of theknee will be used for this demonstration. the investigators will also demonstrate an extension of the virtual environment to include surgical simulation applied to arthroscopy.contact: victor m. spitzer, ph.d.university of colorado health sciences center13001 east 17th place, po box 6508, mail stop f435aurora, co 80045050830372405013037240911 fax15. mammography for the next generation internet, phase iithe university of pennsylvania proposes to develop a testbed to demonstrate the feasibility of a national breast imaging archive and networkinfrastructure to support digital mammography using ngi technologies.they plan to improve access and performance of breast cancer screeningwith an imaging archive that supports storage, retrieval, and distributionof breast images for clinical and research purposes and ensures privacyand confidentiality with multilevel security embedded throughout thesystem. the proposed infrastructure would (1) support traditional breastscreening through the maintenance and distribution of a digital record ofprior breast examinations and relevant medical history for primary interpretation and expert consultation; (2) provide the opportunity to maintain and apply computeraided diagnosis (cad) software at central, wellmaintained computing resources to studies from all women; (3) providenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b333unique tools for creating educational and training programs; and (4) create an unparalleled opportunity to study and understand many epidemiologic issues in breast cancer through searches of a national breastscreening database. ngi technologies will be used to transfer large datafiles, execute realtime queries, and access information securely. thetestbed will demonstrate that quality of service, medical data privacy andsecurity, nomadic computing, network management research and development, and infrastructure technology for collaboration are ngi technologies that are integral to widespread deployment and optimal utilization of digital mammography.contact: mitchell schnall, m.d.university of pennsylvaniaradiology department1 silverstein3400 spruce streetphiladelphia, pa 1910421566264702156623013 faxnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.334appendix cbiographies of committee membersedward h. shortliffe (chair) recently moved from stanford university tocolumbia university, where he serves as professor and chair of the department of medical informatics. he also holds appointments as professor inthe medicine and computer science departments. dr. shortliffe is amember of the institute of medicine and has served on the computerscience and telecommunications board, the federal networking advisory committee (national science foundation), and the biomedicallibrary review committee (national library of medicine) and was therecipient of a research career development award from the nlm. in 1993,he cochaired a cstb planning meeting on the role of information infrastructure in health care. he currently sits on the presidentõs informationtechnology advisory committee (pitac). dr. shortliffe combines expertise in medicine and computer science. he received an a.b. in appliedmathematics from harvard college in 1970, a ph.d. from stanford inmedical information sciences in 1975, and an m.d. at stanford in 1976.during the early 1970s, he was principal developer of the medical expertsystem known as mycin. after a pause for internal medicine housestafftraining at harvard and stanford between 1976 and 1979, he joined thestanford internal medicine faculty, where he directed a research programin medical expert systems development. dr. shortliffe is interested in abroad range of issues related to integrated decisionsupport systems andtheir effective implementation. he spearheaded the formation of astanford degree program in medical informatics and at columbia is continuing to divide his time between clinical medicine and medicalnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c335informatics. dr. shortliffe is a member of the american society for clinical investigation, the american association of physicians, and the american clinical and climatological association. he has also been elected tofellowship in the american college of medical informatics and the american association for artificial intelligence. he sits on the editorial boardsof several medical computing and artificial intelligence publications. inaddition, he received the grace murray hopper award of the associationfor computing machinery in 1976 and has been a henry j. kaiser familyfoundation faculty scholar in general internal medicine. dr. shortliffehas authored over 180 articles and books in the fields of medical computing and artificial intelligence. volumes include computerbased medicalconsultations: mycin (elsevier/northholland, 1976), readings in medical artificial intelligence: the first decade (with w.j. clancey; addisonwesley, 1984), rulebased expert systems: the mycin experiments of thestanford heuristic programming project (with b.g. buchanan; addisonwesley, 1984), and medical informatics: computer applications in health careand biomedicine (with l.e. perreault, g. wiederhold, and l.m. fagan;addisonwesley, 1990; 2nd ed., springerverlag, spring 2000).russ biagio altman is associate professor of medicine (and computerscience by courtesy) at stanford university. his primary research interests are in the application of computing technology to basic molecularbiological problems of relevance to medicine. he is currently developingtechniques for collaborative scientific computation over the internet,including novel user interfaces to biological data. other work focuses onthe analysis of functional microenvironments within macromolecules andthe application of nonlinear optimization algorithms for determining thestructure and function of biological macromolecules, particularly the bacterial ribosome. he is on the executive committee (as molecular sciencethrust leader) for the national partnership for advanced computationalinfrastructure (npaci), the nsfsponsored program at the san diegosupercomputer center. dr. altman holds an m.d. from stanford medicalschool, a ph.d. in medical information sciences from stanford, and ana.b. from harvard college. he has been the recipient of the u.s. presidential early career award for scientists and engineers, a national science foundation career award, and the western society of clinicalinvestigation annual young investigator award. he is a fellow of theamerican college of physicians and the american college of medicalinformatics.patricia flatley brennan is moehlman bascom professor at the school ofnursing and college of engineering at the university of wisconsin.dr.brennanõs research is in the area of nursing informatics and examinesnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.336appendix cways to use the internet, homebased computer systems, and specializedinformation resources to promote selfcare and disease management skillsamong patients and their family caregivers. she earned a ph.d. and anm.s. in industrial engineering from the university of wisconsin at madison, an m.s. in nursing from the university of pennsylvania, and a b.s. innursing from the university of delaware.bruce davie works at cisco systems in chelmsford, massachusetts, wherehe is a cisco fellow. he received his b.e. (electrical) from the universityof melbourne, australia, in 1984. he completed his ph.d. in computerscience at the university of edinburgh, scotland, in 1988 before startingwork in the computer networking research department at bell communications research (bellcore) in morristown, n.j. while at bellcore, heworked on the aurora gigabit testbed, the first widearea gigabit network. at bellcore he held the positions of director of internetworkingresearch and chief scientist and led research efforts on the next generation internet protocol, ipoveratm, and the support of realtime applications over the internet. dr. davie joined cisco systems in 1995. he leadsa group working on the development of multiprotocol label switchingand qualityofservice capabilities for ip networks. he is the author ofnumerous journal articles, conference papers and book chapters, and threebooks on computer networks. he is an active member of both the internetengineering task force and the endtoend research group.william m. detmer is president and chief executive officer of a newinternetbased digital publishing company and is adjunct assistant professor of health evaluation sciences at the university of virginia. he wasformerly vice president of clinical information products for ovid technologies, inc. dr. detmerõs interests lie in the characterization of theknowledge needs of clinicians and the development of content, information science methods, and technologies that collectively meet those needs.in 1994 he developed webmedline, the first world wide web interface tomedline, and he since has developed a variety of internetbased applications and methods that bring medical knowledge to the point of care.dr.detmer holds a b.a. degree from the university of north carolina atchapel hill, where he was a morehead scholar, an m.d. from the university of california san francisco, and a masterõs degree in medical information science from stanford university. he is board certified in internalmedicine.valerie florance is project director for betterhealth@here.now, the information technology futures initiative of the association of american medical colleges (aamc), and principal investigator for iaims: the nextnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c337generation, a stateoftheart review of information management in academic health sciences centers. before joining aamc, she was director ofacademic information at the university of rochester medical center. dr.florance has over 17 years of experience in health sciences libraries andinformation services at the university of utah, johns hopkins, and theuniversity of rochester. she holds a b.a. in anthropology and an m.a. inmedical anthropology from the university of utah, an m.l.s. frombrigham young university, and a ph.d. in library and information science from the university of maryland. she has served in a number ofprofessional leadership roles, most recently as editor of annual statistics ofmedical school libraries in the united states and canada. in 1995 and 1997,she won the ida and george eliot prize from the medical library association. her scholarly interests center on technology, infrastructure, andpolicy issues in health sciences information management.andrew friede is a physician executive with the cerner corporation, amajor supplier of health care information systems and services. dr. friedewrites expert systems, designs information systems for medical researchers,and advises health care organizations on strategy. he was formerly atthe centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), where he led thedevelopment of cdc wonder, an integrated information and communications system that provides online access to over 30 public health databases, and has specialized features for cdc surveillance programs. hisepidemiological research interests focused on maternal and child healthconditions, including immunizations, injuries, infant and maternal mortality, teenage pregnancy, and obstetrical complications. he has been aconsultant to the world bank and the u.n. for public health and clinicalinformation systems in china and madagascar. he is the author ofnumerous publications and served as the chief editor of cdc preventionguidelines.mark frisse is vice president of clinical information services at expressscripts, inc., a pharmaceutical benefits management company. untildecember 1999, he served as director of the bernard becker medicallibrary; director of the medical informatics laboratory; associate deanfor academic information management; professor of medicine, and academic director of the health services management executive m.b.a. program in the john m. olin school of business at washington university. inthese roles he was responsible for a broad array of medical informaticsresearch and teaching activities.john glaser is vice president and chief information officer for partnershealthcare system. he was founding chair of the college of healthcarenetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.338appendix cinformation management executives, is past president of the healthcareinformation management systems society, and was the 1994 recipient ofthe john gall award for health care chief information officer of the year.dr. glaser previously managed the health care information systems consulting practice at arthur d. little. he is the author of more than 40publications on health information systems and holds a ph.d. in healthcare information systems from the university of minnesota.john huffman is chief technology officer at stentor, inc., a company specializing in digital medical applications. he was previously in the corporate research and development group of silicon graphics inc. (sgi) andmanaged its medical market technology and business development efforts.mr. huffman has concentrated on medical imaging applications for thelast 10 years. additional responsibilities while at sgi were the design andspecification of nextgeneration processor and graphics architectures,development of image and signalprocessing methods, and numeric computation methods. prior to joining sgi, mr. huffman was the cofounderand chief technology officer for aware, inc., where he developed imageand video compression systems. mr. huffman holds several of the earlywavelet patents in this field and wrote the only fdaapproved packagefor medical image compression. in addition, he worked on the development of adaptive signal processing methods, numeric solution of nonlinear partial differential equations, and video compression methods. priorto joining aware, mr. huffman spent two years working in the artificialintelligence group at the microelectronics and computer technology corporation under doug lenat, developing cyc, the largest, most comprehensive artificial intelligence system integrating all known methods intoone reasoning system. before that, mr. huffman was one of the originalemployees at thinking machines corporation, where he designed thevlsi chip and contributed to microcoding the connection machine. mr.huffman also developed automated circuit placement methods that arein use in the industry today. mr. huffman began his professional careerat the national security agency as a vlsi design engineer while performing graduate work in computer science and electrical engineering at theuniversity of maryland. he completed his undergraduate work in chemical physics at the university of chicago in 1979.isaac kohane is director of the childrenõs hospital informatics programin boston and assistant professor of pediatrics at harvard medical school.dr. kohane was one of the lead developers of the w3emrs system, asystem that allows secure internetbased sharing of medical informationamong emergency room doctors in five bostonarea hospitals. from 1995to 1997, dr. kohane was leader of the boston collaborative group fornetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c339web access to electronic medical systems. he is currently working on thehealth information identification and deidentification toolkit to enablethe specification of health information systems with multiple tradeoffs inconfidentiality. he is also principal investigator of the personalinternetworked notary and guardian project to enable patients to fullycontrol their own medical records over multiple institutions from theinternet. dr. kohane earned a joint m.d./ph.d. from boston university in1987 and a b.sc. in biology from brown university. he conducted hisdoctoral research in collaboration with the clinical decision makinggroup in mitõs laboratory for computer science, with which he maintains an affiliation.carl e. landwehr is a senior fellow and acting director of the informationsecurity center at mitretek systems, a nonprofit center conductingresearch and development in the public interest. for many years,dr. landwehr headed the computer security section of the center forhigh assurance computer systems at the u.s. naval research laboratory. he has led a variety of research projects to advance technologies forcomputer security and highassurance systems and has served on reviewpanels for highassurance research and development programs at thenational aeronautics and space administration and the national security agency. dr. landwehr serves as an expert consultant to the northatlantic treaty organization and for 10 years chaired an internationaldefense panel on secure information systems. the international federation for information processing (ifip) awarded him its silver core for hiswork as founding chair of ifip working group 11.3 on database security,and the ieee computer society awarded him its golden core for hiswork on behalf of its technical committee on security and privacy. hehas served on the editorial boards of the high integrity systems journal,ieee transactions on software engineering, and the journal of computersecurity. dr. landwehr also served on the cstb committee that produced the report for the record: protecting electronic health information.he received a b.s. (engineering, 1968) from yale university, an m.s. (computer and communication sciences, 1970) from the university of michigan,and a ph.d. (computer and communication sciences, 1974) from the university of michigan.daniel r. masys is director of biomedical informatics at the university ofcalifornia, san diego school of medicine, and associate clinical professorof medicine. an honors graduate of princeton university and the ohiostate university college of medicine, he completed postgraduate trainingin internal medicine, hematology, and medical oncology at the universityof california at san diego and the naval regional medical center, sannetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.340appendix cdiego. he served as chief of the international cancer research data bankof the national cancer institute, national institutes of health, and from1986 through 1994 was director of the lister hill national center forbiomedical communications, which is the computer research and development division of the national library of medicine. he also served asthe nih representative to the federal high performance computing, communications, and information technology committee, which advised thepresidentõs office of science and technology policy in the area ofadvanced computing and national information infrastructure. dr. masysis a diplomate of the american board of internal medicine in medicine,hematology, and medical oncology. he is a fellow of the american college of physicians and a fellow of the american college of medicalinformatics. he is a founding associate editor of the journal of the americanmedical informatics association and has received numerous awards, including the nih directorõs award, the public health service outstandingservice medal, and the u.s. surgeon generalõs exemplary service medal.dr. masysõ research interests are in internetaccessible health informationand information systems support for clinical research. he is coprincipalinvestigator of the patientcentered access to secure systems online(pcasso) research project funded by the national library of medicine,which is developing and evaluating a secure webbased access methodfor clinical data.jane e. sisk is a professor in the department of health policy and codirector of the center for evidencebased medicine and aging at mountsinai school of medicine in new york city. she was formerly a professorin the division of health policy and management and director of themasterõs program in effectiveness and outcomes research at columbiauniversity school of public health. before joining columbia, she directedprojects at the congressional office of technology assessment as a seniorassociate and project director in the health program. she also served aspresident, international society of technology assessment in health care,of which she was a founding member. dr. sisk is a fellow of the association for health services research and sits on the editorial boards of healthservices research and the international journal of technology assessment inhealth care. she served on the iom committee that produced the reporttelemedicine: a guide to assessing telecommunications in health care and iscurrently a member of the iom committee on immunization financepolicies and practices and the nrciom national cancer policy board.dr. sisk earned a b.a. in international relations (phi beta kappa, magnacum laude) from brown university, an m.a. in economics from georgewashington university, and a ph.d. in economics from mcgill university.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c341thorsten von eicken is assistant professor of computer science at cornelluniversity. his research has focused on highperformance communication in clusters of workstations and developed the unet userlevel networking architecture to close the dramatic gap between the bit rate ofhighspeed networks and the communication performance seen by applications. he recently started a new project: the safe language kernel(slk), which is an operating system infrastructure for customizableinternet servers and applicationspecific gateways. the primary goal ofslk is to allow users to download custom services into servers in thenetwork in a secure yet flexible manner. just as java enables web browsers in which users safely download applets, slk will enable safe internetservers into which users can upload servlets. dr. von eicken received hisph.d. from the university of california at berkeley. he was the recipient of an nsf career award in 1997. he has published widely on highperformance computing architectures, parallel computing/programming,and lowlatency data communications.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.342appendix dindividuals who participated in sitevisits or briefed the study committeesite visit participantsdecember 16, 1998california (san francisco, oakland, palo alto, and mountain view)university of california at san francisco, laboratory for radiologicalinformatics: fei cao, tony chou, bill dillon, steve frankel, davidhoogstrate, h.k. (bernie) huang, andrew shyh liang lou, laurasnarr, johannes stahl, albert wong, and x.q. zhou.kaiserpermanente: peter juhn, richard leopold, annalisa silvestre,and valerie tolousshams.stanford center for professional development (scpd): andrew dipaolo,aubrey harris, jay kohn, and mike rouan.nasa ames research center: cynthia bruyns, shirley burg, rei cheng,muriel ross, and xander twombly.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d343february 23, 1999north carolina (greenville and chapel hill)east carolina university center for health sciences communication, telemedicine program: david c. balch, doug barnum, christi brewer,thomas feldbush, susan gustke, gloria jones, marc krien, tedkummer, lori maiolo, lance rogers, and ron rouse.university of north carolina at chapel hill computer graphics laboratory:andrew ade, henry fuchs, and lars s. nyland.university of north carolina at chapel hill school of medicine: johnloonsk.february 1011, 1999seattle, washingtonuniversity of washington: thomas anderson, james brinkley, stevecorbato, sherrilyne fuller, tom furness (human interface technology (hit) laboratory), harold goldberg, ira kalet, debra ketchell,edward lazowska, henry levy, james logerfo, tom martin, jean o.nelson, tom norris, peter oppenheimer (hit laboratory), brentstewart, and suzanne weghorst (hit laboratory).regence blueshield: magdalene aliu, kirk bailey, jac davies (washington state department of health), steven moe, donn morse,richard rubin (foundation for health care quality), peter summerville (community health information technology alliance), andjerry tonkovich.briefers during committee meetingsseptember 1314, 1998washington, d.c.michael ackerman and donald lindberg, national library of medicine; george strawn, national science foundation.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.344appendix ddecember 1618, 1998palo alto, californiaalan hannan, frontier/globalcenter; hon hso, sbc communications; gary leiber, webtv education; milo medin, @home; jackieparker, intel; geoff rutledge, healtheon; j.j. singh, caresoft; markstefik, xerox palo alto research center; hal varian, dean, school ofinformation systems & management, university of california atberkeley.march 1, 1999  march 2, 1999washington, d.c.donald detmer, former chair of the national committee on vital andhealth statistics; michael fitzmaurice, agency for health care policyresearch; margaret hamburg, department of health and humanservices; thomas kalil, national economic council; james ostell,national center for biotechnology information; richard satava, yaleuniversity; and william yasnoff, centers for disease control andprevention.networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.345indexaaccess controls, 6465, 145, 157160, 242243, 256, 302adrenoleukodystrophy, 328aetna u.s. healthcare, 60agency for healthcare research andquality (ahrq), 120, 223, 228,229, 234 (n. 25), 255agora, 311aids, 55 (n. 12), 60, 95, 103, 313alternative medicine, 60american medical association, 155156american medical colleges, 261american medical informatics association,14, 22, 261, 307american national standards institute, 85anatomy, 48, 102, 108, 114115, 244, 296,300, 306, 307309, 315, 317, 320,329, 331, 332anonymity, 167173anonymous email, 169170anonymous data, 172173anonymous payment, 172protected web browsing, 170172association of american medical colleges,130 (n. 30), 261asynchronous transfer mode, 39, 56 (n. 19),72, 117, 134, 163166, 272, 281,290, 331at&t, 172audio, 31, 50, 100, 104, 105, 106, 157, 164,220, 280, 285, 286, 288, 290, 293,294, 296, 327, 332see also video and teleconferencingauthentication, 1718, 6365, 70, 145, 253,279, 297biometric, 18, 55 (n. 13), 279certification authorities, 151152, 155156, 253encryption and, 151153protocols, 150, 151156remotely controlled medical devices, 69tokenbased, 1718, 83, 84availability (network and system), 9, 11,15, 24, 40, 45, 8788, 93, 122, 124,144, 160162, 191, 237, 242244defined, 10digital divide, 1415, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245246email between patients and providers,63, 70in consumer health applications, 63, 70,8788, 124in professional education, 107108in public health, 101see also data security; intellectualproperty; privacy; ubiquity ofaccessnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.346index bbackbone networks, 11, 41, 42, 49, 50, 78, 134,135137, 140, 253, 284, 299, 331very high performance backbonenetwork service (vbns), 49, 51,115, 116, 284, 294, 299balanced budget acts, 92, 219, 220221, 224bandwidth, ix, 6, 9, 1112, 39, 41, 51, 123,132134, 240, 244245, 252253,289, 305cable modems, 12, 18, 34, 39, 40, 49, 67,132, 163166costs of increases, 135, 166167, 209defined, 10, 39digital subscriber line services, 132, 164,165, 166for administrative and financialapplications, 93for biomedical research, 110, 111, 121122, 123, 240241for clinical care, 7273, 75, 7779, 8283,87, 88for consumer health applications, 61,65, 6768, 69, 71, 280for email between patients andproviders, 63for emergency care, 133for home care, 6768, 71, 267for images, 7374, 7779, 80, 123, 134,136, 162, 164, 241, 244, 272, 288289, 301302for patient records, 65, 8283, 320321for professional education, 104, 105,107, 123, 126, 241, 281, 282, 290291, 297298for public health, 100for video and teleconferencing, 11, 7374, 100, 132133, 241, 244, 290integrated services digital networks(isdn), 74, 287, 288, 289, 290, 304local loops, 61, 162167national health alert network, 99100next generation internet, 16, 49, 250251overprovisioning, 137, 138139private networks, 43reconfigurable, 18, 164, 253satellite telecommunications, 166167very high performance backbonenetwork service (vbns), 49, 51,115, 116, 284, 294, 299biomedical research, ix, 1, 2, 3, 5, 16, 57,108123, 255, 306307, 319bandwidth needed, 110, 111, 121122,123, 240241clinical trials, 55(n.2), 120121, 328collaborative research, 118120data access controls and, 110111, 122,159, 316databases, 109112, 240241, 295298,331332digital anatomist, 307309medlars, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135medline, 3, 33, 37, 55 (n. 5), 103104, 109, 110, 215, 295, 301, 307pathology image data system, 314315private sector, 109110digital images, 211, 245246expert systems, 227, 228229patient records, 65, 169, 173174publication of results, 116118, 215217,239; see also intellectual property;medlars; medlineremotely controlled equipment, 5, 113116, 240simulations, 112113, 118, 320technical requirements, 6, 8, 108123,159, 240241, 255biomedical teleimmersion, 316, 325biometric authentication, 18, 55 (n. 13), 279blue cross/blue shield, 89breast cancer, 55 (n. 12)telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142143,236, 244, 272273, 324, 332333bureau of the census, 172173ccable modem technologies, 12, 18, 34, 39,40, 49, 67, 132, 163166cancer, 55 (n. 12), 62, 300301, 305306, 322,325326, 328329national cancer institute, 120121, 273,300301, 305, 322, 324, 325326telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142143,236, 244, 272273, 324, 332333cardiology, 30, 6667, 73, 74, 128, 158, 266,272, 273, 275, 280, 285, 286, 287288, 289, 291, 302, 304, 327328centers for disease control andprevention, 95, 96, 99100, 225,264, 312313networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index347certification authorities, 151152, 155156,253chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192193, 196,239, 261, 290see also support groupschronic illness, general, 1314, 34, 55, 58,60, 191home care, 68risk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 9596,274, 288cities, see urban areasclinical care, 2, 55 (n. 2), 55 (n. 11), 57, 7188, 120121and email, 62, 261, 262patient/provider exchanges, 14, 22,37, 6264, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279bandwidth needs, 7273, 75, 7779, 8283, 87, 88data security, 65, 68, 8284, 88expert systems, 227, 228229latency needs, 8183, 8788, 124next generation internet, 48, 319organizational factors, 182184, 188, 189,192, 195, 196remote consultations, 6, 89, 16, 17, 18,20, 3033, 36, 57, 71, 7276, 88,220221, 228229, 236237, 238239, 244, 247, 258, 266267, 280,285286, 288289, 292, 323standards/guidelines, 5, 14, 22, 57, 238239, 275, 278technical requirements, 45, 7176, 8788, 238239, 246, 258see also diagnosis; emergency care;hospitals; primary carephysicians; patient records;specialistsclinical trials, 55 (n. 2), 120121, 328collaboratory for microscopic digitalanatomy, 114115collections of information antipiracy act,218community health informationtechnology alliance (chita),90, 91, 309, 311312comprehensive telehealth act, 224compression technology, 72, 77, 7879, 80,114, 115, 116, 129, 272, 286, 288,290, 315the computerbased patient record, 204computed tomography (ct), 4, 65, 72, 78,134, 164, 238, 274, 300computer science andtelecommunications board, 12,144, 173, 229conference on fair use, 217confidentiality, see encryption; privacy;securityconsumer assessment of health planssurvey, 90consumer health, 23, 27, 35, 3738, 57, 58,71, 152, 235, 245246, 262alternative medicine, 60availability of access, 63, 70, 8788, 124bandwidth needs, 61, 65, 6768, 69, 71, 280chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192193, 196,239, 261, 290data security for, 61, 63, 6465, 68, 7071,238239, 249ecommerce and, 9, 1011, 35, 6061, 63,71, 85, 168, 179182, 310email, patient/provider exchanges, 14,22, 37, 6264, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279foreign language speakers, 119120, 266267latency needs, 62, 6970, 279organizational factors, 9, 1011, 179182,183, 191, 195primary online activities, ranked, 61quality control, 2, 14, 6162, 246247,255256, 292remote consultations, 6, 89, 16, 17, 18,20, 3033, 36, 57, 71, 7276, 88,220221, 228229, 236237, 238239, 244, 247, 258, 266267, 280,285286, 288289, 292, 323risk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 9596,274, 288support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239technical requirements, 45, 6, 89, 6668, 6971, 238239, 245246web sites, 9, 1011, 5962, 6465, 69, 190,196197, 216, 256, 262, 277280pharmaceutical companies, 60, 71,189, 221see also clinical care; data security;home care; insurance; managedcare; privacy; records ofpatients; telemedicine; crossreferences under demographicfactorsnetworking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.348indexcopyright, see intellectual propertycost and costbenefit factors, 8, 13, 37, 179180, 184, 185, 186187administrative, 89, 9192, 9798, 279bandwidth increases, 135, 166167, 209clinical trials, 120121data security, 144, 279demonstration projects, 257digital images, 211, 245246electronic publishing, 216email, 62, 6364integrated delivery networks (idns),3536integrated services models, 140141managed care, 59, 184medical imaging, 77, 79, 186organizational factors, 59, 179180, 184,185, 186187, 194195, 196patient monitoring and home care, 66patient record sharing, 8182, 144price of internet services and pcs, 209210private networks vs internet, 4445professional education, 282283property, urban areas, 210211publication of biomedical research, 216public health surveillance and, 9798,101102remote consultation via privatenetworks, 74remotely controlled devices, 76spot market purchase of health care,191192telemedicine, 184, 204, 287, 302, 303cryptography, see encryptionct, see computed tomographyddefense advanced research projectsagency, 46, 47, 49, 51, 250, 300demographic factors, see educationalattainment; geographic factors;language factors, human; ruralareas; socioeconomic status;urban areasdemonstration projects, 15, 1922, 250, 257261internet 2, ix, 1, 5051, 52national library of medicine awards,314333payment methods, 221private sector, 20, 260261scalability of protocols, 1617testbed networks, 2, 16, 17, 2021, 28, 47,250252, 259, 283284, 323, 326327see also next generation internetdepartment of agriculture, 212, 215department of commerce, 33, 209210, 212,225, 226bureau of census, 172173department of defense, 20, 21, 24, 43, 161,221, 223, 225, 226, 258, 259, 264,299department of energy, 43, 46, 49, 225, 226,250, 299department of health and humanservices, 14, 20, 23, 2425, 62, 86,92, 208, 215, 221, 223, 225227,255, 257, 259260, 262265agency for healthcare research andquality (ahrq), 120, 223, 228,229, 255indian health service, 20, 21, 24, 258, 259see also health care financingadministration; nationalinstitutes of health; nationallibrary of medicinedepartment of veterans affairs, 20, 24, 221,223, 225, 258, 259, 264dermatology, 73, 184, 191, 274, 285, 286,289, 291, 302diabetes, 55 (n. 11), 61, 66, 68, 275diagnosis, 8, 37, 48, 106, 306, 321, 322, 326,328329, 330see also digital images; specialistsdifferentiated services model (diffserv),12, 18, 45, 137140, 143, 151, 251,252253digital anatomist, 307309digital divide, 1415, 71, 125, 195, 209, 210,211, 245246digital images, 5, 8, 55(n.4), 65, 71, 7679,82, 134, 140, 236, 272274, 300301, 304305, 320321, 323, 328329, 332bandwidth, 7374, 7779, 80, 123, 134,136, 162, 164, 241, 244, 272, 288289, 301302biomedical research applications, 114115, 239cost factors, 77, 79, 186networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index349ct scans, 4, 65, 72, 78, 80, 134, 164, 238,272, 274, 300digital anatomist, 307309latency, 115116mri, 4, 72, 77, 80, 113, 134, 238, 248,272, 274, 284, 328next generation internet, 4849, 305306, 309, 317, 320321, 323, 324,326, 329, 331333picture archiving and communicationssystem (pacs), 76, 79, 80, 274telemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142143,236, 244, 272273, 324, 332333ultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284,293, 294, 300, 306x rays, 4, 36, 65, 74, 78, 80, 84, 113, 134,164, 238, 244, 294see also video and teleconferencingdigital millennium copyright act, 217digital subscriber line services, 132, 164,165, 166disasters, 18, 99100, 239, 254see also terrorismdiscrete multitone, 164, 166diseases and disorders, general, ix, 3031,34, 57, 98, 182surveillance, 3, 4, 8, 57, 9499, 101102,238239, 258, 312313see also chronic illness; risk factorsdistance education, 67, 214, 217218, 238,240241, 249, 261, 266, 280283,289291, 293298, 306307, 324distance medicine, see telemedicinedrugs, 5, 10, 32, 37, 38, 61, 182, 189, 190,239clinical trials, 120121data security, 11, 71insurance claims for, 89intellectual property, 168169online ordering, 60, 71, 189, 221public health surveillance, 8, 97, 98eeast carolina university, 7273, 76, 222,284293ebiomed, 116ecommerce, 9, 1011, 35, 6061, 85, 179182, 310encryption, 63, 71privacy and, 168economic factors, 13, 248, 298299market forces, 3335, 185186, 191192see also cost and costbenefit factors; ecommerce; funding; health carefinancing; socioeconomic status;underserved areaseducation, professional, see professionaleducationeducational attainment, 14, 61, 195, 210elderly persons, 83email, 35, 169, 260261, 286anonymous, 169170, 256cost factors, 62, 6364encryption, 156157, 167168, 169, 300latency, 39patient/provider exchanges, 14, 22, 37,6264, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197, 248,279, 300embryology, 199, 323, 330emergency care, 3, 11, 18, 26 (n. 1), 133,210, 288, 324data security as impediment to, 144, 159disasters, 18, 99100, 239, 254; see alsoterrorismpatient records, 81, 83, 144, 159, 160, 206patient transport, 321, 330videoconferencing, 45encryption, 17, 30, 32, 40, 62, 6365, 70, 79,145, 147, 150155, 325authentication and, 151153bioterrorism response, 100ecommerce, 63, 71email, 156157, 167168, 169, 300firewalls, 149home care, 68, 267in administrative and financialtransactions, 91, 172mindscape, 302patient record sharing, 8283, 84, 292293secure socket layer (ssl) encryption,17, 63, 64, 154155, 252time factors, 150151european union, 208209evaluation issues, 15, 1922, 193, 250, 257261biomedical research, 117118consumer health information, 6162,255256email between patients and providers,62networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.350indexquality of information, 2, 14, 6162, 246247, 255256, 292scalability of protocols, 1617technical considerations, 3841see also demonstration projects;standardsexpert systems, 227, 228229extensible markup language (xml), 85,86, 198, 331ffda modernization act, 120federal communications commission, 211federal government, ix, 2021, 2425, 29, 96,202203, 211212, 223227, 254260national aeronautics and spaceadministration, 24, 46, 4748, 49,221, 250, 283284, 299, 300national center for biotechnologyinformation, 109, 111, 117national center for microscopy andimaging research, 114116national committee on vital andhealth statistics, 25, 264, 265national institute of standards andtechnology, 46, 47national telecommunications andinformation administration, 212see also funding; next generationinternet; regulatory issues;legislation; terms beginningdepartment offinancial issues, see health care financingfirewalls, 147, 148150for the record: protecting electronic healthinformation, 204foundation for health care quality, 91,310311funding, 51, 186, 202203, 223227, 254,287288, 303certification authorities, 156clinical research, 120department of health and humanservices, 20, 23, 257258distance learning and telemedicine, 214next generation internet, 4648payment mechanisms, 221remote consultations, 36, 287288, 301underserved areas, 211212, 213215workforce study, 262263ggeographic factors, 125, 195biomedical research, bandwidth, 110clinical care, 71, 72kaiserpermanente, 275276payment policies, 220professional education, 102, 203; see alsodistance learningsee also home care; remotely controlledequipment; rural areas; ubiquityof access; underserved areas;urban areasgovernment role, 27see also federal government;legislation; public health; publicpolicy; regulatory issues; stategovernmenthhackers, 45, 11, 144, 145, 203, 240anonymous email, 169170firewalls, 147, 148150viruses, electronic, 145, 160health alert network, 99, 225health care financing, ix, 2, 57, 8894, 125,186187payment mechanisms, 2, 10, 24, 28, 32,44, 8992, 186, 194195, 219221,235, 264anonymous, 172encryption, 91, 172integrated services model, 140141patient monitoring, 6667secured transactions, 61, 190191,205, 242, 243technical requirements, 45, 13, 9091,9394, 238239see also insurance; medicaid; medicarehealth care financing administration, 13,2021, 8990, 9192, 219221, 225,258, 264, 286see also medicaid; medicarehealth care personal informationnondisclosure act, 206health data in the information age: use,disclosure, and privacy, 204205health insurance portability andaccountability act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index351health level seven (hl7), 84, 85health maintenance organizations, 89, 103,179, 186, 195, 196, 266267health plan employer data andinformation set (hedis), 90health plans, see insurance; managed care;medicaid; medicarehealth records, see patient recordshome care, 57, 6669, 75, 76, 128 (n. 7), 196,209, 235, 240, 258, 287288, 290bandwidth requirements, 6768, 71, 267encryption requirements, 68, 267patient/provider email exchanges, 14,22, 37, 6264, 66, 70, 189, 192, 197,248, 279, 300technological issues, 6668, 267time factors, 68, 70video, 129 (n. 9)vignettes, 2932, 266267see also telemedicinehospitals, 13, 188189, 287, 290consumer information, 5insurance claims for, 89, 195integrated delivery networks (idns),35, 44patient record sharing, 8182public health surveillance and, 9798see also emergency care; surgeryhypertext transfer protocol, 84, 147, 261hypertext markup language (html), 86,104, 196, 290, 295, 296297iimages, see digital imagesindian health service, 20, 21, 24, 258, 259infrastructure, see technological issuesinsurance, 5, 8, 11, 12, 35, 37, 44, 8990, 186,195, 239, 247data security, 11, 145, 241health insurance portability andaccountability act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208payment mechanisms, 2, 10, 24, 28, 32,44, 219221spot market purchases, 191192standards for claims and payments, 9293, 186, 219221see also health maintenanceorganizations; managed care;medicaid; medicareintegrated advanced informationmanagement systems program,300integrated delivery networks (idns), 3536,44, 79, 179integrated services digital networks(isdn), 74, 287, 288, 289, 290, 304integrated services model (intserv), 12, 17,18, 45, 137, 140141, 142, 251, 253intellectual property, 14, 24, 99, 168169,188189, 196, 202, 204, 215218access controls, 159biomedical research databases, 110111,249, 307educational materials, 14, 217218, 249,307pharmaceutical companies, 168169internet engineering task force, 12, 18, 4546, 138, 141, 143, 153, 174, 252253, 254internet protocol (ip), 42, 49, 140, 161162,260261, 291, 294, 305internet protocol security (ipsec), 17, 150,153154, 251252internet 2, ix, 1, 5051, 52jjohns hopkins university, 60joint photographic experts group (jpeg),286joint working group of telemedicine/telehealth, 224kkaiserpermanente of northern california,184, 196, 274280llanguage factors, human, 119120, 266267latency, 9, 3940, 123, 124, 134, 136, 240administrative and financialapplications, 93biomedical research, 122clinical care, 8183, 8788, 124consumer health applications, 62, 6970,279defined, 10, 39networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.352indexemergency care, 133guaranteed, 134135imaging, 115116professional education, 107, 124public health, 100satellite telecommunications, 167legislation, 58, 91, 205208balanced budget acts, 92, 219, 220221,224collections of information antipiracyact, 218communications act of 1934, 211comprehensive telehealth act, 224digital millennium copyright act, 217european union, 208209, 218fda modernization act, 120health care personal informationnondisclosure act, 206health insurance portability andaccountability act, 86, 92, 185,205, 208medical information privacy andsecurity act, 206207medical information protection act, 206privacy act, 207public health service act, 224telecommunications act of 1996, 211triplea rural health improvementact, 224licensing of health care providers, 14, 24,105, 186, 189, 221223, 224, 267litigation, malpractice, 14, 221223, 263local area networks (lans), 33, 67, 79, 80,104, 137, 153, 154, 284firewalls, 147, 148150images, 80, 301internet protocol security, 153local communities, 38, 312bioterrorist response, 99100health care claims and payments, 90professional education, 104public health surveillance, 96local multipoint distribution systemtechnology, 166167louisiana state university medical center,317318mmagnetic resonance imaging, 4, 72, 77, 80,113, 134, 238, 248, 272, 274, 284, 328malpractice, 14, 221223, 263mammography, 48, 78, 79, 142143, 236,244, 272273, 324, 332333managed care, 11, 35, 95, 179, 182, 183184,186, 190, 191, 195, 244, 247efficiency and costeffectiveness efforts,59, 89integrated delivery networks (idns), 35see also health maintenanceorganizationsmedicaid, 13, 21, 89, 264medical information privacy and securityact, 206207medical information protection act, 206medical records, see patient recordsmedicare, 13, 21, 8990, 219220, 223, 224,225, 264medications, see drugsmedlars, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135medline, 3, 33, 37, 55 (n. 5), 103104, 109,110, 215, 295, 301, 307medtronic inc., 66microsoft corp., 66, 210, 291microwave technology, 74, 166, 289, 290mindscape, 300, 301302, 306mri, see magnetic resonance imagingmulticast protocols, 7, 49, 50, 119, 143144,176, 241, 283, 284nnational aeronautics and spaceadministration, 24, 46, 4748, 49,221, 250, 283284, 299, 300national cancer institute, 120121, 273, 301national center for biotechnologyinformation, 109, 111, 117national center for microscopy andimaging research, 114116national committee on vital and healthstatistics, 25, 264, 265national emergency medicine informationextranet, 316national heart attack alert program, 128(n. 7)national health alert network, 99100national institute of standards andtechnology, 46, 47national institutes of health, 19, 2021, 46,47, 116, 120121, 216, 223, 225,226, 228229, 255257, 258, 264networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index353national laboratory for the study of ruraltelemedicine, 74national library of medicine (nlm), 15,16, 1819, 254, 255, 258, 263clinical transaction standards, 84demonstration project awards (ngi),314333integrated advanced informationmanagement systems program,300medlars, 33, 55 (n. 5), 135medline, 3, 33, 37, 103104, 109, 110,215, 295, 301, 307next generation internet, 4647, 305306, 314333public health initiative, 95national museum of health and medicine,330national network of libraries of medicine,95national science and technology council,46national science foundation, 46, 4749, 5051, 111, 225, 226, 250national telecommunications andinformation administration, 212native americans, indian health service,20, 21, 24, 258, 259naval research laboratory, 171network availability, see availability;ubiquity of accessnetwork data express, 309networked 3d virtual human anatomy,315neurology, 73, 74, 112, 131 (n. 38), 158, 272,274, 284, 285, 289, 308309, 319320, 328next generation internet, ix, x, 12, 1618,28, 4649, 52, 291, 305306, 312,318333 (passim)authentication, 1718bandwidth, 16, 49, 250251clinical care, 48, 319data security, 17, 251252digital images, 4849, 305306, 309, 317,320321, 323, 324, 326, 329, 331333internet 2 and, 5051security, 17, 312, 317318telemedicine, 48, 318319, 321, 324, 327328, 332333testbed networks, 2, 16, 17, 2021, 28, 47,250252, 259, 323, 326327video and teleconferencing, 4849, 306ooffice of the future, 293294onion routing, 171172open systems interconnection model, 146organizational factors, 1314, 1516, 25, 2829, 3738, 58, 178201, 204205,236, 244245, 247248, 265, 310311barriers, external, 185187barriers, internal, 187189, 194, 262clinical care, 182184, 188, 189, 192, 195,196consumer health, 9, 1011, 179182, 183,191, 195costs, 59, 179180, 184, 185, 186187, 194195, 196data security, 38, 43, 147, 159, 203205,253firewalls, 147, 148150information systems staff requirements,14, 23, 196199, 227230, 260, 261263, 298299integrated delivery networks (idns),3536kaiserpermanente, 184, 196, 274280leadership, 197199, 227patient records, 8283, 182183public health decision making, 98web hosting, 162see also administrative support; healthcare financing; insurance;managed careoverprovisioning, 137, 138139ppartners in information access, 95pathmaster, 328329patient records, 45, 10, 20, 34, 57, 6465, 70,7172, 8087, 94, 194195, 197, 236,262, 264, 301, 320321, 325audit capabilities, 19, 83, 159, 207, 242,256, 297, 302availability needs, 11, 30, 6465, 124, 133email, incorporation into, 64networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.354indexin emergency care, 81, 83, 144, 159, 160,206organizational factors, 8283, 182183professional education and, 106public health workers use of, 94quality of service needs, 134, 164standards, 8486, 129 (n. 17), 186, 188see also data security; privacypatientcentered access secure systems(pcasso), 65pharmaceuticals, see drugsphysical fitness and exercise, see exercisepicture archiving and communicationssystem (pacs), 76, 79, 80, 274pilot projects, see demonstration projectsplatform for internet content selection,62policy issues, see public policypresidentõs information technologyadvisory committee, 229pretty good privacy (pgp), 63, 150, 152,156157, 313preventive care, see risk factorsprimary care physicians, 13, 30, 31, 61, 191,220certification authorities, 155156prison telemedicine, 72, 76, 215, 286287,289, 290privacy, 2, 5, 15, 24, 28, 38, 40, 56, 61, 68,153, 167173, 186, 193, 205206,235, 264, 310and home care, 68in financial and administrativetransactions, 9091patient records, 64, 65, 68, 8284, 124,242, 249, 256, 262, 279, 292293,300, 310, 316317, 324325, 332333encryption, 8283, 84, 292293public policy, 203209, 212, 214, 262see also pretty good privacy; securityprivacy enhanced mail, 152private networks, 34, 41, 4345, 74, 154, 297see also local area networksprivate sector, general, ix, 5051, 264biomedical research databases, 109110demonstration projects, 20, 260261protocols, 2122regulatory issues, 14, 25, 205, 207208see also insurance; internet 2; managedcareprofessional education, 2, 3, 67, 14, 15, 2223, 28, 57, 102108, 240241, 261263, 315316and intellectual property, 14, 217218,249, 307availability, 107108, 241bandwidth needs, 104, 105, 107, 123,126, 241, 281, 282, 290291, 297298continuing education, 105107, 322cost factors, 282283data security for, 108distance education, 67, 214, 217218,238, 240241, 249, 261, 266, 280283, 289291, 293298, 306307,324graduate education, 102105, 322information systems staffs, 14, 23, 227230, 261263latency needs, 107, 124next generation internet, 4849, 318,319, 322remotely controlled apparatus, 113114simulations, 103, 104105, 123, 124, 250,293294, 320, 329ubiquity of access, 108, 241video and teleconferencing, 67, 104,106, 240241, 266, 273, 280283,290, 291, 293294, 297298, 315,325proprietary information, see intellectualpropertyprotocols, 2122, 34, 42, 45, 5556 (n. 15),244, 260261authentication, 150, 151156demonstration projects, scalability, 1617hypertext transfer protocol, 84, 147, 261internet protocol (ip), 42, 49, 140, 161162, 260261, 291, 294, 305internet protocol security (ipsec), 17,150, 153154, 251252latency and, 3940multicast, 7, 49, 50, 119, 143144, 176,241, 283, 284quality of service protocols, 12, 18, 45,132, 135141, 142, 143, 251, 252253scalability of, 1617, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252253, 320321networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index355security, 17, 49, 63, 150157, 251252; seealso encryptiontransmission control protocol, 3940,42, 136137, 260261public health, ix, 1, 2, 27, 3637, 58, 94102and data security, 9899, 101centers for disease control andprevention, 95, 96, 99100, 225,264, 312313cost savings, 9798, 101102privacy and, 169standards for, 101102, 186state government and, 95, 96, 97surveillance, 3, 4, 8, 57, 9499, 101102,238239, 258, 312313technical requirements for, 45, 100102,238239ubiquity of access, 101102video and teleconferencing needs, 45,238239, 100public health service act, 224public key infrastructure, 17, 63, 64, 152156, 252, 264, 275, 276277public policy, 1415, 2325, 29, 202234, 236,248249, 263265consumer health security, 70data security, 151152, 203209, 212, 214,225, 264privacy, 203209, 212, 214, 262see also federal government; intellectualproperty; legislation; regulatoryissues; state government; crossreferences under demographicfactorspubmed central, 216qquality of health care, general, 28, 191, 236quality of information, 2, 14, 6162, 246247, 255256, 292quality of service (qos), 10, 12, 15, 1617,19, 41, 4546, 51, 132, 133144,173, 235236, 237, 243245, 254,256257, 259, 293, 297298, 331availability of network, 160defined, 10, 41, 55 (n. 14)guarantees, 18, 41, 134135, 140, 141,142, 253254, 256257next generation internet, 46, 49, 251overprovisioning, 137, 138139patient records, 134, 164private networks vs internet, 43, 44, 45private sector, other, 50protocols, 132, 134144bandwidth, 132, 135138diffserv/intserv, 12, 18, 45, 137141, 142, 143, 251, 252253qos policy, 141143recommendations related to, 1618,251253research needed, 1718, 252253video and teleconferencing, 133, 134virtual overlay networks, 141see also differentiated services model(diffserv); evaluation issues;integrated services model (intserv); standardsrrealizing the information future: the internetand beyond, 204regence blueshield, 309313regulatory issues, 186, 202, 219223, 248249, 263insurance, 56 (n. 16)licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221223, 224,249, 267malpractice, 14, 221223, 263privacy and security, 14, 25, 205, 207208public health surveillance and, 98see also intellectual property;legislation; standardsremotely controlled equipment, 3, 47, 20,36, 39, 6869, 70, 7576, 113116,121, 128 (n. 7), 133, 209, 235, 236,240, 243, 247, 253254, 266267,331next generation internet, 46, 4849, 331remote, realtime simulation for teachinghuman anatomy and surgery,320research, 15, 29, 174, 223227department of health and humanservices, 2425national institutes of health, 19national library of medicine role, 1819networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.356indexnetwork availability, 161162see also biomedical research;demonstration projects;evaluation issues; funding;internet 2; next generationinternetrisk factors, 3, 31, 34, 58, 59, 60, 9596, 274,288robert wood johnson foundation, 156, 310rural areas, ix, 6, 48, 72, 74, 77, 96, 103, 104,120, 195, 209, 210, 211212, 213214, 215, 220, 222, 224, 236, 240,245246, 300, 315, 321rural health science education, 315ssatellite telecommunications, 166167, 300see also national aeronautics and spaceadministrationscalability, 1617, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252253,320321see also bandwidthscience applications international corp., 65seattle/pacific northwest gigapop, 305secure/multipurpose internet mailextension (s/mime), 157secure radiologic collaboration on thenext generation internet, 318secure socket layer (ssl) encryption, 17,63, 64, 154155, 252security, ix, 911, 15, 17, 22, 28, 29, 40, 45,46, 123, 124, 136, 144162, 167173, 186, 193, 235, 237243, 262,310, 322323access controls, 6465, 145, 157160, 242243, 256, 302attribution/nonrepudiation, 146authentication, 1718, 6365, 70, 145,253, 279, 297confidential email, 156157cost factors, 144, 279defined, 10firewalls, 147, 148150for digital images, 79for patient records, 64, 65, 68, 9284,124, 242, 249, 256, 262, 279, 292293, 300, 310, 316317, 324325,332333encryption, 8283, 84, 292293in biomedical research, 110111, 122,159, 316in clinical care, 65, 68, 8284, 88; see alsofor patient records suprain clinical trials, 121in consumer applications, 61, 63, 6465,68, 7071, 238239in email between patients andproviders, 63, 66, 300in emergency care, 144, 159in financial and administrativetransactions, 61, 9092, 94, 145,172, 190191, 205, 241, 242, 243in home care, 68in private networks, 34, 41, 4344, 74,154, 297in professional education, 108in responding to bioterrorist attacks, 99100information warfare, 5internet protocol security (ipsec), 17,150, 153154network availability, 6, 911, 160162next generation internet, 49on consumer web sites, 61, 6465, 249organizational factors, 38, 42, 147, 159,203205, 253; see also firewallssupraperimeter control, 146protocols, 32, 48, 72, 140, 252253, 320321public health information, 9899, 101public key infrastructure, 17, 63, 64,152156, 252, 264, 275, 276277public policy, 151152, 203209, 212, 214,225, 264recommendations regarding, 1617, 251253regulatory issues, 14, 25, 205, 207208rural areas, 48secure socket layer (ssl) encryption,17transport layer security, 154156see also authentication; encryption;intellectual property; privacyshine project, 130 (n. 31)simulationsbiomedical research, 112113, 118, 320professional education, 103, 104105,123, 124, 250, 293294, 320, 329smart cards, 1718, 30networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index357socioeconomic status, 95digital divide, 1415, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245246southern governorsõ association, 223specialists, 8, 11, 13, 7677, 82, 182, 184, 191consultations, 6, 89, 16, 17, 18, 20, 3033, 36, 57, 71, 7276, 88, 220221,228229, 236237, 238239, 244,247, 258, 266267, 280, 285286,288289, 292, 323see also specific specialitiesstandards, 186, 188, 194, 196, 239, 280, 286,292, 310clinical practice standards/guidelines,5, 14, 22, 57, 238239, 275, 278discrete multitone, 164, 166distance education, intellectualproperty, 218insurance claims and payments, 9293,186, 219221patient records, 8486, 129 (n. 17), 186,188public health, 101102, 186quality of service guarantees, 18, 41,134135, 140, 141, 142, 252253,256257see also protocols; regulatory issuesstanford university, 130, 131, 280283,329state government, 317318insurance regulation, 56(n.16)licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221223, 224,249, 267malpractice, 14, 221223, 263public health surveillance, 95, 96, 97washington state laboratory reportingproject, 312313washington, wyoming, alaska,montana, and idaho (wwami)rural telemedicine network,300, 302303, 306307see also terms beginning university ofsupernet, 49support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239see also chat groupssurgery, 3, 45, 8, 36, 71, 105, 123, 124,239, 244, 250, 294, 316, 320, 323,329synchronous optical network equipment,135, 146ttechnology opportunities program, 212,213214teleconferencing, see video andteleconferencingtelemammography, 48, 78, 79, 142143,236, 244, 272273, 324, 332333telemedicine, 21, 47, 5253, 56, 69, 71, 186,189, 197, 209, 224, 235, 236, 243,248249, 259, 300, 321chat groups, ix, 5, 60, 191, 192193, 196,239, 261, 290comprehensive telehealth act, 224costs, 184, 204, 287, 302, 303defined, 56funding, 214licensing of health care providers, 14,24, 105, 186, 189, 221223, 224,249, 267malpractice, 14, 221223, 263next generation internet, 48, 318319,321, 324, 327328, 332333payment policies, 219220prisons, 72, 76, 215, 286287, 289, 290private sector (internet 2), 50remote consultations, 6, 89, 16, 17, 18,20, 3033, 36, 57, 71, 7276, 88,220221, 236237, 238239, 244,247, 258, 266267, 280, 285286,288289, 292, 323site visits by committee, 280, 284289,290support groups, ix, 5, 60, 61, 196, 239telemammography, 47, 78, 79, 142143,236, 244, 272273, 324, 332333ultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284,293, 294, 300, 306vignettes, 2932, 266267washington, wyoming, alaska,montana, and idaho (wwami)rural telemedicine network,300, 302303see also home care; remotely controlledequipmenttelemedicine: a guide to assessingtelecommunications in health care,204telequest, 77teletrauma and the ngi, 324terrorism, 45, 99, 100, 101, 225, 239networking health: prescriptions for the internetcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.358indextestbed networks, 16, 17, 2021, 28, 47, 250252, 259, 283284, 323, 3263273com corp., 210time factors, 11, 28, 184, 240bandwidth, impacts of increases ininternet use, 136continuing medical education, 107email responses, 22, 63encryption/decryption, 150151home care, 68, 70image transmission, 78see also availability; bandwidth; latencytokenbased authentication, 1718, 83, 84transmission control protocol, 3940, 42,136137, 260261transport layer security, 150, 154156transport of patients, 321, 330triplea rural health improvement act,224uubiquity of access, 9, 12, 15, 38, 4041, 71,88, 124126, 195, 235, 239, 245246administrative and financialapplications, 94biomedical research, 122123defined, 10, 40digital divide, 1415, 71, 125, 195, 209,210, 211, 245246patient records, 65professional education, 108, 241public health, 101102underserved areas, ix, 14, 210212; seealso rural areassee also bandwidthultrasound technology, 77, 273, 284, 293,294, 300, 306uncle system, 295, 297underserved areas, ix, 14, 72, 210212unified medical language system, 8485universal resource locators (urls), 170171, 295, 298universal service administrationcompany, 211212, 213universal service fund, 211, 215university consortium for advancedinternet development, 46, 5051university of california, 65, 76, 77, 272274university of iowa, 74university of north carolina, 293298university of washington, 298309urban areas, 72, 96, 103, 120, 176, 195, 210211, 220, 245246urls, see universal resource locatorsvvery high performance backbone networkservice (vbns), 49, 51, 115, 116,284, 294, 299video and teleconferencing, 3, 47, 71, 74,75, 129(n.10), 179, 220, 238239,240241, 273, 304305, 315, 321,326bandwidth, 11, 7374, 100, 132133, 241,244, 290biomedical teleimmersion, 316bioterrorism response, 100consumer use of, 3031, 266, 288home care, 129(n.9)image transmission and, 78, 115116next generation internet, 4849, 306professional education, 67, 104, 106,240241, 266, 273, 280283, 290,291, 293294, 297298, 315, 325public health, 45, 238239, 100quality of service, 133, 134see also digital images; simulationsviruses, electronic, 145, 160see also firewalls; hackerswwashington, wyoming, alaska, montana,and idaho (wwami) ruraltelemedicine network, 300, 302303, 306307wavelength division multiplexingtechnology, 135webtv, 210, 291western governorsõ association, 222world wide web consortium, 62world wide web electronic medicalrecord system, 8183xx rays, 4, 36, 65, 74, 78, 80, 84, 113, 134, 164,238, 244, 294xml, see extensible markup language