detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9829making it better: expanding information technology researchto meet society's needs272 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309069915 | doi 10.17226/9829committee on information technology research in a competitive world, computerscience and telecommunications board, national research councilmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on information technology researchin a competitive worldcomputer science and telecommunications boardcommission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applicationsnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, nw ¥ washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of thenational academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute ofmedicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for theirspecial competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation under sponsoraward number ani9616857. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendationsexpressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views ofthe sponsor. library of congress cataloginginpublication datamaking it better : expanding information technology research to meetsociety's needs. p. cm.isbn 03090699121. information technology. 2. information technologyñsocialaspects. i. title.t58.5. m35 2000303.48'33dc21 00009738making it better: expanding information technology research to meet societyõs needs is availablefrom the national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, nw, box 285, washington, dc20055 (18006246242 or 2023343313 in the washington metropolitan area; internet: http://www.nap.edu).copyright 2000 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americamaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of itsmembers, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility foradvising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr.kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairmanand vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on information technology researchin a competitive worldsamuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc., cochairdavid g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeley,cochairpaul baran, com21, inc.linda cohen, university of california at irvinejohn a. copeland, georgia institute of technologyalbert m. erisman, the boeing companydaniel t. ling, microsoft corporationrobert l. martin, lucent technologiesjoel moses, massachusetts institute of technologynorine e. noonan, u.s. environmental protection agency(formerly of the florida institute of technology)david a. patterson, university of california at berkeleystewart personick, drexel university (formerly of bellcore)robert sproull, sun microsystems laboratoriesmark weiser,* xerox palo alto research centerpatrick windham, windham consultingirving wladawskyberger, ibm corporationstaffjerry r. sheehan, senior program officer (study director)lisa l. shum, project assistant (through august 1998)d.c. drake, project assistant (after august 1999)*deceased.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairjames chiddix, time warner cablejohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstsusan l. graham, university of california at berkeleyjudith hempel, university of california at san franciscojeffrey m. jaffe, lucent technologies incorporatedanna karlin, university of washingtonbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, whizbang! labs, inc.donald norman, unext.comraymond ozzie, groove networksdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleycharles simonyi, microsoft corporationburton smith, tera computer companyterry smith, university of california at santa barbaralee sproull, new york universitystaffmarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistjerry r. sheehan, senior program officeralan s. inouye, program officerjon eisenberg, program officergail pritchard, program officerjanet d. briscoe, office managerdaniel llata, project assistantsuzanne ossa, project assistantmickelle rodgers rodriguez, senior project assistantd.c. drake, project assistantmargaret marsh, project assistantbrandye williams, office assistantmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viicommission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplicationspeter m. banks, veridian erim international, inc., cochairw. carl lineberger, university of colorado, cochairwilliam f. ballhaus, jr., lockheed martin corporationshirley chiang, university of california at davismarshall h. cohen, california institute of technologyronald g. douglas, texas a&m universitysamuel h. fuller, analog devices, inc.jerry p. gollub, haverford collegemichael f. goodchild, university of california at santa barbaramartha p. haynes, cornell universitywesley t. huntress, jr., carnegie institutioncarol m. jantzen, westinghouse savannah river companypaul g. kaminski, technovation, inc.kenneth h. keller, university of minnesotajohn r. kreick, sanders, a lockheed martin company (retired)marsha i. lester, university of pennsylvaniadusa m. mcduff, state university of new york at stony brookjanet norwood, former commissioner, u.s. bureau of laborstatisticsm. elisabeth pat…cornell, stanford universitynicholas p. samios, brookhaven national laboratoryrobert j. spinrad, xerox parc (retired)myron f. uman, acting executive directormaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this book is dedicated to the memory of mark weiser, whose untimelydeath in april 1999 prevented him from seeing the reportõs completion,but whose ideas, energy, and enthusiasm live on in its pages.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixthe united states enjoys an enviable position in the information age.the nationõs information technology (it) industry is thriving, and virtually every facet of society has been influenced by it. indeed, it is transforming a largeñand growingñportion of the nationõs economic andpersonal activities. as a result, itrelated issues are of interest to a widening circle of users, not just the vendors of it products and services. theseobvious trends do not, however, ensure continued progress in it and itsapplications because they do not indicate whether sufficient investmentsare being made in it research.as previous reports by the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council demonstrate,1 thenationõs leadership in the development and application of it derives inlarge part from an effective program of research that has been conductedand managed jointly by industry, universities, and government since theend of world war ii. todayõs it systems continue to draw on the knowledge base constructed by research conducted over the past five decades.preface1 the role of federal research funding in the innovation process has been examined intwo cstb reports: computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil. 1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative tosupport the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.;computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. national academy press,washington, d.c.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacecontinued leadership and innovation in itñand the continued flow ofsocietal benefits that derive from such leadershipñdepend on suitableinvestments in it research today and in the future. a critical examinationis needed to define the kinds of research investment needed for the earlytwentyfirst century, a time when it will play a much more prominentrole than it did in the second half of the twentieth century, when most oftodayõs it capabilities and expectations were built.the committee and its chargeto improve understanding of these issues and help guide futureendeavors, the national science foundation (nsf) asked cstb to conduct a study of it research that would examine ongoing trends in industry and academic research, determine the possible effects of those trendson the wellbeing of the nationõs it industry and the nation as a whole,and explore options for strengthening the research base, if necessary. ofparticular interest is support for research that advances our fundamentalunderstanding of capabilities, architectural designs, and principles thatcan have a pervasive influence on innovation throughout the it industry(called òfundamental researchó in this report) rather than advancing asingle product, process, or service (called òapplied researchó in this report).2 is the nation investing sufficient resources in the types of researchthat will ensure its capability to innovate in the future, or have researchinvestments become more narrowly targeted to nearterm efforts? representative issues include the following:3¥trends in it research and development spending. what trends in computing and communications industry research and development (r&d)spending can be documented, and at what level of detail? how hassupport for fundamental and more targeted research programs shifted?is the overall level of effort sufficient?¥the scope of it research. are the scope and scale of computing andcommunications r&d changing? is it research sufficiently broad to2 the federal government tends to classify research as either òbasicó or òapplied.ó thereis some correspondence between these terms and the terminology used in this report, asdescribed in greater detail in chapter 1.3 the original concept for the study also included attention to international issues, inparticular, the relative position of u.s. research efforts in it compared with those of othercountries. as the project unfolded, issues of international competitiveness became less of amotivational factor. the growth of the internet and u.s. it industries led to a perceptionthat the greatest threats to the nationõs it base were not external, but internalñthe lack offundamental understanding of largescale systems and their broad range of societal applications.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexiaddress new challenges resulting from the convergence of computing andcommunications? are government, universities, and industry well organized to conduct research across disciplinary boundaries?¥changes in privatesector support for research. how do major technology market trends, such as the growing emphasis on and pervasivenessof networkbased systems, affect private sector r&d investments? howdo computing and communications companies of different sizes and typesmake r&d decisions, and how have the decision processes and outcomesbeen changing?¥mechanisms for strengthening it research. what are some promisingapproaches to filling in gaps in the research portfolio and/or sustainingthe flow of r&d? is the government investment adequate? what types ofinstitutional approaches might be the focus of experimentation? whatfactors, structures, and mechanisms enable success in research collaborations?to conduct the study, cstb assembled a committee of 16 memberswith expertise in the it industry, it research, applications of it in government and industry, the organization of it research, and federal supportfor research. members were drawn from both industry and academia andbrought with them technical expertise in computing, communications,software, and devices. several committee members had experience withfederal research programs and backgrounds in economics and publicpolicy.the committee met five times between july 1997 and august 1998 toplan its course of action, solicit testimony from relevant experts, deliberateover its findings, and draft its final report. it continued its work byelectronic communications throughout 1999 and into the beginning of2000. during the course of the project, the committee heard from researchersand research managers in industry and universities and from directors ofgovernment agencies involved in funding computing research. it metwith engineers involved in the development and deployment of sophisticated information systems for clients in a range of fields. the committeealso gathered available statistics on it research investments in the publicand private sectors. these data have a number of limitations (as describedin this report) so they could not by themselves provide definitive insightinto trends in it research. accordingly, the committee supplemented thedata with information provided by its members and by those who briefedthe committee. this range of input was used to develop the conclusionsand recommendations contained in the report. the unusually long time ittook the committee to do its work reflects the challenges involved inintegrating diverse inputs and perspectives and in shaping a contributionto the rapidly evolving national debate about it and it research.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiprefaceduring the committeeõs working period, a number of importantdevelopments took place that were factored into the committeeõs conclusions. most notably, an advisory committee authorized by the high performance computing and communications act of 1991 and encouragedby earlier cstb reports was finally established in 1997, albeit in a formtailored to suit the times: the presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). the cstb study committee and pitac sharedone common member (irving wladawskyberger), but the work of thetwo committees proceeded independently, preserving the cstb committeeõs ability to offer its own perspective and comment on pitacõswork. the cstb committee reviewed the interim and final reports frompitac, as well as information on the clinton administrationõs information technology research initiative (originally constituted as informationtechnology for the twentyfirst century, or it2) and ongoing federalprograms, ensuring that the present report would be relevant to the evolving environment for federal support of it research. similarities betweenthe main conclusions of this report and the pitac report, which werearrived at independently, reflect a degree of consensus within the fieldregarding the research base for it.although it attempted to complement the work of pitac, the cstbcommittee differentiated itself by (1) concentrating on two specific areas thatit deemed to be of great importance to the nation and also insufficientlyaddressed by ongoing it research initiatives and (2) relating its substantiveresearch recommendations to an assessment of trends and supportivemechanisms for it research. rather than compete with pitac or duplicateits work, the committee monitored the reception given to pitacõs recommendations and attempted to address questions that were raised about theirrationale. the resulting report is a vehicle for maintaining the momentumimparted by pitacñwhich itself drew on the evolution of thinking andprograms throughout the 1990sñand for furthering the realignment of itresearch to which pitac and others have contributed. it draws on the workof other cstb committees, which have looked in great detail at a number ofspecific components of the it research arena and developed recommendations for it research (both its substance and process) related to those components. finally, the committee strove to present its conclusions in a formconsistent with its intention to target the report at a broad, highlevelaudience, including policymakers, research managers in government andindustry, corporate executives, and the research community.acknowledgmentsas with any project of this magnitude, thanks are due to the manyindividuals who contributed to the work of the committee. first, thanksmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexiiiare due to the members of the committee itself, who volunteered considerable time during the course of the study to attend meetings, engage inemail and telephone discussions, draft sections of the report, and respondto comments from external reviewers. although they shared a commoninterest in it research, committee members brought to the table a wideranging set of perspectives, concerns, and vocabularies that took time andeffort to blend into a common view. their overwhelming consensus onthe main themes of this report is a testament to the importance of thesethemes to the field.beyond the committee, numerous persons provided valuable information through briefings to committee meetings. these presenters includejohn best (ibm almaden research center); joel s. birnbaum (hewlettpackard co.); timothy f. bresnahan (stanford university); joseph k.carter (andersen consulting); vinton g. cerf (mci worldcom); ashokk. chandra (ibm almaden research center); melvyn ciment (then withnsf, now with the potomac institute); james a. desveaux (ucla); fredfath (boeing shared services group); jim gray (microsoft corporation);anoop gupta (microsoft corporation); peter hart (ricoh); juris hartmanis(then with the nsf, now at cornell university); john l. hennessy(stanford university); john jankowski (nsf); don e. kash (george masonuniversity); chuck larson (industrial research institute); edward a. lee(university of california at berkeley); david liddle (then with intervalresearch, now with u.s. venture partners); larry lynn (then director ofthe defense advanced research projects agency (darpa)); peter g.neumann (sri international); greg papadopoulos (sun microsystems);richard pledereder (sybase, inc.); robert w. rycroft (george mason university); david tennenhouse (then with darpa, now with intel corporation); and gilbert weigand (then with the department of energy).others also provided valuable assistance to the committee behind thescenes. raymond wolfe at the nsf provided detailed statistics on industry r&d spending and answered numerous questions about the data.elinor champion, andrew hildreth, nelson lim, janet shapiro, marystreitwieser, and ron taylor at the census bureau helped committeemembers and staff navigate the process of accessing detailed data oncorporate r&d spending. hoyle curtis provided information on researchexpenditures at hewlettpackard co. jed gordon, an undergraduate inthe science, technology, and society program at the massachusetts institute of technology, worked with the cstb during the summers of 1997,1998, and 1999, collecting and analyzing corporate expenditures on r&d,writing summaries of his investigations, and conducting a wide range ofrelated research and writing assignments. as she has done so many timesin the past, laura ost, a freelance editor, provided invaluable assistancein preparing the final manuscript under incredibly tight deadlines.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivprefacetheresa fisher and claudette baylorfleming of the national researchcouncilõs space studies board assisted with the final preparation of thisreport. marjory blumenthal, director of the cstb, provided critical commentary, advice, and writing in the final stages of the project to help bringthe project to a successful conclusion.finally, thanks are due to aubrey bush at the nsf, whose interestand vision gave impetus to the project and who provided ongoingencouragement during the course of the study. the committee and staffare thankful for his continued patience and support throughout the duration of this project.samuel h. fuller and david g. messerschmittcochairscommittee on information technologyresearch in a competitive worldmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvacknowledgment of reviewersthis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approvedby the nrcõs report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist theauthors and the nrc in making the published report as sound as possibleand to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the contents of thereview comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect theintegrity of the deliberative process. the committee wishes to thank thefollowing individuals for their participation in the review of this report:duane adams, carnegie mellon university,john armstrong, ibm corporation (retired),robert epstein, sybase, inc.,kenneth flamm, university of texas at austin,peter freeman, georgia institute of technology,robert frosch, harvard university,paul gray, massachusetts institute of technology,juris hartmanis, cornell university,john hopcroft, cornell university,john king, university of michigan,robert lucky, telcordia technologies,thomas malone, mit sloan school of management,linda sanford, ibm corporation,making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviacknowledgment of reviewersmarvin sirbu, carnegie mellon university, andkeith uncapher, corporation for national research initiatives.although the individuals listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests solely with the authoring committee and the nrc.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviicontentsexecutive summary11introduction18why focus on information technology?, 20what is information technology research? 23the many faces of information technology research, 23a classification of information technology research, 26the changing environment for information technologyresearch, 29changing industrial structure, 30expanding applications of information technology, 33implications for information technology research, 37implications for the research enterprise, 42organization of this report, 44bibliography, 44notes, 452resources for information technologyresearch48diversity in the research base, 49federal support for information technology research, 51trends in federal funding, 52sources of federal support, 56making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiicontentsstyles of federal support, 58federal information technology research programs, 60industry support for information technology research, 64trends in industrial support, 66disincentives to corporate investment in research anddevelopment, 70a countertrend in central research laboratories, 76gaps in the research base: systems integration, 79research by enduser organizations, 82venture capital support for innovation, 85university research, 87trends in support for university research, 88gaps in academic research, 90commercialization of university research, 91conclusion, 93references, 93notes, 953research on largescale systems99what is the problem with largescale systems? 100technical challenges associated with largescale systems, 107large scale, 108complexity, 108heterogeneity, 110flexibility, 111trustworthiness, 114distributed operation and administration, 118improving the design and implementation of largescalesystems, 118limitations of past research, 119toward an expanded systems research agenda, 124designing a research program, 126moving forward, 133references, 134notes, 1364research motivated by social applications ofinformation technology142social applications of information technology, 144research challenges in social applications of informationtechnology, 148group applications, 149knowledge management, 150making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxixcommerce, 151coordination and control, 152common challenges, 153systemspecific research, 154conducting research on social applications, 155a plausible approach, 155new research teams, 157mechanisms for social applications research, 160participation of enduser organizations, 160industry internships and sabbaticals, 166interdisciplinary research in academia, 168interdisciplinary research in industry, 179multidisciplinary research centers, 180embedding information technology research in otherdisciplines, 185expanding the scope of information technology research, 187bibliography, 187notes, 1905expanding the scale and scope of informationtechnology research195recommendations for government, 197recommendations for universities, 206recommendations for industry, 209conclusion, 211bibliography, 212notes, 212appendixesatwo research topics involving social applications217bbiographies of committee members224index233making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythe united statesñindeed much of the worldñis in the midst of agreat transformation wrought by information technology (it).fueled by continuing advances in computing and networking capabilities, it has moved out of the laboratories and back rooms of largeorganizations and now touches people everywhere. the indicators arealmost pedestrian: computing and communications devices have enteredthe mass market, and the language of the internet has become part of thebusiness and popular vernacular. these changes are often considered tobe the outcomes of technology developmentñthe second half of the familiarterm òresearch and developmentó (r&d)ñwhose role is to create specificit systems and products. what is sometimes overlooked is the criticalrole of the first half of the r&d process: the research that uncovers underlying principles, fundamental knowledge, and key concepts that fuel thedevelopment of numerous products, processes, and services. researchhas been an important enabler of it innovationsñfrom the graphical userinterface to the internet itselfñand it will continue to enable the morecapable systems of the future, the forms of which have yet to be determined. it has another role as well: in universities especially, it serves toeducate and to build a knowledgeable it workforce.the future of it, and of the society it increasingly powers, depends oncontinued investments in research. despite the incredible progress madeover the past five decades, it is anything but a mature, stable technology.revolutionary new technologies based on quantum physics, molecularchemistry, and biological processes are being examined as replacementsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2making it betterfor or complements to the siliconbased chips that perform basic computingfunctions. computing and communications capabilities are being embeddedin a widening range of existing and novel devices, presaging an age ofubiquitous or pervasive computing, when it is absorbed almost invisiblyinto the world around us. it systems are being deployed to supportcountless tasks, from monitoring the health of patients with chronic diseases to controlling the flight paths of aircraft to analyzing mountains ofdata for private corporations and government agencies. yet, the potentialof it will not be harnessed to meet societyõs needs automatically; it is notsimply a matter of producing it products and distributing them morewidely. research is needed to enable progress along all these fronts andto ensure that it systems can operate dependably and reliably, meetingthe needs of society and complementing the capabilities of their users.the question becomes, can the nationõs research establishment generatethe advances that will enable tomorrowõs it systems? are the right kindsof research being conducted? is there sufficient funding for the neededresearch? and are the existing structures for funding and conductingresearch appropriate to the challenges it researchers must address?this report by the committee on information technology research ina competitive world, convened by the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council, attemptsto answer these questions. it examines the overall funding levels for itresearch from industry and government, the scope of ongoing researchefforts, and the structures and mechanisms that support research. itadvances the argument that the nationõs needs for it systems havechanged in ways that demand a much broader agenda for such researchñone that includes more explicit support for research on largescale itsystems and the social applications they support (see box es.1)ñandmechanisms for funding and conducting research that are better attunedto this broadened agenda. the report was written with an awareness ofthe legacy of reports about it research and recognizes that some of theresearch it covers is not new. what distinguishes this report is that itconsiders the big picture emerging from research programs that havebeen cataloged and recommended in other reports and uses this perspective to assess the sufficiency of todayõs research efforts. the reportrecognizes that longstanding problems cannot be solved instantly, and itacknowledges the institutional, cultural, and resource factors that willmake the recommended changes difficult to achieve. but after lengthyanalysis and deliberation, the authoring committee concluded, with conviction, that a reorientation of it research is vital to the wellbeing of thetechnology base.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3toward an expanded research agendaoverall, the nationõs it research base appears to be thriving. federalfunding for it research rose steadily throughout the 1990s, from approximately $1.4 billion in 1990 to $2.0 billion in 1998 (the most recent year forwhich consistent data are available),1 and the clinton administrationõsbudget for fiscal year 2001 proposes to increase funding for it r&d by$1 billion above 1999 levels. industrial support for r&d also appears tobe increasing dramatically. the combined r&d expenditures of companies in the six industry sectors most closely associated with it totaled$52 billion in 1998, of which approximately $14 billion was classified asresearch.2 these figures compare to $39 billion and $8.5 billion, respectively, in 1995.3 over the past decade, a number of large it firms, including microsoft corporation, motorola, inc., and intel corporation, havebox es.1defining largescale systems andsocial applications of itlargescale systems are it systems that contain many (thousands, millions,billions, or trillions or more) interacting hardware and software components. theytend to be heterogeneousñin that they are composed of many different types ofcomponentsñand highly complex because the interactions among the components are numerous, varied, and complicated. they also tend to span multipleorganizations (or elements of organizations) and have changing configurations.over time, the largest it systems have become ever larger and more complex,and, at any given point in time, systems of a certain scale and complexity are notfeasible or economical to design with existing methodologies.social applications of it serve groups of people in shared activities. the moststraightforward of these applications improve the effectiveness of geographicallydispersed groups of people who are collaborating on some task in a shared context. more sophisticated applications may support the operations of a business orthe functioning of an entire economy; systems for ecommerce are an example.characteristic of social applications of it is the embedding of it into a large organizational or social system to form a òsociotechnicaló system in which people andtechnology interact to achieve a common purposeñeven if that purpose is notobviously social, such as efficient operation of a manufacturing line (which is aconjunction of technological automation and human workers) or rapid and decisivebattlefield management (which is a conjunction of commandandcontrol technology and the judgment and expertise of commanders). social applications ofitñespecially those supporting organizational and societal missionsñtend to belargescale and complex, mixing technical and nontechnical design and operational elements and involving oftendifficult social and policy issues such as thoserelated to privacy and access.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4making it betterestablished central research laboratories, signaling their increased commitment to longterm research.nevertheless, current investments in it research are insufficient tosupport an important expansion of the it research agenda. work needsto continue in ongoing areas of research, but societyõs growing reliance onit also demands greater attention to problems associated with the design,deployment, and operation of largescale systems and social applications.the proliferation of the internet has greatly accelerated the deployment oflargescale it systems to serve a variety of personal, social, and businessneeds. yet largescale system efforts in both government and industryare often characterized by cost overruns, development failures, and operational problems, ranging from limited adaptability to breakdowns ofvarious types.4 as more and more people, activities, and organizationscome to depend on such systemsñthat is, as the systems become criticalsocietal infrastructuresñtheir impact, and the cost to society of their failure, grow. but the necessity of addressing systems problems is only oneof the reasons for renewing and reorienting the focus on fundamentalresearch. there is also the promise of much greater societal good from itsystems, a promise hinted at by the systems that have already been successfully deployed and used and by the connectedness achieved throughthe internet and the exuberant experimentation with new types of businesses, services, and social and nonprofit activity it has fostered. this is afuture that can be attained only with significant improvements in thescience and technology base.research is needed on the science and engineering issues associatedwith largescale systems, to devise ways to make it systems betterñmorescalable, flexible, predictable, and reliable (see box es.2). work is alsoneeded to better understand the technical and nontechnical issues thatarise when such systems are integrated into social applications. socialapplications of it are expected to motivate technical research that willdevelop new capabilities to satisfy a growing set of societal needs, andthey will demand that technological needs be considered in the social andorganizational context in which they will be applied. such work is by itsvery nature interdisciplinary, demanding insight into both the technicalcapabilities of it and the ways in which people engage or are affected byit systems in a variety of operational settings. it requires computerscience and engineering, but it also requires economists and other socialscientists and businessschool researchers who understand how it systems are selected, used, and integrated into organizational processes (seebox es.3). such work also benefits from practical perspectivesñtheknowledge of people working in systems development and enduserorganizationsñto ground thinking about systems in the contexts of theirdevelopment, deployment, and use.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5box es.2what makes largescale it systems so difficult to design,build, and operate?¥large number of componentsñlarge it systems can contain thousands ofprocessors and hundreds of thousands or even millions of lines of software.research is needed to understand how to build systems that can scale gracefullyand add capacity as needed without needing overall redesign.¥deep interactions among componentsñcomponents of large it systemsinteract with each other in a variety of ways, some of which may not have beenanticipated by the designers. a single misbehaving router can flood the internetwith traffic that will bring down thousands of local hosts and cause traffic to bererouted worldwide. research is needed to provide better analytical techniquesfor modeling system performance and building systems with more comprehensiblestructures.¥unintended and unanticipated consequences of changes or additions to thesystemsñfor instance, upgrading the memory in a personal computer can lead totiming mismatches that cause memory failures that in turn lead to loss of application data, even if the memory chips are themselves perfectly functional. in thiscase it is the system that fails to work, even though all its components work.research is needed to uncover techniques or architectures that provide greaterflexibility.¥emergent behaviorsñsystems sometimes exhibit surprising behaviors thatarise from unanticipated interactions among components. these behaviors areòemergentó in that they are unspecified by any individual component and are theunanticipated product of the system as a whole. research is needed to find techniques for better analyzing system behavior.¥constantly changing needs of the usersñmany large systems are longlived, meaning they must be modified while preserving some of their own capabilitiesand within the constraints of the performance of individual components. development cycles can be so long that requirements change before systems are evendeployed. research is needed to develop ways of building extendable systemsthat can accommodate change.¥independently designed componentsñtodayõs largescale it systems arenot typically designed from the top down but often are assembled from offtheshelf components. these components have not been customized to work in thelarger system and must rely on standard interfaces and, often, customized software. modern it systems are essentially assembled in each home or office. as aresult, they are notoriously difficult to maintain and subject to frequent, unexplainedbreakdowns. research could help to develop architectural approaches that canaccommodate heterogeneity and to extend the principles of modularity to largerscales than have been attempted to date.¥large numbers of individuals involved in design and operationñwhenbrowsing the internet, a user may interact with thousands of computers and hundreds of different software components, all designed by independent teams ofdesigners. for that browsing to work, all of these designs must work sufficientlycontinuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6making it betterwell without anyone doing the integrating or anyone handling complaints if they failto work as a whole. research is needed on ways to prevent failures in one part ofa system from affecting the system as a whole in ways evident to a user.¥large numbers of usersñlarge it systems must be able to support largenumbers of users, and they must be able to scale up gracefully as the number ofusers grows. this is seldom the case today. changes in scale lead to new,unforeseen problems that no company could have anticipated given the state ofthe art in understanding these systems. research is needed to find ways ofextending the scale of systems easily, without taking them out of operation.¥large number of independent requirementsñfor instance, a typical computer is built and manufactured without any knowledge of whether it will be usedfor word processing, scientific simulation, or game playing. it must be good at allof them. many largescale systems must also serve a variety of functions. newapproaches may be able to provide universal computing capabilities without penalties in performance compared with dedicated devices.¥embedding within a larger social and business system contextñlargescale it systems tend to form just one element of larger sociotechnical systemsthat consist of people, organizations, and other technologies. the most effectiveapplications of it in such systems are not those that merely automate existingprocesses, but those that enable a transformation of processes that cannot becomprehended without a significant understanding of social and organizational dynamics. research is needed on the relationships among organizations, people,and technology.¥usabilityñengineering that addresses the human factors and social factorsof it systems is paramount. as it systems serve more users and are used toperform a larger number of functions, they must be made easier to use. they willincreasingly be operated by novices rather than experts in it design and operation. research is needed to develop techniques for making systems easier to use.box es.2 continuedneither largescale systems nor social applications of it are adequately addressed by the it research community today. most it researchis directed toward the components of it systems: the microprocessors,computers, and networking technologies that are assembled into largesystems, as well as the software that enables the components to worktogether.5 this research nurtures the essence of it, and continued workis needed in all these areas. but component research needs to be viewedas part of a much larger portfolio, in which it is complemented by researchaimed directly at improving largescale systems and the social applications of it. the last of these includes some work (such as computersupported cooperative work and humancomputer interaction) traditionally viewed as within the purview of computer science. research in allmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7box es.3research on the social applications of information technologyresearch on the social applications of information technology (it) combineswork in technical disciplines, such as computing and communications, with researchin the social sciences to understand how people, organizations, and it systemscan be combined to most effectively perform a set of tasks. such research canaddress a range of issues related to it systems, as demonstrated by the examplesbelow (more detailed discussion is contained in chapters 3 and 4):¥novel activities and shifts in organizational, economic, and social structuresñwhat will people do (at work, in school, at play, in government, and so on) whencomputers can see and hear better than they can? how will activities and organizations change when robotic technology is widespread and cheap? how willindividual and organizational activities change when surveillance via it becomeseffectively universal? new technologies will affect all kinds of people in manyways, and they hold particular promise for those with special situations or capabilities, because they will give them broader access to social and economic activities.¥electronic communitiesñhow can it systems be best designed to facilitatethe communication and coordination of groups of people working toward a common goal? progress requires an understanding of the sociology and dynamics ofgroups of users, as well as of the tasks they wish to perform. psychologists andsociologists could offer insight for the conceptualization and refinement of thesesocial applications, and technologists could mold their technological aspects.¥electronic commerceñhow can buyers and sellers be best brought togetherto conduct business transactions on the internet? what kinds of security technologies will provide adequate assurances of the identities of both parties and protectthe confidentiality of their transactions without imposing unnecessary burdens oneither? how will electronic commerce affect the competitive advantage of firms,their business strategies, and the structure of industries (e.g., their horizontal andvertical linkages)? such work requires the insight of economists, organizationaltheorists, business strategists, and psychologists who understand consumerbehavior, as well as of technologists.¥critical infrastructuresñhow can it be better embedded into the nationõstransportation, energy, financial, telecommunications, and other infrastructures tomake them more efficient and effective without making them less reliable or moreprone to human error? for example, how can an air traffic control system bedesigned to provide controllers with sufficient information to make critical decisionswithout overwhelming them with data? such work requires the insight of cognitivepsychologists and experts in air traffic control, as well as of technologists.¥complexityñhow can the benefits of it be brought to the citizenry withoutthe exploding complexity characteristic of professional uses of it? although networks, computers, and software can be assembled and configured by professionalsto support the missioncritical computing needs of large organizations, the techniques that make this possible are inadequate for information appliances designedfor the home, car, or individual. research is needed to simplify and automatesystem configuration, change, and repair. such research will require insight fromtechnologists, cognitive psychologists, and those skilled in user interface design.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8making it betterthree areasñcomponents, systems, and social applicationsñwill make itsystems better able to meet societyõs needs, just as in the medical domainwork is needed in biology, physiology, clinical medicine, and epidemiology to make the nationõs population healthier.research on largescale systems and the social applications of it willrequire new modes of funding and performing research that can bringtogether a broad set of it researchers, end users, system integrators, andsocial scientists to enhance the understanding of operational systems.research in these areas demands that researchers have access to operational largescale systems or to testbeds that can mimic the performanceof much larger systems. it requires additional funding to support sizableprojects that allow multiple investigators to experiment with large itsystems and develop suitable testbeds and simulations for evaluatingnew approaches and that engage an unusually diverse range of parties.research by individual investigators will not, by itself, suffice to makeprogress on these difficult problems.today, most it research fails to incorporate the diversity of perspectives needed to ensure advances on largescale systems and social applications. within industry, it is conducted largely by vendors of it components: companies like ibm, microsoft, and lucent technologies. few ofthe companies that are engaged in providing it services, in integratinglargescale systems (e.g., andersen consulting, eds, or lockheed martin),or in developing enterprise software (e.g., oracle, sap, peoplesoft) havesignificant research programs.6 nor do enduser organizations (e.g., usersin banking, commerce, education, health care, and manufacturing) tendto support research on it, despite their increasing reliance on it and theirstake in the way it systems are molded. likewise, there is little academicresearch on largescale systems or social applications. within the it sector,systems research has tended to focus on improving the performance andlowering the costs of it systems rather than on improving their reliability,flexibility, or scalability (although systems research is slated to receivemore attention in new funding programs). social applications present aneven greater opportunity and have the potential to leverage research inhumancomputer interaction, using it to better understand how it cansupport the work of individuals, groups, and organizations. success inthis area hinges on interdisciplinary research, which is already being carried out on a small scale.one reason more work has not been undertaken in these areas is lackof sufficient funding. more fundamentally, the problems evident todaydid not reach critical proportions until recently. there has been no crisisto motivate the research community or to compel a broader set of companies to fund research, no compelling set of visions to inspire broadbasedinterest. from a practical perspective, conducting the types of researchmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9advocated here is difficult. significant cultural gaps exist between researchers in different disciplines and between it researchers and the endusers of it systems. these groups tend to have different sets of motivations, interests, and even perspectives on what constitutes research.7 butif it is to meet societyõs growing needs, then the challenges of collaborative research will have to be overcome. luckily, a few seeds have beenplanted that, if nurtured, may sprout and blossom in ways that can support and encourage a larger, more diverse range of efforts. government,industry, and universities need to ensure that this happens. this reportprovides guidance that they can follow in doing so.recommendationsnow is the time to adjust and expand the it research portfolio, bothto overcome problems that have become urgent and to better meetsocietyõs needs. doing so will require efforts on many fronts. increasedfunding will be needed to extend the scope of it research more fully intolargescale systems and social applications. at the same time, existingmechanisms for funding it research will have to be strengthened to ensurethat fundamental research continues to be supported in a way that willprove most productive for the it industry and, ultimately, the nation.new mechanisms will be needed to fund and conduct research on largescale systems and social applications of itñthe nature of which differsfrom that of traditional components research. in many cases, mechanisms for research on largescale systems and social applications can buildon existing programs and initiatives, expanding their scale and scope.changes like these have been suggested before. the lessthansatisfactory outlook today simply reflects insufficient followthrough onthose earlier suggestions. all of the relevant recommendations made bycstb committees, past and present, draw on the expertise of the itresearch community and other relevant experts; engaging the communityeffectively requires listening to its advice. the committeeõs recommendations in each of these areas are presented below, organized according tothe group that would carry them out, and elaborated on in chapter 5.recommendations for governmentrecommendation 1. the federal government should continue toboost funding levels for fundamental information technologyresearch, commensurate with the growing scope of researchchallenges.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10making it betterthe first step toward strengthening the nationõs it research base is toensure that sufficient investments are made in it research. increasedfederal funding for such research is necessary to support continuedgrowth in existing componentoriented research (e.g., microprocessors,computing systems, networking equipment, and software) while expanding the research base to look at the problems of largescale systems andthe social applications of it, to help the nation harness itõs potential for arange of public and privatesector missions. although it is not possible tospecify precisely how much additional funding is needed, the committeebelieves that the increases proposed in recent years by the presidentõsinformation technology advisory committee ($1 billion over 5 years)and the clinton administration ($1 billion between 1999 and 2001) are theright order of magnitude and would allow the it research community togrow larger while providing adequate resources for each investigator.funding increases need to be aimed primarily at fundamental research,not applied research. not only is such work important to the longtermevolution of the field, but it would also shift some of the responsibilityfrom industry, which faces a number of strong disincentives to investment in fundamental, longterm research. the results of such work cannot be anticipated and their most important implications often lie far inthe future, even if some benefits can be gained more immediately. asexperience demonstratesñand economic theory supportsñcompaniesthat make fundamental breakthroughs often have difficulty capturing thebenefits of these advances while preventing competitors from doing so.hence, they tend to underinvest in such research.8 only the largest, mostprofitable, and most dominant it firms tend to be able to invest in longterm research (in part because they are better positioned to capture itsbenefits), and even this source of funding has been in short supply.increasing competition, which can erode the market share of leading firmsin an industry, and the need to introduce new products and servicesrapidly into the marketplace have forced even the most forwardthinkingcompanies to shift more of their resources to applied research efforts. thefederal government is much better able to provide sustained funding forresearch with longterm potential, but it, too, has increased funding forapplied research more quickly than funding for fundamental research inrecent years. it researchers corroborate this trend, noting that federallyfunded projects have become more focused on nearterm objectives anddemonstrations of capabilityñprecisely the same types of things thatindustry is likely to doñrather than on fundamental advances in thetechnology. as shown in earlier cstb reports, federal funding for fundamental research laid the groundwork for many of todayõs common commercial innovations, from graphical user interfaces and relational databases to computer graphics and even the internet itself (cstb, 1995, 1999).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11the need for it has not diminished. although the it industry has grownand is highly profitable, the barriers to investments in longterm researchpersist, and the government continues to have a role to play.recommendation 2. the national science foundation and thedefense advanced research projects agency should establish significant programs of fundamental research in largescale informationtechnology systems.the national science foundation (nsf) and the defense advancedresearch projects agency (darpa) each have a number of efforts underway that address aspects of largescale systems. as yet, these efforts havenot been integrated into a larger programmatic thrust that attempts togain a more fundamental understanding of largescale systems (asopposed to pursuing development of specific applications). the nsf anddarpa should exercise the leadership they have demonstrated in thepast and create more comprehensive, cohesive programs in this area thatwould allow a vibrant research community to coalesce around the problems of largescale systems. the programs run by the organizationsshould complement one another and should together have the followingcharacteristics:¥support both theoretical and experimental work;¥offer awards in a variety of sizes (small, medium, and large) tosupport individual investigators, small teams of researchers, and largercollaborations;¥investigate a range of approaches to largescale systems problems,such as improved software design methodologies, system architecture,reusable code, and biological and economic models (see chapter 3);¥attempt to address the full scope of largescale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, and predictability;9 and¥give academic researchers some form of access to largescale systems for studying and demonstrating new approaches.given the wide circle of agencies interested in and involved with itresearch and the even wider circle coming to depend on largescale itsystems, the nsf and darpa should attempt to involve in their researchother federal agencies, such as the department of health and humanservices and the federal aviation administration, that operate largescaleit systems and would benefit from advances in their design. such involvement could provide a means for researchers to gain access to operationalsystems for analytical and experimental purposes.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12making it betterrecommendation 3. federal agencies should increase support forinterdisciplinary work on social applications of information technology that draws on the expertise of researchers from it and otherdisciplines and includes end users of it systems.research on the social applications of it demands the perspectives ofit researchers, researchers in other academic disciplines, and end users ofit systems who are familiar with the particular challenges faced and theviability of different solutions. a number of programs are in place, suchas the digital government program, the digital libraries initiative, andthe nsfõs computing and social system program, that combine theseperspectives and apply them to problem areas, but an initiative is neededthat has a larger scale and scope and that possesses the following characteristics:¥support provided through a variety of research mechanisms, including singleinvestigator grants, small teams of researchers, and largerresearch centers that bring together researchers from several disciplinesand different industries for an extended period of interaction;¥explicit participation in the research process of end users and systems integrators who understand the problems faced in using largescalesystems and social applications;¥participation of the federal agencies that are major users of it systems and that invest considerable resources in the development of itsystems (such as the internal revenue service, the social security administration, and the federal aviation administration), not just the traditional funders of it research;¥access to large systems or testbeds so that researchers can gaininsight into operational problems and appreciate the relationships between an it system and the larger social or organizational context inwhich it operates; and¥management and oversight by traditional funders of it research toensure that the work retains a research focus and does not become linkedtoo closely to development efforts at particular enduser organizations.the nsf has already allocated some funding for it research centersfocusing on social, economic, and workforce issues associated with it.these centers could make valuable contributions to research and education in this area if they incorporate enduser perspectives as well as theperspectives of disciplines such as business, law, economics, and othersocial sciences. they should also be sure to complement their attention tothe effects of it on society and the economy with parallel efforts to developthe scientific and engineering knowledge needed to improve the designmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13of it systems. additional effort will be needed to review proposals forinterdisciplinary work related to it and for assuring its quality. qualitycontrols are especially important in fields with growing research budgets,and interdisciplinary research can be especially difficult to evaluate.review and evaluation processes will need to reflect the full range ofperspectives involved in the research.recommendation 4. the bureau of the census should work withthe national science foundation to develop more effective procedures for classifying data on federal and industry investments ininformation technology r&d that better account for the dynamicnature of the industry.before they can make better decisions on it research, policy makersneed better data on current expenditures by the federal government andindustry on such research. existing data fluctuate from year to year,largely because of reclassifications of companies among sectors. thesereclassifications occur as a result of changes within the individual companies (e.g., new lines of business, mergers, outsourcing of production) aswell as the rules for the classification process itself, which are based onthe composition of the payrolls of individual firms. the result is inconsistent data that make it difficult to discern trends, even very general ones.the nsf and the census bureau need to develop ways to collect anddisseminate moreconsistent data describing past, present, and futureinvestments in it r&d. additional efforts will be needed to developmore consistent timeseries data for the it industries in particular and todevelop robust procedures for classifying firms within industrial sectors.recommendations for universitiesrecommendation 5. universities should take steps to increase theability of faculty members and students to participate in interdisciplinary research related to information technology and researchon largescale systems.universities have the potential to make significant strides in largescale systems and social applications research because they have all thekey ingredients: researchers in a broad range of related areas, from computer science and electrical engineering to business, law, economics, andother social sciences. they are also able to complement this research witheducational initiatives that can teach students about largescale systemsand social applications, thereby helping create a future workforce capableof researching, developing, and using them. for the most part, universitiesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14making it betterare not currently set up properly to make progress on these issues. withsome degree of change, they could contribute to the research base at thesame time as they educate students and imbue them with an appreciationof the issues. because getting diverse researchers to work together hasnever been easy, incentives must be provided and barriers to collaboration removed. the availability of funding for work on largescale itsystems and the social applications of it would motivate academicresearchers to pursue the sorts of interdisciplinary research needed tomake progress in these fields, but additional efforts will also be needed tocreate a more suitable environment for interdisciplinary research and onethat ensures the quality of such research.the first step should be to ensure that hiring, reviewing, and tenureprocesses are aligned to suit the interdisciplinary nature of the researchthat this report recommends and to ensure its quality. this can be accomplished through a variety of mechanisms, including the creation of interdisciplinary schools or departments that have their own hiring and promotion processes10 or the establishment of guidelines for evaluating facultyin traditional academic departments who pursue interdisciplinary work.the sharing of information should be encouraged between universityresearchers (both faculty and students) and their counterparts in industry,especially in companies that urgently need to resolve problems of largescale systems and social applications of it. the purpose of industryinvolvement should not be to facilitate the commercialization of universityresearch (although this is a welcome outcome) but to provide researcherswith the knowledge they will need to make progress in largescale systems and social applications. in particular, universities should work withindustry to establish more internship opportunities for students andsabbatical opportunities for faculty, especially in enduser organizationsthat do not have established programs aimed at technologists. althoughsuch activities may take students away from their faculty supervisors fora time, the committee believes the experience will ultimately prove valuable to the work that these students perform at the university. universitiesshould also bring industry leaders into the classroom and the researchlab.recommendation 6. senior faculty members should take the lead inpioneering research on largescale systems and social applicationsof information technology.even though they may have innovative ideas, junior faculty membersare at a distinct disadvantage when they set off in new research directionsthat are not considered part of the intellectual core of their disciplines.concerns about tenure can limit their willingness to work on topics suchmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary15as largescale systems and social applications of it that do not fall neatlywithin established research areas. senior faculty members, by contrast,sometimes seek a refreshing change in emphasis. they should be encouraged to establish interdisciplinary research projects, to attract fundingand people to them, and to articulate a vision for such work. theirinvolvement would help legitimize these areas of inquiry and provide anumbrella under which junior faculty could join them, bringing new ideasand insights.recommendations for industryrecommendation 7. organizations that are significant end users ofinformation technology systems should actively seek opportunitiesto engage in it research.large enduser organizations in industries ranging from banking tohealth care to manufacturing face significant challenges in designing,developing, and operating the it systems on which they rely and in whosedevelopment they invest large sums of money. ideally, they too shouldsupport it research that would address problems of largescale systemsand the social applications of it. these organizations could benefit handsomely from research in these areas. they also have knowledge of theapplication and its operation (as well as its failures) that will prove vital inthese areas of research. involving end users in it research will not beeasy, because few have much interest in research, let alone experience inconducting or managing it, and the benefits of such engagement may notbe immediately apparent to them. nevertheless, the time is right to overcome these obstacles and experiment with ways to bring end users moreeffectively into the research process. as a first step, enduser representatives should be engaged to serve on advisory boards to it research programs, labs, or academic departments. over time, they should becomemore directly involved, and some enduser organizations could even fundresearch for groups or centers whose capabilities match their needs. recentresearch support by leading financial services firms shows it is possible tomeaningfully engage enduser organizations, albeit on a limited scale.recommendation 8. information technology companies with established r&d organizations should develop mechanisms for engaging end users more actively in the research process.to help end users become better engaged in it research, it companies with a tradition of research (as opposed to development) shoulddevelop mechanisms for involving end users more extensively in intermaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16making it betterdisciplinary and largescale systemsrelated work. such it companieshave track records in research and an interest in better understandingcustomer needs. companies such as ibm corporation and microsoftcorporation have demonstrated the utility of working more closely withcustomers and researchers from different disciplines. other companiesmay be able to build on these examples and develop other mechanismsfor achieving similar results.a final wordthe committee believes that these recommendations will strengthenthe nationõs it research base sufficiently to help meet societyõs growingneed for, and dependence on, it systems. by strengthening the existingmechanisms for it research and experimenting with new mechanisms toexpand it research into largescale systems and social applications of it,the nation will be able to ease its transition to an information economy. astrong research base will provide the industry and the nation with theknowledge resources needed to harness it for the common good.referencesarrow, kenneth. 1962. òeconomic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,óin richard nelson, ed., the rate and direction of innovative activity. princeton university press, princeton, n.j.barr, avron, and shirley tessler. 1998. òhow will the software talent shortage end?óamerican programmer 11(1). available online at <http://www.cutter.com/itjournal/itjtoc.htm#jan98>.campbell, donald t. 1969. òethnocentrism of disciplines and the fishscale model ofomniscience,ó pp. 328348 in muzafer sherif and carolyn w. sherif, eds., interdisciplinary relationships in the social sciences. aldine publishing co., chicago.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to supportthe nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.gibbs, w.w. 1994. òsoftwareõs chronic crisis,ó scientific american (september):8695.johnson, jim. 1999. òturning chaos into success,ó software magazine, december. available online at <http://www.softwaremag.com/archives/1999dec/success.html>.jones, c. 1996. applied software measurement. mcgrawhill, new york.nelson, richard. 1959. òthe simple economics of basic research,ó journal of politicaleconomy 67(2):297306.standish group international, inc. 1995. the chaos. available online at <http://www.standishgroup.com/chaos.html>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary17notes1.these figures represent combined federal obligations for research (basic and applied)in computer science and electrical engineering, the two academic disciplines most closelyassociated with information technology (it). some work in electrical engineering, such asresearch on power systems, is not applicable to it, and some work in other disciplines isapplicable but is not captured in these statistics.2.these sectors, as defined by the standard industrial classification (sic) system, aresic 357, office, computing, and accounting machines; sic 366, communications equipment;sic 367, electronic components (including semiconductor devices); sic 48, communications(services); sic 504, professional and commercial equipment and supplies; and sic 737,computer and data processing services (including prepackaged software, custom programming, systems integration, and other services).3.as described in greater detail in chapter 2, federal statistics on it industriesõ r&dinvestment are not compiled in a consistent manner from year to year because of the frequent reclassification of firms from one it sector to another as well as into and out of the itindustries. the aggregate figures used in this report account for reclassifications among itsectors but not into or out of the it industry.4.it is estimated that between 70 and 80 percent of all major system developmentefforts are never completed, are late, or overrun cost projections by a wide margin. estimates of failure rates in largescale system development efforts are contained in severalstudies. see johnson (1999), standish group (1995), gibbs (1994), jones (1996), and barrand tessler (1998).5.this definition of a component is much broader than the definition typically used inthe research community.6.the most notable exception to this general rule is ibm, which derives a significantportion of its revenues from itrelated services and systems work and which maintains asubstantial research program. about onequarter of the work conducted by ibm researchsupports its systems and services businesses.7.a discussion of the longstanding challenges inherent in interdisciplinary work inthe social sciences can be found in campbell (1969).8.most notably, xerox failed to capture much of the benefit of its pioneering work inpersonal computing. ibmõs work in relational databases and reducedinstructionset computing seeded not only its own product development efforts but also those of numerouscompetitors. economics provides a theoretical verification of this phenomenon. see cstb(1999), nelson (1959), and arrow (1962).9.see chapter 3 for a more indepth discussion of each of these topics.10.in recent years, a number of universities have created interdisciplinary schools thatexamine issues at the intersection of it, business, and the social sciences. examples includethe school of information management and systems at the university of california atberkeley and the school of information at the university of michigan. carnegie mellonuniversity and the massachusetts institute of technology also have a number of interdisciplinary departments and divisions in this general area. chapter 4 contains a morecomplete list of such programs.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.181introductionòmay your wildest dreams come trueó is an old adage broughtto mind by the phenomenal advances in computing andcommunications technology and their deployment in awidening array of business, government, commercial, and social applications. the underlying industrial base for computing and communicationsñthe information technology (it) industriesñhas grown rapidly,creating jobs, improving the standard of living, and fueling the nationõstransition to an information economy. since 1992, firms that producecomputers, semiconductors, software, and communications equipmentand provide computing and communications services have contributedonethird of the nationõs economic growth, and in 1998 they employed 5.2million workers at wages 85 percent higher than the privatesector average (u.s. department of commerce, 2000). companies throughout theeconomy are using it to compete in global markets, and it promises totransform the way people work, play, live, and learn. the nationõs dependence on the vitality of the technology base for it was underscored in thelate 1990s by such voices as the chairman of the federal reserve, thedirector of the national science foundation, and the president of theunited states. this technology base and tomorrowõs information economydepend, in turn, on continued research on it.the role of research in driving innovation and social transformationsis often difficult to see. the seemingly endless introduction of new goodsand services by entrepreneurs and established corporations obscures thefundamental science and engineering bases underlying innovation. itmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19also creates the appearance of a selfsustaining process. if businesses aregrowing and new products are proliferating, why should national leadersbe concerned about it research? this question remains central to contemporary political debate about federal budgets for it research, despiterecent increases in funding. the difficulty of explaining and justifyingfederal it research spending influenced the evolution and eventual transformation of the first large federal it research initiative, the high performance computing and communications initiative (hpcci);1 it enlargedthe scope of the presidentõs information technology advisory committee(pitac) and the associated federal proposals for new and larger researchprograms, notably the 1999 information technology for the twentyfirstcentury (it2) initiative, and shaped the reports that came out of them;2and it continues to color the annual budget debates about the level anddistribution of it research funds.an enduring lack of understanding of the nature of both it researchand industrial innovation in it makes debates about federal programs inthis area unusually contentious. experts from industry and academia,individually and as participants in groups such as computer science andtelecommunications board (cstb) committees, pitac, and professionalorganizations, have asserted publicly that both government and industryare underinvesting in it researchñespecially fundamental research. callsfor increased funding have met with skepticism from those who arecritical of the rationale for increased funding, uncertain about the natureof it research (which is apparently less comprehensible than, for example,classical scientific research) and who question why it should be expensive(a concern that reflects a limited understanding of software research).unless these criticisms and questions can be answered, technologicalprogress may be stymied by a lack of needed research funding.the nationõs increasing reliance on it demands a reexamination ofthe it research base. both the substance of the research and how it iscarried out are at issue. as for substance, the potential is mounting forproblems to arise and for opportunities to be lost as a result of deficienciesin the technologies already being distributed quickly and widely into theeconomy. society is becoming dependent on information systems thatare fragile, and companies striving to be competitive in the short termsacrifice opportunities for it innovations that depend on sustained orlessconstrained exploration, raising questions about longterm prospects.research is needed to address a host of new problemsñmany arising as aconsequence of interactions among a large and growing number of individual componentsñas well as longstanding problems that are becoming more prominent and, once a technology is in use, more difficult tomanage.procedurally, the situation challenges the confederation of governmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20making it betterment, industry, and academia that drives it research. the giveandtakeamong these parties was healthy for several decades, as is clear fromtodayõs commercial and societal successes with it, but recently it hasbecome weaker. in addition, industry has faced increasing pressures tostreamline research and development (r&d) as a result of waves of structural change in the it industries in the 1980s and 1990s.3 these conditions discourage investments of time and money in research, insteadfavoring the creative exploitation of existing science and technology inthe guise of new products. todayõs it industry is thriving because it isleveraging a rich base of historical investments in research (see box 1.1);emblematic of the practice is the nowfamiliar story of the internetõs rootsin governmentsponsored academic research (see cstb, 1999a). but where,today, is the base for a thriving industry tomorrow?this report examines the approaches to sustaining it research, including institutional support mechanisms for the nationõs it research base.the definition of it research is broad, encompassing work that advancescomputing and communications technologies as well as systems that combine those technologies to serve a range of social needs. the report doesnot attempt to develop a detailed research agenda (that information canbe gleaned from other cstb reports and assorted government documents). rather, it addresses four main topics:1.levels of funding for it researchñare government and industrialsponsors providing sufficient funding for research to keep up with thefast pace of innovation and the explosive growth of the it marketplace?2.the scope of it researchñis the scope broad enough to address therange of challenges to it systems as they are increasingly integrated intobusiness, societal, and government applications?3.the constituencies supporting it researchñis the base of organizations supporting it research broad enough to ensure sufficient financialand intellectual contributions needed to advance the field?4.mechanisms for supporting researchñare existing structures forfunding and conducting it research adequate to address future challenges? are new mechanisms needed?this report offers recommendations in each of these areas, with theobjective of ensuring that the investments in it research will propel thenation through the information age.why focus on information technology?few in the it industryñor elsewhereñforesaw the dramatic progressin it that has occurred over the last few decades. fewer still can read amaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21box 1.1research and innovation in it: a historical perspectivemany of the information technologies commonly used today have roots inresearch conducted decades ago. that research was often supported by a combination of government agencies and private firms. federal funding for computingresearch began in earnest immediately following world war ii and supported thedevelopment of many of the nationõs earliest computers. beginning in the late1960s, federal support for longterm fundamental research created a growingknowledge base for exploitation by innovators and entrepreneurs. industry alsofunded such research and brought the new technologies to the marketplace. thefollowing list presents some of the betterknown examples of current technologiesthat leverage historical investments in research:¥the internetñthe seeds of todayõs internet were planted by the defenseadvanced research projects agency (darpa) in the late 1960s, when it began todevelop the arpanet, a packetswitched network used to connect its computingresearchers. this work sparked the development of the basic communicationsprotocols used for the internet as well as electronic mail.¥graphical user interfacesñwork sponsored by darpa in the late 1960sled to development of the computer mouse and its use as part of a graphical userinterface. the technology was later incorporated into the xerox corporationõs altocomputer and then into apple computerõs macintosh. it has since become thestandard interface for personal computers.¥computer graphicsñwork on computer graphics dates back to projectwhirlwind in the late 1940s and its successor, the u.s. air force air defense system sage, which used interactive graphics consoles and displays. algorithms forrendering graphical images (in three dimensions) on a computer screen were firstdeveloped during the 1960s, with many advances emerging from darpafundedwork at the university of utah.¥speech recognitionñtodayõs speechrecognition programs build on decadesof research in artificial intelligence and speech recognition sponsored by bothindustry and government. at&t and ibm corporation maintained programs in thefield, as did darpa, which seeded early work in hidden markov models on whichthe first commercial products were based.¥reducedinstructionset computing (risc)ñmany of todayõs fastest computer workstations rely on risc, a technology pioneered by ibm in the 1970s andfurther developed by researchers with funding from darpaõs very large scaleintegrated circuit program, which ran until the early 1980s.¥relational databasesñthe relational databases sold by companies likeibm, informix, oracle, and sybase are the products of research first conducted atibm in the 1970s. simultaneously, relational databases were pursued by researchers at the university of california at berkeley with funding from the nationalscience foundation. todayõs products still rely on the relational model developedby those early projects.source: computer science and telecommunications board (1999a).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22making it betternewspaper today without coming across comments, articles, or specialsections that remark on trends in it and their social and economic impacts.dramatic advances in computer processing speeds, communications bandwidth, and storage capacities are almost clich”s. a popular yardstick ismooreõs law: for the last 40 years, computing capability per dollar hasdoubled every 18 to 24 months, equivalent to a 100fold improvementevery 10 to 13 years, reflected in both rapidly increasing performance anddeclining price. these performance gains, the associated development ofsoftware applications, and falling prices for it relative to its capabilitieshave propelled it into new markets. for instance, controllers are nowembedded within products such as cellular telephones and automobiletransmissions, and complex information systems are used to manage airtraffic, book air travel reservations, and process electronic commercetransactions. research has borne fruit in a cumulative manner, transforming the it baseline. the early emphasis on computation, combinedwith the advent, later on, of mass storage devices, focused attention onthe capture, storage, and retrieval of massive amounts of data. likewise,early developments in networking led to ever more sophisticated communications and to distributed processing. with each advance camea dramatic expansion in the uses of computing. the expansion in the useof communications has been more recent; the combined progress in eachfield has stimulated applications of increasing scope and sophistication.to a technologist, it is being applied to increasingly complex systems,thanks to past advances in microprocessors, algorithms, packet networking, memory, and information storage and retrieval. to a layperson, it isbecoming infrastructure, an enabler of more and more of what people do,even in situations in which the use of a òcomputeró is neither obvious norintentional. the internet, because of its pervasiveness and intrinsic abilityto connect many elements, epitomizes these advances, as does the proliferation of personal computers for applications such as electronic bankingand home shopping and the nowroutine use of cellular telephones, especially those capable of internet access. all of this is happening becausedecades of research led to proven concepts and technologies, loweringrisks enough to enable commercialization.the lesson of the recent growth of the internet, and the world wideweb that rides atop it, is that technical success can generate new challenges: in short, it is neither stable nor static. what will tomorrowõs webbe like? no one knows for sure, but todayõs research and experimentation hint at advances in the design and implementation of virtual realitysystems, which enable telepresence and other blends of real and virtualenvironments; advances in integrating computing and biology that enablenovel approaches to computation, such as through molecular or chemicalprocesses; leaps in the capacity to collect, store, and retrieve bothmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23previously generated and new information; and capabilities surpassingthose of humans for seeing, hearing, and speaking (see box 1.2). theintegration of such specific advances into applications and systems thatare more complex than todayõs state of the art can only be speculated on.what is not speculation is the fact that todayõs society depends greatly onit, and tomorrowõs will do so even more. the internet of today is abeginning, not an end point: it may be thought of as infrastructure, but itis far from offering the stability and predictability associated with thetraditional infrastructures of the physical world.what is information technology research?the many faces of information technology researchit research takes many forms. it consists of both theoretical andexperimental work, and it combines elements of science and engineering.some it research lays out principles or constraints that apply to all computing and communications systems; examples include theorems thatshow the limitations of computation (what can and cannot be computedby a digital computer within a reasonable time) or the fundamental limitson capacities of communications channels. other research investigatesdifferent classes of it systems, such as user interfaces, the web, or electronic mail (email). still other research deals with issues of broad applicability driven by specific needs. for example, todayõs highlevel programming languages (such as java and c) were made possible by researchthat uncovered techniques for converting the highlevel statements intomachine code for execution on a computer. the design of the languagesthemselves is a research topic: how best to capture a programmerõs intentions in a way that can be converted to efficient machine code. efforts tosolve this problem, as is often the case in it research, will require invention and design as well as the classical scientific techniques of analysisand measurement. the same is true of efforts to develop specific andpractical modulation and coding algorithms that approach the fundamental limits of communication on some channels. the rise of digitalcommunication, associated with computer technology, has led to the irreversible melding of what were once the separate fields of communications and computers, with data forming an increasing share of what isbeing transmitted over the digitally modulated fiberoptic cables spanning the nation and the world.experimental work plays an important role in it research. onemodality of research is the design experiment, in which a new techniqueis proposed, a provisional design is posited, and a research prototype isbuilt in order to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the design.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24making it betterbox 1.2some research goals for information technologydespite the incredible progress made in information technology over the past50 years, the field is far from mature. a number of compelling goals will driveresearch. the following is just a partial list of possible research goals articulatedby jim gray, a leading it researcher and recipient of the turing award, the topprize in computer science. they are envisioned as welldefined goals that canstimulate considerable research.¥scalabilityñdevise a software and hardware architecture that scales up bya factor of a million. in other words, an applicationõs storage and processingcapacity would have to be able to automatically grow by a factor of a million, doingjobs faster or doing a million jobs in the same time, just by adding more resources.¥turing testñbuild a computer that wins the òimitation gameó at least 30percent of the time. in a blind contest, the computer should be able to behaveconvincingly like a human 30 percent of the time.¥speechtotextñbuild a device that can hear as well as a native speaker.¥texttospeechñbuild a device that can speak as well as a native speaker.¥see as well as a personñbuild a device that can recognize objects andbehavior.¥personal memexñbuild a system that can record everything a person seesand hears and quickly retrieve any item on request.¥world memexñbuild a system that given a text corpus can answer questions about the text and summarize the text as precisely and quickly as a humanexpert in that field. do the same for music, images, art, and cinema.¥telepresenceñbuild a system that can simulate being some other placeretrospectively as an observer (teleobserver: hear and see as well as actually bethere, and as well as a participant), and simulate being some other place as aparticipant (telepresent: interact with others and with the environment as thoughactually there).¥troublefree systemsñbuild a system used by millions of people each dayand yet administered and managed by a single parttime person.¥secure systemñassure that the system in the preceding goal services onlyauthorized users, that service cannot be denied by unauthorized users, and thatinformation cannot be stolen (and prove it).¥always upñbuild a system that is unavailable for less than 1 second perhundred years (and prove it).¥automatic programmerñdevise a specification language or user interfacethat (a) makes it easy for people to express designs (1,000 times easier), (b) computers can compile, and (c) can describe all applications (is complete). the systemshould reason about the applications, asking questions about exception cases andincomplete specifications, but it should not be onerous to use.source: gray (1999).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction25although much of the effect of a design can be anticipated using analytictechniques, many of its subtle aspects are uncovered only when the prototype is studied. some of the most important strides in it have been madethrough such experimental research. timesharing, for example, evolvedin a series of experimental systems that explored different parts of thetechnology. how are a computerõs resources to be shared among severalcustomers? how do we ensure equitable sharing of resources? how dowe insulate each userõs program from the programs of others? whatresources should be shared as a convenience to the customers (e.g., computer files)? how can the system be designed so itõs easy to write computer programs that can be timeshared? what kinds of commands doesa user need to learn to operate the system? although some of these tradeoffs may succumb to analysis, othersñnotably those involving the userõsevaluation and preferencesñcan be evaluated only through experiment.ideas for it research can be gleaned both from the research community itself and from applications of it systems. the web, initiated byphysicists to support collaboration among researchers, illustrates howpeople who use it can be the source of important innovations. the webwas not invented from scratch; rather, it integrated developments in information retrieval, networking, and software that had been accumulatingover decades in many segments of the it research community (schatz,1997; schatz and hardin, 1994). it also reflects a fundamental body oftechnology that is conducive to innovation and change (cstb, 1994).thus, it advanced the integration of computing, communications, andinformation. the web also embodies the need for additional science andtechnology to accommodate the burgeoning scale and diversity of it usersand uses: it became a catalyst for the internet by enhancing the ease ofuse and usefulness of the internet, it has grown and evolved far beyondthe expectations of its inventors, and it has stimulated new lines of researchaimed at improving and better using the internet in numerous arenas,from education to crisis management.progress in it can come from research in many different disciplines.for example, work on the physics of silicon can be considered it researchif it is driven by problems related to computer chips; the work of electricalengineers is considered it research if it focuses on communications orsemiconductor devices; anthropologists and other social scientists studying the uses of new technology can be doing it research if their workinforms the development and deployment of new it applications; andcomputer scientists and computer engineers address a widening range ofissues, from generating fundamental principles for the behavior of information in systems to developing new concepts for systems. thus, itresearch combines science and engineering, even though the popularñand even professionalñassociation of it with systems leads many peoplemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26making it betterto concentrate on the engineering aspects. fine distinctions between thescience and engineering aspects may be unproductive: computer scienceis special because of how it combines the two, and the evolution of both iskey to the wellbeing of it research. because of its emphasis on it systems in the service of society, this report emphasizes the engineeringperspective, but takes an even broader view of the field that includes theinteraction between it systems and their end users.4a classification of information technology researchdistinguishing different types of research is problematic and politicized; it feeds enduring science policy debates that can seem to confusethe issues, but it remains important for diagnosing what needs to be doneand how that might differ from what is being done. a variety of termshave been used to distinguish between different types of scientific andtechnological research. the most widely used distinction is between basicand applied research. in this classification, which is used by federalstatistical agencies, basic research is defined as work motivated by a desireto better understand fundamental aspects of phenomena without specificapplications in mind; it is often called curiositydriven research. appliedresearch is defined as work performed to gain the understanding neededto meet a particular need; it is often called problemoriented research.although useful in some respects, this distinction tends to place utility andunderstanding at the extremes of a onedimensional research spectrum.another, more useful classification, developed by donald stokes,overcomes these limitations by explicitly separating the usefulness ofresearch results from the degree to which the research seeks fundamentalunderstanding (stokes, 1997). it classifies research along two dimensions:whether use is considered, and whether or not the research pursues fundamental understanding (figure 1.1). stokes distinguishes four types ofresearch: (1) pure basic research performed with the goal of fundamentalunderstanding, without any thought of practical use (exemplified by nielsbohrõs research on atomic structure); (2) useinspired basic research thatpursues fundamental understanding but is motivated by a particularquestion or application (exemplified by louis pasteurõs research on thebiological bases of fermentation and disease, and by the fundamentalwork done for the manhattan project); (3) pure applied research that ismotivated by use but does not seek fundamental understanding (exemplified by thomas alva edisonõs inventive work); and (4) applied researchthat is not motivated by a particular application (such as the developmentof taxonomies for birds and plants, or tycho braheõs work to documentthe position of the planets, which later informed keplerõs developmentsof laws about planetary motion). in contrast to the basic/applied researchmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction27consideration of use?noyesyespure basic researchbohruseinspired basic researchpasteurquest forfundamentalunderstanding?noapplied researchunmotivated by applicationsbrahepure applied researchedisonfigure 1.1 stokesõ quadrant model of research. source: stokes (1997).dichotomy, this taxonomy explicitly recognizes the category of researchthat is simultaneously inspired by use and seeks fundamental knowledge. this category of researchñòpasteurõs quadrantó in stokesõ formulationñis especially important in it.a considerable amount of basic it has been developed as a result ofpasteurstyle research that focuses on understanding the fundamentalprinciples of information representation and behavior, addresses widespread and enduring problems, and yields broad capabilities rather thana specific product or system (e.g., better ways to specify, build, and maintain software of all sorts). operating systems stem from research intohow multiple tasks can share a single computer. communications andnetworking research seeks better ways to overcome constraints on communication, such as the nature (òqualityó) of service needed for delivering realtime video or audio. todayõs reducedinstructionset computing(risc) microprocessors are based on research that showed how to increaseperformance by optimizing the speed of the processor instructions thatare used most frequently in actual computer programs. speech recognition and machine vision technologies have matured through research intothe machine collection of information from the physical world and itsinterpretation, which has to be quick and accurate to be useful.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28making it betterpasteurstyle research in it sometimes aims at solving new problemsthat arise in older areas. the internet satisfied an older research goal ofcarrying many types of data traffic over a single network, and it generatesnew research problems associated with multimedia (including audio andvideo), congestion control, quality of service, and new communicationparadigms such as broadcast and multicast. in wireless communications,rapidly increasing demands for service stimulate research into smartantenna systems and multiuser detection to achieve dramatic increases incapacity. more generally, it researchers are still struggling to find thebest ways to tell computers what to doñthat is, to write correct softwareefficiently. they are also still struggling to find the best hardware designsthat can scale up to many thousands of processors harnessed to a singlecomputation. these are difficult research problems that endure.pasteurstyle research tends to have long time horizons. it involves acycle in which novel designs are worked out, implemented, and evaluated in use. the cycle is often long because each individual stage mayrequire that new techniques be developed. for example, new programming language designs require developing techniques for translating programs into machine language. implementations of the language have tobe complete, robust, and widely available before widespread use begins;evaluation requires that a number of programmers learn the newlanguage, apply it to a range of systems, and accumulate evidence aboutthe value of the language; only some languages will survive these processes. previous reports on retrospective assessments of it have demonstrated how much of it research has yielded results that became evidentonly after periods of time measurable in decades, a reality that may seemcounterintuitiveñthe new clich” of òinternet timeó has not erased theinherent lags in creating and leveraging new scientific and engineeringknowledge (see cstb, 1995, 1999a). a longterm perspective also fostersrecognition of the key role of unexpected research results, which lay thefoundations for new technologies, products, and entire industries.in the it sector, applied research differs from pasteurstyle researchonly in degree: the focus is sufficiently narrow that results usually applyonly to specific applications, products, or systems. applied it researchtends to be short term, with clear paths to the transfer of research resultsinto production. in one example from industry, a research project investigated how to obtain maximum data rates from a specific disk driveattached to a specific computer that was to be used to transmit digitalvideo data over a network in real time. unlike conventional diskdriversoftware, which sacrifices performance to ensure that there are no errorsin the data read from the disk, this application emphasized speed aboveall else. this investigation was (arguably) research because it was notmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction29known beforehand what data rates could be achieved or how best tocontrol the disk drive. but the research targeted a particular product, andthe results were unlikely to apply to a broad class of settings.sometimes, what is intended to be applied research achieves farreaching results more characteristic of pasteurstyle research. for example, researchers at carnegie mellon university who were investigatingways to improve scheduling on a particular factory shop floor devised anew type of optimization algorithm, called constrained optimization, thatwas able to solve more complex problems than could previous algorithms.the new algorithm went far beyond solving a shopfloor problem: it hadapplications in many other domains. in fact, its use for optimizing theassignment of payload to transport aircraft during operation desert stormsaved millions of dollars in transportation costs. this result epitomizesthe benefits that can emerge from research on specific problems that alsoattempts to arrive at broadbased solutions.both basic and applied research differ from development. development exploits the knowledge generated by research into scientific andtechnological phenomena, creating specific goods, processes, or services.in general, internet startups, electronic commerce (ecommerce) technology, and the growing variety of information appliances are creatures ofdevelopment. although useful knowledge is often created in the processof developing new goods and services (as well as in manufacturing andselling them) and development generates new questions for research toaddress, research has the primary aim of creating scientific and technicalknowledge, and in the process it serves to train people, who go on togenerate (and apply) more knowledge. unless the research base is replenished, developmentñand innovationñwill eventually slow. the distinction between research and development and the relationship of one to theother are often obscured by glib references to r&d; tallies of industrialinvestment in r&d, which tends to favor development, can produce largenumbers without, however, yielding research value. part of the misunderstanding lies in the available data, part in interpretation of the data.the changing environment for informationtechnology researchthe 1990s witnessed the rise of a new environment for it researchinvestments. the structure of the it industry has changed, and the natureof it applications has greatly expanded. a review of the changes thathave taken place underscores why now is an appropriate time to examinethe structures and mechanisms used to fund and conduct research, toensure that they will help the nation reach its itrelated objectives.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30making it betterchanging industrial structurethe it industry appears to be growing faster than the research basethat has supported it, raising questions about the future in an arena whereideas and talent, or intellectual capital, are the most critical assets. mostobvious is the influx of smaller firms that leverage fundamental researchundertaken in universities (and elsewhere). also obvious is the relativedecline of several large u.s. industrial laboratories as sources of itresearch. players present in the early 1990s, such as digital equipmentcorporation, control data corporation, cray research, and even applecomputer, are no longer contributing to the research base. enduringplayers, such as ibm corporation and at&t, have reorganized and nowfocus their research more narrowly than they did in the 1970s and 1980s.newer companies, such as microsoft corporation, and foreign corporations, such as nec and mitsubishi, launched u.s. research laboratories inthe late 1980s and 1990s; the impact of these new efforts remains to beseenñwhat is known is that they have attracted leading researchers fromacademia.5 industrial research relevant to it has grown, both in absoluteterms and as a share of all such research, but that growth is dwarfed bythe it industryõs growth. in this environment, any research investmentcan have great leverage and influence developments across a broad spectrum of industry and society.why does change in the it industry matter? one might expect, afterall, that as an industry matures, r&d spending would decline as a proportion of revenues; such a decline could also come from expanding salesof a stable productñone for which the r&d has been more or less completed. an industry whose history is measured in decades cannot, however,be called mature. indeed, the evidence of the 1990s points to rejuvenationrather than senescenceñthe rapid growth of the internet and its associated business activity, for example, are new phenomena, and that activitywill shape yet other phenomena through cumulative experimentationwith the networkbased interactions of people and systems. informationtechnology is neither mature nor stable, and the structure and competitive conduct of the industry continue to change.measuring the it research effort is difficult; the most common yardstick is funding. several factors contribute to concerns about the sufficiency of it research funding. first, attempts to reduce federal budgetdeficits and trim defense spending (which historically supported a significant portion of computing and electrical engineering research)constrained federal funding for university research in the early 1990s,affecting career decisions and research output in ways that are beginningto have an impact now. efforts to enhance accountability in federal government operations and spending also led to increasing support for nearmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction31term, missionoriented research by federal agencies, at the expense ofmore fundamental longterm research.6 yet, as the congressional budgetoffice (cbo) observed, federal funding for longterm research òmay havea disproportionately large effect on the direction that information technology takes in the long runó (webre, 1999). indeed many argue that thetrue value of the early research investments in it by agencies such as thedefense advanced research projects agency (darpa) and the nationalscience foundation (nsf) has been support for the creation of technologies and capabilities not known before (cstb, 1999a). external validationof these claims may be gauged not only from industry growth, which lagsresearch investments, but also in flows of venture capital funds, which,according to the cbo, òraise the efficiency of existing r&d by raising therate at which ideas developed in the laboratory are brought to marketó(webre, 1999). realizing the future potential of it therefore depends oncontinued federal support for fundamental research.second, the private sector also faces growing disincentives to investing in longterm research. increased competition has forced many bluechip firms to restructure their it research and development programs toconcentrate on problems with greater market relevance. the most obvious examples are the reduction in, and reorientation of, research anddevelopment investments by historical industry leaders ibm and at&t.at the same time, a broader move toward a more horizontal, layeredindustry structure has resulted in the transfer of research and development to the suppliers of it components, whether microprocessors, diskdrives, or software. the associated specialization may militate againstsufficient progress in systems research, which unifies efforts across the itindustries (see box 1.3 for a description of component research vs. systems research). at the same time, new entrants into the marketplace, andthe new mix of products, feature players without a research history. newsoftware enterprises and webbased ventures can be started with a fewhighly talented people and a little capital. the venture capital industry isready and willing to provide the additional funding needed if the startupappears to be on its way to success.third, mooreõs law has the effect of driving it companies to offer thevery latest technology continually. to do otherwise would mean losingout to competitors. there is an unusually high obsolescence factor drivenby the rapid advances in it. any company attempting to offer 2yearoldversions of its systems would, in effect, be offering technology only halfas costeffective as the latest technology allows. in other words, the penalty for being late to market is to lag the performance of more rapidlydeveloped competitive products. abbreviated product developmentcycles accelerate the pace of researchñif researchers can produce tangibleresults faster, then products can change faster. if research is done at all, itmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32making it betterbox 1.3components, systems, and applicationseven in fields traditionally associated with information technology (it), themethods and subjects of research can vary. these problems can be viewed onthree levels:¥components are individual elements of computing and communicationssystems that have specific interfaces and functions. they include hardware andsoftware.¥systems are amalgams of many interacting components that are combinedto perform a particular set of functions, however broadly those functions may bedefined. systems must maintain their performance guarantees under widely varying and unknown external (and internal) conditions.¥applications are components and systems that are embedded in a largerenvironmental or organizational context to solve particular problems, such as airtraffic control or electronic commerce. they provide value to endusers, whetherthe end user is an individual or an organization.the distinction between components, systems, and applications is not absolutebut depends on the perspective from which they are viewed. a personal computer(pc), for example, may be considered an application by a microprocessor designer,a system by a pc designer, and a component by a network designer. as it hasbecome more integral to everyday life and work, the set of research problemsassociated with systems and applications has grown. these problems result fromsuccess in building components, such as the pc and the internet, which have inturn created opportunities for new systems and applications.is often impossible to follow the traditional open research model, withresults broadly available for review. as suggested earlier in this chapter,research investments that are coupled more closely to market objectivestend to refine and exploit existing knowledge rather than lay the groundwork for the more radical innovations upon which the industryõs futuresuccess will surely rely. the shortcomings of this mode of operation areobvious in the areas of securityñwhere, for example, the cycle of iterativeproduct release, public announcement of product flaws, and product fixeshas become the norm (cstb, 1999b)ñand of usability, where, for example, the lack of time for studying how real people with differing abilitiesuse systems and what they need and want from the systems continues toconstrain ease of use (cstb, 1997). the situation is compounded by longstanding difficulties in improving productivity in the development ofquality software; progress in software engineering continues to be elusive(cstb, 1999b).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction33expanding applications of information technologythe second major change affecting it research is the expanding roleof it systems in a number of important social applications of it thatsupport groups of people performing tasks related to government, industry,business, and commerce and in which the technology and larger organizational or social processes are inseparable. it is no exaggeration to saythat, today, virtually every facet of government, industry, and commerceis touched by it, and some depend heavily on it. many crucial organizational and societal systems operate at a scale and complexity that wouldsimply not be feasible without the assistance of it. these applicationstend to implemented in largescale systemsñit systems that containmany hardware and software components that interact with each other incomplex ways. many social applications of it are characterized by thedeep interrelationship of the it with nontechnological elements, such aspeople, workers, groups of people, students, and organizations of workers.for example, data storage has become a foundation of organizationalprocesses that involve people and material as well as data. networkinghas integrated computing into many human interactions, supporting groupactivities and collaboration: for example, collaboration on the design of acomplex vehicle by manufacturers, suppliers, and major customers whoshare in the development and modification of plans and specifications orthe enhancement of retail product and pricing strategies and customerservice by capturing information about customer buying behavior.newfound applications of it represent a significant step forward inthe evolution of computing, much of which has been shaped by the needsof and conditions in the scientific and engineering communities.7 therunaway success of the internet has vastly expanded the range andsophistication of applications, making the issues surrounding largescalesystem design, which were for a long time open issues, more critical andimmediate. for example, growing numbers of it applications are spanning different organizations and administrative domains, incorporatingnot only multiple users but also multiple organizations (with differentpreferences, procedures, capabilities, and so on) into a single application.as a result, it is becoming much less appropriate to design applicationswith the assumption that they will be implemented, deployed, operated,and maintained in a coordinated fashion under central control.8increasing complexity and sophistication are predictable trends. theyare standard phenomena in technologically advanced industries, in whichproductivity gains, fundamental innovations, and difficult, if less fundamental, research problems continue for many years.9 a corollary is thegeneration of research problems, discussed in the subsequent chapters,that arise from technical complexity. new it systems are especially commaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34making it betterplex because of their large size, the number of interacting components,and their intimate involvement with people who are themselves complexcomponents. the performance of these cannot be fully modeled, so it isdifficult to understand how they work before they are put to actual use.their intended applications and design continue to evolve, and they areincreasingly embedded in realworld systems. this situation stands incontrast to the largescale systems of the past, such as the telephonesystem, which, because it was so regulated and standardized, did nothave to address heterogeneity to the same degree as do todayõs largescale it systems.the shortcomings in the current state of technology supporting socialapplications of it are painfully evident. engineers are building it systems that venture beyond the state of knowledge, much as designers ofthe tacoma narrows bridge ventured too far into lightweight suspensionbridge design.10 todayõs news reports of system outages in electronictrading, internet access, and telephony signal that users expect it systemsto have characteristics of reliability and availability that parallel those ofphysical infrastructures, such as roads, bridges, and power supplies.aggravating the situation is the distribution of the underlying computingand networking infrastructure across multiple organizations, with components designed by multiple equipment and software vendors. a lowlevel of coordination is possible, but the virtual distributed computinginfrastructure cannot be designed or even òtunedó in the same way asearlier generations of computing infrastructure were, when everythingwas typically under the control of a single organization and its handpicked vendors. as a result, todayõs infrastructure forms a rather shakysubstrate for the distributed social applications of it that depend on it.one manifestation of this reality is vulnerability to various securitythreats, unpredictable emergent behaviors, and breakdowns. it is difficult to predict or control the performance of largescale systems or theenvironment in which they operate. challenges include constant changein both functional requirements and regulatory constraints, as well as inthe underlying infrastructure itself, all of which have the effect of compounding the vulnerability and performance issues. the responses tothese challenges are generally ad hoc and not based on any fundamentalunderstanding that could inspire confidence in the methodologies andoutcomes. indeed, the many shortcomings and even failures of pastefforts suggest that confidence would not be justified.many system problems have been evident for decades, but the broadening deployment of it and growing dependence on it mean that thepayoff from finally resolving them will be greater than ever. enduringdifficulties include achieving parallelism in systems, reusing system components, enhancing ease of use and trustworthiness, and supporting amaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction35larger scale. some other difficulties are becoming more compelling: forexample, achieving adaptability (the ability to evolve over time) or maintaining availability of use in the face of predictable and unpredictableproblems.11 the need for progress on these problems has become acute.12major users of largescale systems, networks, and applications areseverely limited in their ability to develop new it systems by high development costs, uncertain outcomes, and the need to maintain existingoperations even though a new system could reduce operational costs,speed product innovation, and improve the services they provide to theircustomers.the problems associated with largescale systems are much the sameas those associated with the large, monolithic systems created by organizations like the federal aviation administration (faa), the internal revenue service (irs), and large private companies. they could becomecharacteristics of systems used for health care, education, manufacturing,and other social applications that have become widespread.13 the continued development of computing systems embedded in other devicesand systems promises to exacerbate these problems. microprocessors arebeing incorporated into an increasing array of devices, from automobiletransmissions and coffeemakers to a range of electronic measuringdevices, such as thermostats, pollution detectors, cameras, microphones,and medical devices (business week online, 1999b). they are also enteringa range of information appliances that can be used for playing music,reading electronic books, sending and reading email, and browsing theweb. such devices are expected to become more numerous than standalone computers and will be able to share information across the internetand other information infrastructures. some believe that, within 10 years,discrete microprocessors will be knitted together into ad hoc distributedcomputers whose terminals are laptops, cell phones, or handheld devices.in considering the social applications of it, two distinct but relatedcategories of research are relevant. the first is systems research, whichhas long been pursued in the computing community but takes on addedsignificance in light of the broadening range of functions supported bylargescale systems. in fact, the definition of systems research haschanged. in the past, it meant primarily computer architecture, operatingsystems, and related computer science subjects. research in these subjects continues, driven by the need for highly scalable systems, aroundtheclock availability, and the like. however, the greatest impact of systems and opportunities for them transcend the technology per se: they liein the social applications of it. there is a huge demand for research in ecommerce systems and technologies, content management and analysis,community and collaboration systems, and so forth. there is a broadspectrum of social applications of it, ranging from those that serve primaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36making it bettermarily a single user operating in a larger context (as in home bankingapplications that are used by a single user but connect into the bankõsfinancial system) through those that serve groups of users in a timelimited activity, through those that serve the needs of organizations,through those that serve groups of organizations (in commerce or taxcollection, for example), to those that serve individual users interactingwith groups of organizations (as in online shopping). systems researchwill aim at new levels of automation and integration of activities withinand among organizations. it will couple it more closely than ever tocomplex social and business processes, making it more truly an information infrastructure. but such coupling also complicates the pursuit ofsuccess.the second category of research focuses on it embedded in a socialcontext. this research addresses the technology itself, asking how it canbe changed to provide greater benefits to users and enduser organizationsthrough social applications. this perspective is the opposite of the moreconventional perspective on the impact of technology, which emphasizeshow people must change to accommodate it: the question is how technology can be changed to accommodate people and organizations.one characteristic of it is its extreme malleability. at the level ofsoftware and applications, there are few physical limits to be concernedabout, and the inherent flexibility of the technology enables it to adjustrather unconstrainedly to application needs, at least in theory. there are,however, serious obstacles to carrying out such adjustments. theseinclude the practical difficulties of changing existing approaches andinfrastructure, known by economists as òpathdependent effectsó andòlockin.ó but even if these economic obstacles could be overcome, thereis simply a lack of fundamental understanding of how the technologycould be made to better serve the social applications of it. furthermore,there are serious gaps in the methodologies for translating contextualapplication requirements into concrete architectures and specificationsfor a software implementation (as well as gaps in methods for modifyingthe context to take maximum advantage of it). the implication is thattrial and error is inevitable, as are false starts and dead ends.technical and organizational factors are intertwined, adding to thescientific and engineering challenges. for example, despite its leveragingof work on constrained optimization in the gulf war, cited above, theunited states experienced notable logistical failures in that war: some 40percent of the sea containers that arrived dockside at the saudi disembarkation points had to be physically opened and inspected for want ofdocumentation of their contents and its disposition, and it took at leasttwice as long as the department of defenseõs worstcase projections tomobilize the necessary warfighting materiel in saudi arabia and othermaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction37key points and nearly four times as long to get all that materiel to where itwas supposed to go. these represent failures in information systems andreflect underinvestments in areas such as sealift, containerization, andlogistics, none of which is as intriguing as, say, smart bombs. they underscore the importance of human and organizational factors in harnessingit and demonstrate why more research needs to be done on the blend offactors. although in practice it has always been shaped by the environment in which it is used, it research needs to focus more on the overallsystem and the operational context in which such systems will be used.to date, it research has not emphasized systems and applications tonearly the extent called for by the virtual explosion of sophisticated socialapplications of it as a result of the internet. this is not to say there hasbeen a complete void. indeed, there has been a substantial effort, but itappears to have been inadequate when weighed against the significantchallenges and tremendous opportunities. there is a critical need for morefundamental understanding, given the rapidly expanding deployment ofapplications that support organizational missions and the interaction ofmany entities (such as businesses, universities, and government) as wellas of society in general. this is an area in which opportunities abound forsubstantial advances in technology, with the goal of making applicationsmuch more effective and improving their development, administration,operation, and maintenance in terms of effectiveness, reliability, trustworthiness, and cost.implications for information technology researchthe challenges posed by largescale it systems and the social applications of it can be addressed effectively only if the it research base isexpanded. past research in it has tended to focus on areas such as thefollowing:¥fundamental understanding of the limitations on computation andcommunications;¥underlying technologies (such as integrated circuits), design techniques and tools (such as compilers), components (such as microprocessors),and computer systems (such as parallel and networked computers); and¥applications and usability for isolated users, improvements in thehumancomputer interface, and applications that serve an isolated user.this technology base must be carried forward; continuing substantialprogress will be needed to support and maintain the progress in largerdomains. as the importance of networking increases, research in associated challenges (such as distributed file systems and transaction andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38making it bettermulticast protocols) is expanding. a number of engaging social applications (such as email, newsgroups, chat rooms, multiplayer games, andremote learning) have emerged from the research community. as is truefor other relatively immature suites of technologies, much of the researchwas begun in academia, and large segments of both the research agendaand its commercial applications have migrated to industry.past research in technology emphasized underlying technologies andcomponents, in part because these were necessary ingredients for gettingstarted and in part because it was challenging to obtain the functionalityand performance required of even the most basic applications. today, thechallenge is almost the reverse. in the wake of several decades of exponential advances in the capabilities of both electronics and fiber optics, itcan be argued that the technologies are beginning to outstrip societyõsunderstanding of how to use them effectively. increasingly, the challengecan be stated as follows: wonderful technologies are now in our grasp;how can they be put to good use? this is not to minimize either theimportance or the challenges of advancing the core technologies, becausesuch advances are critical to progress in applications built on these technologies. rather, the point is that the existing research agenda needs toaccommodate a major push into the uses of technology.the idea of an expanded it research agenda is not entirely new. astudy committee convened by cstb in the early 1990s observed both thatintellectually substantive and challenging computing problems can anddo arise in the context of problem domains outside computer science andengineering per se and that computing research can be framed within thedisciplineõs own intellectual traditions in a manner that is directly applicable to other problem domains (cstb, 1992). the committee viewedcomputing research as an engine of progress and conceptual change inother problem domains, even as these domains contribute to the identification of new areas of inquiry within computer science and engineering.its recommendations sought to sustain the core effort in computer scienceand engineering (similar to òcomponentsó research as defined in thisreport) while simultaneously broadening the field to explore intellectualopportunities available at the intersection of computer science and engineering and other problem domains (see box 1.4). efforts over the pastdecade have shown both the virtue and the difficulty of including moreapplicationinspired work under the umbrella of it research, but the needfor such work continues to outstrip efforts to produce it.as the emphasis shifts from applications serving solitary users andsingle departments to those serving large groups of users, entire enterprises, and critical societal infrastructures, the issues related to this embedding become more interesting and challenging. in particular, researchis needed in two areas in addition to it components: (1) the technicalmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction39box 1.4echoes of cstbõs computing the futurein the early 1990s, the cstb committee to assess the scope and direction ofcomputer science and technology was charged to assess how best to organizethe conduct of research and teaching in computer science and engineering (cs&e)in the future. in considering appropriate responses, the committee formulated aset of priorities, the first two of which are relevant to this report:priority 1ñsustain the core effort in cs&e, i.e., the effort that creates the theoretical and experimental science base on which computing applications build. thiscore effort has been deep, rich, and intellectually productive and has been indispensable for its impact on practice in the last couple of decades.priority 2ñbroaden the field. given the solid cs&e core and the many intellectualopportunities available at the intersection of cs&e and other problem domains,the committee believes that academic cs&e is well positioned to broaden its selfconcept. such broadening will also result in new insights with wide applicability,thereby enriching the core. furthermore, given the pressing economic and socialneeds of the nation and the changing environment for industry and academia, thecommittee believes academic cs&e must broaden its selfconcept or risk becoming increasingly irrelevant to computing practice.these priorities led the committee to offer a set of recommendations that, whilelinked to particular programs of the time, have continued relevance today andforeshadow the recommendations made in chapter 5 of this report.recommendation 1ñthe high performance computing and communications(hpcc) program should be fully supported throughout the planned 5year program. the hpcc program is of utmost importance for three reasons. the first isthat highperformance computing and communications are essential to the nationõsfuture economic strength and competitiveness, especially in light of the growingneed and demand for ever more advanced computing tools in all sectors of society.the second reason is that the program is framed in the context of scientific andengineering grand challenges. thus the program is a strong signal to the cs&e[computer science and engineering] community that good cs&e research canflourish in an application context and that the demand for interdisciplinary andapplicationsoriented cs&e research is on the rise. and finally, a fully fundedhpcc program will have a major impact on relieving the funding stress affectingthe academic cs&e community. . . .recommendation 2ñthe federal government should initiate an effort to supportinterdisciplinary and applicationsoriented cs&e research in academia that isrelated to the missions of the missionoriented federal agencies and departmentsthat are not now major participants in the hpcc [high performance computingand communications] program. collectively, this effort would cost an additional$100 million per fiscal year in steady state above amounts currently planned. manyfederal agencies are not currently participating in the hpcc program, despite theutility of computing to their missions, and they should be brought into the program.those agencies that support substantial research efforts, though not in cs&e,should support interdisciplinary cs&e research, i.e., cs&e research undertakenjointly with research in other fields. problems in these other fields often include ancontinuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40making it betterimportant computational component whose effectiveness could be enhanced substantially by the active involvement of researchers working at the cutting edge ofcs&e research. those agencies that do not now support substantial researchefforts of any kind, i.e., operationally oriented agencies, should consider supporting applicationsoriented cs&e research because of the potential that the efficiency of their operations would be substantially improved by some research advancethat could deliver a better technology for their purposes. such research could alsohave considerable òspinoffó benefit to the private sector as well.recommendation 3ñacademic cs&e should broaden its research horizons,embracing as legitimate and cogent not just research in core areas (where it hasbeen and continues to be strong) but also research in problem domains that derivefrom nonroutine computer applications in other fields and areas or from technologytransfer activities. the academic cs&e community should regard as scholarshipany activity that results in significant new knowledge and demonstrable intellectualachievement, without regard for whether that activity is related to a particular application or whether it falls into the traditional categories of basic research, appliedresearch, or development. chapter 5 describes appropriate actions to implementthis recommendation.recommendation 4ñuniversities should support cs&e as a laboratory discipline(i.e., one with both theoretical and experimental components). cs&e departmentsneed adequate research and teaching laboratory space, staff support (e.g., technicians, programmers, staff scientists); funding for hardware and software acquisition, maintenance, and upgrade (especially important on systems that retain theircutting edge for just a few years); and network connections. new faculty should becapitalized at levels comparable to those in other scientific or engineering disciplines.source: excerpts from computer science and telecommunications board (1992), pp. 58.box 1.4 continuedchallenges, such as trustworthiness, scalability, and location transparency,associated with largescale systems and (2) challenges that surround themolding of embedded it within its application context, that is, within thesocial applications of it. the second challenge can be considered onlypartly a technical one, arising as it does from the context of it. these aredifficult problems to characterize, let alone solve.an analogy to the health sciences may be helpful in understandingthe relationship between the more traditional componentsorientedresearch and the additional work that is needed on largescale systemsand on the social applications of it. one way to classify the health sciencesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction41is to divide them into three related and overlapping sets of disciplines,each with its own research base:¥the biological sciences, which examines the basic scientific processesthat underlie much of the progress in medicine;¥physiology, anatomy, and pathology, which focus on understanding how biological systems, such as organisms composed of interactingorgans, work and how their components can be manipulated to providemedical benefits; and¥clinical medicine and epidemiology. the former focuses on treating human diseases, drawing on the other disciplines but also workingclosely and empirically with patients; the latter focuses on the relationship between environments and health.pursuing this analogy, the component and technologyorientedresearch that has so far dominated it research is similar to research in thebiological sciences: it develops the basic understanding and techniquesthat are invaluable in constructing working systems. research related tolargescale systems that use it is analogous to physiology: it attempts tounderstand the interactions among components and the development ofsystems. interdisciplinary research involving the social sciences, business, and law, in collaboration with technologists and addressing many ofthe social and organizational challenges posed by the social applicationsof it, is analogous to medicine and epidemiology. this research is focusedon applications and is justified by the direct impact it can have on themand society as a whole.as this report argues, research in components, systems, and applications is needed to ensure the development of fundamental understandingthat will allow it systems to evolve to meet societyõs growing needs. thisis not research directed at finding a more effective way to use it in anarrow application domain; rather, it is research directed at revolutionizing the understanding of how distributed computing environments withdecentralized design and operations can offer predictable, reproducibleperformance and capability and controlled vulnerability. it is alsodirected at revolutionizing the ability to accommodate rapid change inboth the context and requirements of the infrastructure and applications.it is directed at fundamentally revamping methodologies for capturingapplication requirements and transforming them into working applications. it is directed at revolutionizing the organizational processes andgroup dynamics that form the application context in ways that can mosteffectively leverage it. this is longterm research that is extremely challenging.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42making it betterimplications for the research enterprisethe trends in it suggest that the nation needs to reinvent it researchand develop new structures to support, conduct, and manage it. thehistory of u.s. support for it research established enduring principles forresearch policy: support for longterm fundamental research; support forthe development of large systems that bring together researchers fromdifferent disciplines and institutions to work on common problems; andwork that builds on innovations pioneered in industrial laboratories(cstb, 1999a).as it permeates many more realworld applications, additional constituencies need to be brought into the research process as both fundersand performers of it research. this is necessary not only to broaden thefunding base to include those who directly benefit from the fruits of theresearch, but also to obtain input and guidance. an understanding ofbusiness practices and processes is needed to support the evolution of ecommerce; insight from the social sciences is needed to build it systemsthat are truly userfriendly and that help people work better together. noone truly understands where new applications such as ecommerce, electronic publishing, or electronic collaboration are headed, but businessdevelopment and research together can promote their arrival at desirabledestinations.many challenges will require the participation and insight of the enduser and the service provider communities. they have a large stake inseeing these problems addressed, and they stand to benefit most directlyfrom the solutions. similarly, systems integrators would benefit from animproved understanding of systems and applications because they wouldbecome more competitive in the marketplace and be better able to meettheir estimates of project cost and time. unlike vendors of componenttechnologies, systems integrators and end users deal with entire information systems and therefore have unique perspectives on the problemsencountered in developing systems and the feasibility of proposed solutions. many of the enduser organizations, however, have no tradition ofconducting it researchñor technological research of any kind, in factñand they are not necessarily capable of doing so effectively; they dependon vendors for their technology. even so, their involvement in the researchprocess is critical. vendors of equipment and software have neither therequisite experience and expertise nor the financial incentives to investheavily in research on the challenges facing enduser organizations, especially the challenges associated with the social applications of it.14 ofcourse, they listen to their customers as they refine their products andstrategies, but those interactions are superficial compared with the demandsof the new systems and applications. finding suitable mechanisms formaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction43the participation of end users and service providers, and engaging themproductively, will be a big challenge for the future of it research.past attempts at publicprivate partnerships, as in the emerging arenaof critical infrastructure protection, show it is not so easy to get the publicand private sectors to interact for the purpose of improving the researchbase and implementation of systems: the federal government has a responsibility to address the public interest in critical infrastructure, whereas theprivate sector owns and develops that infrastructure, and conflictingobjectives and time horizons have confounded joint exploration. as auser of it, the government could play an important role. whereas historically it had limited and often separate programs to support research andacquire systems for its own use, the government is now becoming a consumer of it on a very large scale. just as it and the widespread access toit provided by the web have enabled businesses to reinvent themselves,it could dramatically improve operations and reduce the costs of applications in public health, air traffic control, and social security; governmentagencies, like privatesector organizations, are turning increasingly tocommercial, offtheshelf technology.universities will play a critical role in expanding the it researchagenda. the university setting continues to be the most hospitable forhigherrisk research projects in which the outcomes are very uncertain.universities can play an important role in establishing new research programs for largescale systems and social applications, assuming that theycan overcome longstanding institutional and cultural barriers to theneeded crossdisciplinary research. preserving the university as a basefor research and the education that goes with it would ensure a workforcecapable of designing, developing, and operating increasingly sophisticated it systems. a booming it marketplace and the lure of large salariesin industry heighten the impact of federal funding decisions on the individual decisions that shape the university environment: as the keyfunders of university research, federal programs send important signalsto faculty and students.the current concerns in it differ from the competitiveness concernsof the 1980s: the allpervasiveness of it in everyday life raises new questions of how to get from here to thereñhow to realize the exciting possibilities, not merely how to get there first. a vital and relevant it researchprogram is more important than ever, given the complexity of the issuesat hand and the need to provide solid underpinnings for the rapidlychanging it marketplace.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44making it betterorganization of this reportthe remainder of this report elaborates on the themes introduced inthis chapter. chapter 2 examines trends in support for it research bygovernment, industry, and universities. it reviews statistics on fundingfor r&d and describes the linkages between existing funding patternsand the trends outlined above. chapter 3 examines challenges in largescale systems research that are not new but that have taken on renewedimportance as social applications of computing and communicationsemerge. it identifies existing shortfalls in the research communityõs understanding of largescale systems and suggests avenues for further investigation. chapter 4 examines it systems that are embedded in a socialcontext, outlining the research problems that result from the integrationof it into a range of social applications and discussing the value of interdisciplinary research in this area. it identifies areas in which interdisciplinary research drawing on the social sciences is needed to complement thestrictly technical research being conducted by it researchers; outlinesdifferent mechanisms for pursuing an expanded it research agenda thatconsiders systems and applications as well as components; and discussesways in which government, industry, and universities need to alter theirorganization and management of it research to ensure that mechanismsexist for conducting the kinds of research that will be needed for thefuture. chapter 5 presents the committeeõs recommendations for strengthening the resource base in it. it outlines actions that government, universities, and industry should take to advance a broader research agendafor it.bibliographybuderi, robert. 1998. òbell labs is dead: long live bell labs,ó technology review 101(5):5057.business week online. 1999a. òq&a: an internet pioneer moves toward nomadic computing,ó august 30.business week online. 1999b. òthe earth will don an electronic skin,ó august 30.carey, john. 1997. òwhat price science?ó business week, may 26. available online at<www.businessweek.com/1997/21/b3528136.htm>.committee for economic development (ced). 1998. americaõs basic research: prosperitythrough discovery. committee for economic development, new york.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1992. computing the future. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. realizing the information future: the internet and beyond. national academypress, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995. evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to supportthe nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction45computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997. more than screen deep. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999a. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council1999b. trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.council on competitiveness. 1996. endless frontier, limited resources: u.s. r&d policy forcompetitiveness. council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., april.council on competitiveness. 1998. going global: the new shape of american innovation.council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., september.critical infrastructure assurance office (ciao). 2000a. defending americaõs cyberspace:national plan for information systems protection, version 1.0, an invitation to a dialogue.the white house, washington, d.c., january. available online at <http://www.ciao.gov/nationalplan/nationalplan%20final.pdf>.critical infrastructure assurance office (ciao). 2000b. practices for securing critical informationassets. ciao, washington, d.c., january. available online at <http://www.ciao.gov/ciaodocumentlibrary/practicesforsecuringcriticalinformationassets.pdf>.david, paul. 1990. òthe dynamo and the computer: an historical perspective on themodern productivity paradox,ó the american economic review 80(2):355361, may.gray, jim. 1999. whatõs next: a dozen informationtechnology research goals. technicalreport mstr9950, microsoft research, redmond, washington, june. availableonline at htmlresanchor http://www.research.microsoft.com/~gray/.leibovich, mark. 1999. òmicrosoft skims off academiaõs best for research center,ó washington post, april 5, p. a1.presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection (pccip). 1997. critical foundations: protecting americaõs infrastructures, washington, d.c., october. availableonline at <http://www.ciao.gov/ciaodocumentlibrary/pccipreport.pdf>.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future. national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, arlington, va., february. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.schatz, bruce r. 1997. òinformation retrieval in digital libraries: bringing search to thenet,ó science 275(5298):327334, january 17.schatz, bruce r., and joseph b. hardin. 1994. òncsa mosaic and the world wide web:global hypermedia protocols for the internet,ó science 265(5174):895901, august 12.stokes, donald e. 1997. pasteurõs quadrant: basic science and technological innovation.brookings institution press, washington, d.c.uchitelle, louis. 1996. òbasic research is losing out as companies stress results,ó newyork times, pp. a1 and d6, october 8.u.s. department of commerce, economics and statistics administration. 2000. digitaleconomy 2000. u.s. department of commerce, washington, d.c., june.webre, philip. 1999. òcurrent investments in innovation,ó congressional budget office,washington, d.c., april.ziegler, bart. 1997. òlab experiment: gerstner slashed r&d by $1 billion: for ibm, it maybe a good thing, latest breakthrough shows,ó wall street journal, october 6, p. a1.notes1.for a discussion of the influence that debates over federal research policy had on thehigh performance computing and communications initiative (hpcci), see cstb (1995).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46making it better2.the recommendations of pitac regarding federal funding for it research can befound in pitac (1999). additional information on the clinton administrationõs it2 initiative is available online at <http://www.ccic.gov/it2/>.3.numerous press accounts from the mid and late 1990s reported on the reorientationof research labs in the it industry and resulting concerns about longterm, fundamentalresearch. see, for example, uchitelle (1996), carey (1997), ziegler (1997), and buderi (1998).4.a new cstb study on the fundamentals of computer science will emphasize thescience aspects, including the interaction of computer science with other sciences. additional information on this project is available on the cstb web site at <www.cstb.org>.5.microsoft, in particular, has been noted for tapping top academic talent for itsresearch lab. see leibovich (1999).6.the government performance and results act of 1993, for example, called for explicitattempts to measure the results of government programs, including research programs.the act therefore added to the pressure for nearterm and missionoriented work.7.in scientific computing, it is used to model, emulate, and simulate various scientificand technical processes. scientific computing has received considerable attention from theit research community from the earliest days, for several reasons. first, it researchers aretechnically oriented and can appreciate and understand the issues related to scientific computing. second, scientific computing has been critical to the scientific and engineeringenterprise and to major government programs such as nuclear energy and weapons and themilitary and so has been admirably supported by the government. scientific computingcontinues to be important to the future of computing, science, many fields of engineering,and the military enterprise and should not be deemphasized.because it has been strongly supported by funding agencies and the research community, scientific computing is an inspirational example of the interrelationship and synergy between application and technology. scientific computing applications have been amajor driver of highperformance computing technologies and parallel programming techniques. in turn, scientific computing has influenced engineering and science, providing notonly substantial benefits but also approaches to problem solvingñsuch as the characteristics of numerical algorithms that yield to parallelism. the very methodologies of sciencehave been substantially affected in ways that make scientific progress more rapid as well ascost effective. scientific computing has benefited greatly from its longterm associationwith the research environment.scientific computing also demonstrates the importance of longterm and fundamentalresearch on technology in application contexts. there are fundamental gaps in understanding and unexploited opportunities that can be addressed by taking a longterm perspective,one that is not generally pursued by industrial organizations with their more shorttermprofit motivation. much of the benefit of research outcomes will accrue not to individualprivate firms but to industry, government, and society in general. the government is amajor user and developer of scientific computing applications and, in many ways, its challenges are much greater than those of the private sector. if governmentfunded research inany facet of technology is justified, then surely research in the more effective application oftechnology to the needs of government and its citizens is even more strongly justified.8.as recalled recently by leonard kleinrock: òin the early days of arpa [theadvanced research projects agency], even when we had only three machines, we wereable to uncover logical errors in the routing protocol, or the flowcontrol protocol, thatwould cause network failures. those errors are hard to detect ahead of time, especially asthe systems get more complex. itõs easy to detect the cause of a massive crash or degradation. but complex systems have latent failure modes that we have not yet excited. there isalways potential for deadlocks, crashes, degradations, errant behavior. . . . as systems getmore complex, they crash in incredible and glorious ways. what you want to have is a selfmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction47repairing mode [so that if] one part fails, other parts continue to functionó (business weekonline, 1999a).9.a considerable economics literature exists on the increasing complexity of technologies as they evolve over time. see, for example, david (1990).10.the first tacoma narrows suspension bridge, near the city of tacoma, washington,collapsed as a result of windinduced vibrations on november 7, 1940, just 4 months after itwas opened to traffic. the collapse was attributed to the bridgeõs structure, which caughtthe wind instead of letting it pass through. a windstorm caused the bridge to undergo aseries of undulations, which were caught on film before its collapse, earning the bridge thenickname ògalloping gertie.ó video footage of the bridgeõs collapse is available online at<http://mecad.uta.edu/~bpwang/me5311/1999/lecture1/intro25.htm>.11.this material derives from a set of briefing slides entitled òcomputer systemsresearch: past and presentó prepared by butler lampson from microsoft research. theslides are available online at <http://www.research.microsoft.com/lampson/slides/computersystemsresearchabstract.htm>.12.as evidence of the recognition that issues of security and reliability have received inthe policy community, president clinton signed presidential decision directive 63 on may22, 1998, which calls for a national effort to ensure the security of critical information infrastructures, such as the telephone system and electric power grid. the directive also established the critical infrastructure assurance office (ciao), which was charged with integrating the plans of various industry sectors into a national plan for infrastructure assuranceand with coordinating an analysis of the federal governmentõs own dependence on criticalinfrastructures. its work to date is captured in ciao (2000a,b). it builds on the efforts of itspredecessor, the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection, which wasestablished in july 1996 as the first national effort to address vulnerabilities of infrastructure in the information age. see pccip (1997).13.the 1999 pitac report outlines nine areas that could be dramatically transformedby information technology. it describes specific transformations in communications, processing information, teaching and learning, the provision of health care, the conduct ofcommerce, the way people work, the design and manufacture of goods, the conduct ofresearch, and government operations. the full potential of these and similar applicationscannot be achieved without a much better fundamental understanding of the applicationsthemselves, the supporting it, and the relationship between the two. a great deal ofresearch needs to be done to gain this understanding.14.as noted in a previous cstb study (cstb, 1997), most of the people involved in thedesign and implementation of it systems are sophisticated users of computing and communications devices. they do not, in general, understand the ways in which it is used indifferent applications, nor the more limited technical prowess of the average end user. as aresult, it is difficult for researchers and system designers to know what will be easy andgratifying for many of their ultimate customers.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.482resources for information technologyresearchthe resources needed for research include funding and human capital, which are interrelated. increases in funding for informationtechnology (it) research can enable industrial and university laboratories to hire more researchers, increase the number of graduate students trained in the nationõs research universities, and allow the purchaseof more it hardware, software, and services to support those people.similarly, increasing the size of the research workforce demands additional financial resources for salaries and technical infrastructure. butnumbers alone do not tell the whole story. equally important are thetypes of work supported and the types of organizations that fund orundertake the research. vendors of computing and communicationsproducts, systems integrators, and end users all have different perspectives on the it challenges that need to be addressed, and these perspectives combine with those of government funders of research and theresearchers themselves to influence the scale and scope of the researchagenda.this chapter reviews trends in the nationõs overall investment in itresearch. the first section provides a framework for evaluating trends byexplaining the importance of diversity in research portfolios, a themecarried forward through the chapter. the next two sections examinelevels of government and industry funding for it research, concentratingon the years 1987 to 1998. distinctions are made, when possible, amongfunding sources (e.g., specific federal agencies, vendors, or users of itcomponents) and the types of research supported (e.g., componentmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research49advances vs. system integration issues). the last section of the chapterreviews trends in academic it research, which receives much of the government and industrial support.a credible discussion of research resources presupposes the existenceof data: unfortunately, the present discussion is limited by the nature andquality of available statistics on it research expenditures, as well as bylags between the time conditions are measured and the time they arereported. despite extensive efforts by the national science foundation(nsf) and the bureau of the census, federal statistics on industrial andfederally funded research remain difficult to track over time because someindividual firms have been reclassified into different industry sectors andsurvey methodologies have been revised. private sources of information,whether corporate reports or statistics from industry associations, typically do not distinguish expenditures on basic research from those ontechnology development (or applied research). further complicatingmatters, neither federal nor private statistics speak to it as a whole.rather, they refer to academic disciplines (e.g., computer science andelectrical engineering) or industry classifications (e.g., office and computing equipment and computing and data processing services). some of thecategories are being updated, but it is too soon to assess the impact ofthose changes. as computing and communications technologies convergeand it is infused into a growing number of products and services, assessing the size and needs of it research will become even more difficult.because of the limitations in the available data sets, this chapter doesnot attempt a definitive assessment. instead, it presents and analyzes amosaic of available statistics to elucidate the dominant themes in supportfor research. in some cases, funding for combined expenditures on research and development (r&d) is used as a proxy for research; in others,the distinctions in federal data between basic and applied research areused to gain some insight, however limited, into the overall investmentsin these areas.diversity in the research basethe payoff of any research, especially fundamental research, is inherently uncertain. research managers cannot predict which projects willprove successful or produce the greatest benefit to their organizations,industry, or society as a whole. accordingly, savvy research managersseek to invest in a range of diverse research programs as a strategy forensuring that at least a fraction of the overall portfolio will pay offñpreferably enough to justify the entire investment. the concept of preparing for the unpredictable by investing in diverse activities that pursue amaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50making it betterspread of the best possible ideas is known as òportfolio managementó infinancial markets, which rely on this concept to manage risk.diversity within a research or financial portfolio plays much the samerole as does genetic diversity in a species. a living organism carries asmall amount of genetic material in addition to the genes that are essential for function. in a static environment, this genetic diversity imposes acost beyond that carried by a species whose members are geneticallyidentical and specifically tuned to exploit the environment. however, intimes of a change or competition from other species, genetic diversityenables a species to adapt to the new environment using its extra resources. similarly, diversity in the research base ensures that a nationõsinnovations will continue in the face of unforeseen changes in the technical, business, or societal landscape.1 diverse approaches will thus beavailable when changing conditions require new solutions quickly.no one can fully predict future needs. the need for highspeed packetswitching could not have been predicted 25 years ago, yet it is the heart ofthe internet today. the need for ultralowpower microprocessors waslargely unexplored 20 years ago, whereas today it is a critical underpinning in the growing area of portable and handheld computing. theeconomic payoffs of specific investments are likewise difficult to predict.coding theory and digital signal processing were important research areas40 years ago because of their applications in telephony and military radio.there was no way to know, however, that this research would have suchenormous importance for consumer cellular telephones and internetmultimedia conferencing, which have hundreds of millions of users.lack of diversity in the it research base can result from several factors. first, inbreeding can dilute the effectiveness of a research area as thesame small community keeps funding and peer reviewing its membersõprojects. or a research area can become too focused on a single approachthat in retrospect turns out to have been unproductive. this can happenin a vigorous industry when firms adopt common approaches in theirproducts, implying to researchers that even a successful new idea couldnot be introduced into practice. for example, radical new ideas for microprocessor designs might seem futile, because a tiny number of designsdominate todayõs market and the cost of market entry is enormous. however, lowpower designs, crafted for the batterypowered portable devicesthat are sure to increase in number, might offer an opportunity for a verydifferent approach.second, there can be a lack of funding for certain types of researchñresulting in an absence of understanding of some technology that mightsuddenly become important to the field. this can happen when innovation moves ahead of research and new products and services are developed without sufficient intellectual underpinnings. arguably, some ofmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research51the problems inherent in largescale systems fall into this category (asdiscussed further in chapter 4).third, research can reflect, to too great a degree, the objectives of thefunders rather than the ideas of researchers. although narrowly definedproject goals can sometimes drive research that has serendipitous outcomes, they typically undermine diversity. this prospect fueled debatewithin the it research community in the 1990s, when the high performance computing and communications initiative focused attention onthe nature of research program definition and its impacts. of course, itcan be difficult to quantify the opportunity cost, which, at best, may bemeasurable only in retrospect.federal support for informationtechnology researchthe federal government has been a strong supporter of it researchsince world war ii. some of this research is conducted in federal laboratories, such as those supported by the department of energy (doe) andthe department of defense (dod), but the greatest impact may havecome from federally funded research carried out in university and industrial laboratories (cstb, 1999). over the past 50 years, this research hascontributed to a wide range of important developments, including interactive timeshared computing, computer graphics, artificial intelligence,relational databases, and internetworking (cstb, 1995, 1999).2 thesetechnologies laid the foundation for new firms and new industries thathave made substantial contributions to the nationõs economic and socialdevelopment. the context for decisions about new it research continuesto changeñthe industrial context seems particularly uncertain as thisreport is writtenñbut broad lessons can be extracted from history toinform future decision making.as noted in earlier reports by the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb, 1995, 1999), federal support for it research hasbeen most effective when (1) directed toward fundamental research withlongterm payoffs, (2) used to support experimental prototypes thatpushed the technological frontier and created communities of researchersthat crossed institutional boundaries, and (3) expanded on research pursued in industry laboratories. such investments not only generated newtechnical ideas and knowledge that subsequently were incorporated intonew products, processes, and services, but alsoñespecially in the case ofuniversity researchñtrained generations of researchers who went on tolead the it revolution. continued federal support for projects thatcomplement industryfunded research in these ways will help maintainthe strength of the it sector. federal agencies also need to continue tomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52making it betterlook forward, supporting computing and communications research inareas that are likely to grow in importance.the following sections examine trends in federal funding between1990 and 1998, the relative contributions of particular agencies, the operating styles of major federal agencies, and the characteristics of somelarge it research programs. that period was chosen because it constitutes the most recent period for which consistent statistics are available.other sections draw on data for 1999 and 2000.trends in federal fundingtrends in federal support for it research over the past decade can begleaned from data on funds obligated for research in computer scienceand electrical engineering, the two academic disciplines most closely associated with it. computer science encompasses the study of the theory ofcomputing; the design, development, and application of computingdevices; information science and systems; programming languages; andsystems analysisñall topics that are directly applicable to it. electricalengineering includes the study of electronic devices and communicationsystems, which is directly relevant to it, as well as the study of electricpower systems, which is not. the sum of research expenditures for computer science and electrical engineering is an imperfect, but reasonable,proxy for it research. although it overstates federal expenditures byincluding work on electric power, this overstatement is offset by uncounted research in other academic disciplines relevant to it, such asmathematics and cognitive science (important for understanding humancomputer interaction).the data indicate that federal funding for it research has, in general,been strong over the past decade. combined federal funding for computer science and electrical engineering grew from $1.4 billion to $2 billionin constant dollars between 1990 and 1998ña 40 percent increase in realterms (figure 2.1).3 however, federal funding for it research remainedvirtually unchanged in real terms between 1993 and 1997, when theinternet and the world wide web began to exert a significant influenceon the nationõs economic and social structure, and when combined salesof it goods and services were growing at an annual rate of more than 10percent in real terms.4 in other words, the explosion in it applicationsthroughout industry, government, and society was not matched by a commensurate increase in federal research support for the fieldñeven as thoseapplications began pushing beyond the knowledge limits of the underlying technology and began opening up new research opportunities.despite the gains in funding for it as a whole, federal support forresearch in electrical engineering appears to have declined between 1990making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research5305001,0001,5002,0002,500199019911992199319941995199619971998computer scienceelectrical engineeringtotal itmillions of constant 1998 dollarsfigure 2.1 federal funding for it research, 1990 to 1998. source: nationalscience foundation (2000a).and 1998. the data suggest a 16 percent drop in real terms, from $764million to $639 million in constant dollars (figure 2.2). most of the cutswere in the applied research budget, effectively boosting the share offunds devoted to basic research from 23 percent to 34 percent of totalresearch spending in electrical engineering. however, support for basicresearch did not grow appreciably until 1998. reductions in total researchmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54making it better02004006008001,0001,200199019911992199319941995199619971998millions of constant 1998 dollarstotal researchbasic researchfigure 2.2 federal obligations for research in electrical engineering, 1990 to 1998.source: national science foundation (2000a).in electrical engineering appear to be due almost entirely to cutbacks insupport from the dod, which accounted for as much as 84 percent of thenationõs total research funding for the field during this time period. thisobservation suggests that a significant portion of the cutbacks wasdirected toward those areas of electrical engineering that are directlyrelated to it, but sufficiently detailed data are not available to confirmmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research55this statement. nor can available statistics reveal whether apparent reductions in funding for electrical engineering resulted from the reclassification of some research from electrical engineering to computer science.in computer science, combined federal expenditures for basic andapplied research (also referred to as òtotal researchó) more than doubledin real terms between 1990 and 1998, growing from $671 million to $1.4billion in constant 1998 dollars (figure 2.3). here, however, funding forapplied research grew more quickly than that for basic research. although02004006008001,0001,2001,4001,600199019911992199319941995199619971998millions of constant 1998 dollarstotal researchbasic researchfigure 2.3 federal obligations for research in computer science, 1990 to 1998.source: national science foundation (2000a).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56making it betterspending on basic research increased from $269 million to $419 millionduring the 8year period, its share of total federal funding for computerscience research fell from 40 percent to 30 percent. statistics on basicversus applied research must be used with caution because distinctionsbetween the two categories are notoriously difficult to make and mayonly reflect differences in accounting methods. nevertheless, the datacorrelate with the testimony to this committee (and others) by it researchersñespecially university researchersñwho perceive a decided shift infederal funding away from fundamental research and toward more applied projects with narrower scopes of inquiry, additional project milestones, mandatory system demonstrations, and interim deliverables. thistrend has an upside and a downside: it may enhance the accountability ofgovernment agencies and help document the benefits of public investments (objectives set forth by the government performance and resultsact), but it researchers report that it hampers their ability to conductlongterm research with inherently uncertain outcomes. at risk is thetype of work that has been the cornerstone of federally funded it researchfor decades.sources of federal supportdespite growth in the number of agencies listed as supporting itresearch, federal funding remains concentrated in a handful of agencies.as recently as 1998, 88 percent of all federal funds for computer scienceresearch were distributed by just three federal agencies: the departmentof defense (dod), the department of energy (doe), and the nationalscience foundation (nsf). the dod alone contributed 40 percent of thetotal, with much of its funding coming from the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) (see table 2.1). a similar proportion ofall funding for basic research in computer science came from the samethree agencies, with the nsf alone contributing 62 percent of the total in1998. this funding pattern continues a historical trend: as far back as1976 (the earliest date for which consistent data are available), these threeagencies contributed 91 percent of federal funding for computer scienceresearch, with the dod alone contributing 68 percent.although the dod has driven many important it innovations in thepast 50 years, the fieldõs reliance on this one agency makes it researchsupport especially sensitive to fluctuations and directions in defensespendingñand to repeated calls for research to be more relevant to defense missions. defense budgets declined significantly in the postcoldwar environment, with total defense r&d declining 24 percent in realterms from its high in 1989 to 1999.5 although dod funding for computer science research grew 32 percent in real terms between 1990 andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research57table 2.1 federal funding for computer science research by agency,1998total researchbasic researchmillionspercentmillionspercentagencyof dollarsof totalof dollarsof totaldepartment of defense562408520department of energy39628225national science foundation2671925862department of health andhuman services665358department of commerce58410national aeronautics and spaceadministration262174other25210total1,399100419100source: national science foundation (2000a).1998, it varied from year to year, declining in real terms in 1991, 1994, and1996. steep increases in spending by nsf and doe during those yearsmore than compensated for fluctuating military funding, but increases incomputer science spending were not matched in spending for electricalengineering. the dod funding for electrical engineering research dropped20 percent in real terms between 1990 and 1998, driving the decline intotal federal funding for the field.the concentration of federal it research funding within three organizations may have other limiting effects, not only on technology but also,perhaps, on the performance of government operations. several agencies, including the department of health and human services (dhhs),the social security administration, the federal aviation administration,and the internal revenue service, find their missions increasingly relianton capable it systems, which figure not only in internal processes (e.g.,determinations and tracking of social security benefits) but also, increasingly, in the conduct of external activities for which they have someresponsibility and in the very fabric of their relationships with externalparties, from entities in regulated industries to individual citizens. thepotential benefits to government agencies from it are such that specialfederal efforts have been mounted to pursue them, including the digitalgovernment program described in chapter 4. this level of attention andeffort distinguishes it from other types of infrastructure, such as transportation, on which agencies also depend.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58making it betterachieving the benefits of it within agencies has been more difficultthan articulating their promise. the difficulties these agencies have experienced with systems modernization over the past decade (see chapter 3)suggest that adequate solutions to their it needs are not available andcannot be developed within existing time and budget constraints. theproblems are related mostly to the large scale of the systems and applicationsña common issue that might have the best chance of being resolvedif the agencies supported the relevant it research. yet the agencies arenot mounting significant it research programs, nor have they rushed tosupport the exploratory digital government program launched by thensf to couple it researchers to agencies with it challengesñan initiativethat could stretch the state of the art. surely, support for it research fromfederal agencies other than dod, doe, and nsf has increased as a percentage of total federal support since 1990, but the fraction remains small.only 12 percent of total it research funding and 13 percent of basicresearch support came from other agencies in 1998ñand most of that wasprovided by sciencebased agencies such as dhhs and the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), which have long histories ofattention to it. few other agencies have established it research programs, and without the impetus of their resources and problem definitions, technical progress on these problems will probably be a matter ofchance.styles of federal supportfederal agencies support it research in different ways that tend to besuited to different types of problems. the most notable distinction is thatbetween the research management styles of darpa and the nsf. research at darpa has always emphasized the design and engineeringaspects of it, and building and experimenting with research prototypesare an essential aspect of that research.6 such experimental work requirescontinuityñmore funding per investigator and longer projects than arenecessary for theoretical or paper studies (cstb, 1994). darpaõs program managers assemble and oversee research portfolios within particular thematic areas. researchers themselves play an indirect role in settingthe objectives of the program through their interactions with programmanagers, and some darpa programs specifically allow investigatorinitiated proposals within the research theme of the program. programmanagers are technically savvyñusually researchers on leave from university or industryñand know both the field and its researchers well.they work with research leaders and military leaders to develop longterm objectives that are both tractable for the research community andvaluable to the dod, balancing nearterm military needs against longermaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research59term fundamental research that will advance the field. program managers often devise ways for researchers from different organizations towork together on common problems or to bring new expertise or disciplines to bear on a problem.the nsf, by contrast, relies much more heavily on peer review toallocate its it research funding. proposals are submitted by principalinvestigators, reviewed by several research peers, and acted on by aprogram manager. as a result, ideas are derived from the research community without the programmatic framework characteristic of a darpafunded effort. at the same time, most research proposals are for individualinvestigator research. grants are typically small, on the order of $90,000per year, and include support for graduate research assistants. more than10 years ago, the computing and information science and engineering(cise) directorate within the nsf began to address experimental researchwith grants that could support modestsized research teams for severalyears, something that had not been possible within conventional grantprograms. recently, this approach has been extended from hardware tosoftware systems experiments. in partnership with darpa, the dhhsõsnational library of medicine, nasa, and others, cise supports thedigital libraries initiative (dli), characterized by research themes focusedmore on an application vision than is typical of traditional computerscience research programs, which support subdisciplines such as programming languages, operating systems, and artificial intelligence. inkeeping with a trend throughout the nsf, cise is sponsoring more interdisciplinary work, engaging more social scientists (e.g., in support ofbetter user interfaces or better systems to support group interaction) andresearchers in the natural sciences to work in collaboration with computerscientists and engineers.in addition, cise sponsors a variety of efforts designed to provide itinfrastructure to support nsfõs broader mission, namely, the support ofscientific research. the most notable examples originated with the supercomputer centers established in the mid1980s. now called partnershipsfor advanced computational infrastructure (paci), two facilities withhighperformance computers are linked nationwide to groups of academicand industrial partners to constitute a òdistributed metacomputing environment,ó featuring largescale computing and visualization techniquesto address scientific questions in many disciplines.7 other efforts aim atimproving networking infrastructure for the scientific community, leveraging the multiagency next generation internet (ngi) initiative. theseactivities routinely provoke comments from it researchers who fear thatthese efforts will be counted as programs that contribute to it research,when in fact their purpose is to provide it systems for other scientists touse in their research. they are, for the most part, infrastructure programs,making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60making it betternot research programs. the dli, as well as some of the larger activitieslikely to emerge from the information technology research initiative (seebelow), are different from paci and the infrastructure component of thengi because of their more balanced integration of application objectiveswith it research.federal information technology research programsthe majority of recent federal funding for it research has been provided under the umbrella of the high performance computing and communications initiative (hpcci), which involved 10 federal agencies andoffices and had a total budget of over $800 million in 1999 (table 2.2).this initiative pursues research in several areas, primarily highend computing and largescale networking. highend computing research includes work on components and architectures for highspeed computers(i.e., computers capable of 1015 operations per second); software for operating them and supporting various applications (e.g., scientific visualization, weather prediction, biomedical research); and theoretical computertable 2.2 federal funding for high performance computing andcommunications by agency, fy99 (millions of dollars)highendlargescaleagencycomputingnetworkingotheratotalnational science foundation224.772.04.3301darpa48.082.210.4141department of energy91.933.90126national institutes of health27.167.98103national aeronautics and spaceadministration71.420.60.693national security agency24.03.027national institute of standards andtechnology3.55.24.313national oceanic and atmosphericadministration8.82.712agency for health care policy andresearch03.14.98environmental protection agency4.24 total503.6290.632.5828athis category includes funding for highconfidence systems; humancentered systems; andeducation, training, and human resources.source: national science and technology council (1999b).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research61science. research in largescale networking involves attempts to developand deploy innovative technologies for highspeed networking and toexperiment with applications that can take advantage of these networks.the ngi initiative falls into this category.8 smaller amounts of fundingare allocated to the development of highconfidence systems that havepredictably high levels of availability and security; humancentered systems that enhance interactions between computers and users; and education, training, and human resources.other federal programs are aimed at more specific needs of federalagencies and contribute to the research base in different ways. for example, the doe spent $484 million in 1999 on its accelerated strategic computing initiative (asci), which is intended to develop technologies thatwill enable the agency to simulate the performance of nuclear weaponswithout testing them (in compliance with the comprehensive test bantreaty). through this program, the doe is establishing centers of excellence at five universities to pursue highend computing systems and simulation software and is working with the developers of these systems.9meanwhile, nasa pursues a more limited program of it research todevelop tools and integrated systems for the design and manufacture offlight vehicles, to manage complex flight and aviation operation systems,and to automatically generate and verify flightcrucial software. the dodresearch labs support a range of fundamental and applied research programs to serve military needs.a new multiagency initiative, proposed under the name informationtechnology for the twentyfirst century (it2) by the nsf is intended toboost fundamental it research, particularly in the areas of scalability andsoftware. in its first year (fy00), the initiative provided an additional$366 million in federal funding for it r&d to support (1) longtermresearch in software, humancomputer interfaces and information management, scalable information infrastructure, and highend computing;(2) the procurement and deployment of advanced computers that are 100to 1,000 times more powerful than those available in 1999, simulationsoftware and tools to make the computers useful in scientific and engineering applications, and teams of researchers to work on them to solvechallenging problems, and (3) research on the social and economic impactsof it that will enhance the usefulness of it systems, limit potential misuses of such systems (such as potential violations of privacy), and lead tobetter understanding of the ways in which knowledge, values, and systems of society influence the spread of it and the acceptability of itsystems in various applications (nstc, 1999a). the longterm researchcomponent, in particular, is an attempt to recapture the past success offederal funding for it research and òlead to fundamental breakthroughsin computing and communications, in the same way that governmentmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62making it betterinvestment beginning in the 1960s led to todayõs internetó (pitac, 1999).the initiative is to be coordinated jointly with the hpcc programs andthe ngi initiative. the clinton administration proposed an additional$605 million in it r&d funding in its fy01 budget to support research inpriority areas, such as infrastructure for advanced computational modeling and simulation; storing, managing, and preserving data; security andprivacy of information; ubiquitous computing and wireless networks;intelligent machines and networks of robots; more reliable software;broadband optical networks; and future generations of computers. it willalso support partnerships to pursue research breakthroughs in particularapplication areas, such as health care and education (white house, 2000).six federal agencies are participating in the it2 initiative: dod, doe,nasa, nih, the national oceanic and atmospheric administration(noaa), and nsf. each has developed new programs or expandedexisting ones to meet the objectives of it2. some of these programs willaddress elements of largescale systems and social applications of it, butnot to the full extent needed (see chapters 3 and 4). although it is toosoon to evaluate these efforts, early indicators point to some practicalchallenges. the largest federal supporter of computing research, darpa,attempted to jumpstart its efforts to promote pathbreaking it researchby issuing a broad agency announcement (baa) in late 1998 (immediately after pitac released a draft version of its report) calling for òradically new visionsó of the future of information technology (box 2.1).anecdotal reports suggest that the results were disappointing to darpa,perhaps because the research community was uncertain about the neweffort. nevertheless, several projects were funded as a result of thisannouncement, including project oxygen at the massachusetts instituteof technology (mit) laboratory for computer science;10 the endeavorexpedition at the university of california at berkeley;11 portolano/workscape at the university of washington;12 and another expedition atcarnegie mellon university. each of these is exploring different aspectsof the postpc era in which computing will be embedded into a range ofinformation devices.13in late 1999, nsf issued a solicitation for proposals under its agencywide information technology research (itr) program, which called forresearch in eight areas related to it: software, it education and workforce,humancomputer interfaces, information management, advanced computational science, scalable information infrastructure, social and economic implications of computing and communications, and revolutionarycomputing (nsf, 1999). awards are anticipated in september 2000, butanecdotal reports on this effort point to the stresses on nsf programmanagement caused by a large influx of researcher communications (e.g.,letters of intent, preproposals, and proposals) that need to be evaluatedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research63box 2.1expeditions into the twentyfirst centuryòthe goal of expeditions into the 21st century, a broad agency announcement(baa) issued by the defense advanced research projects agency, is to encourage vigorous and revolutionary research in information technology (it). the fundedefforts will set out to invent the future of it by exploring alternative visions and theirimpact on society. the ideas pursued by expedition teams are expected to lead tounexpected results, thereby nourishing the information infrastructure and industries of the future.òthe baa solicits proposals for radically new visions that step outside of thepresent and anticipated models of both it itself (i.e., hardware, software, etc.) andthe domains and modes in which it is applied. there are a number of precedentsfor the ôexpeditionõ approach. a famous example is the xerox palo alto researchcenter, where researchers created an experimental network of computers for useby individuals doing office work. this effort pioneered many of the revolutionarytechnologies that led to todayõs personal computersñgraphical user interfaces,pointing devices, laser printing, distributed file systems, and ôwhat you see is whatyou getõ word processing. this expedition was rooted in an alternative visionregarding how it could be organized and used by individuals (i.e., distributed computing) as opposed to a more predictable goal of increasing the raw capability ofthendominant mainframe computers.òan expedition may focus on either a disciplinebased theme, such as bioinformatics, or an infrastructurebased theme, such as ubiquitous computing. toestablish a context, each expedition must be based on assumptions not true today;for example, one could assume the worldwide availability of nearinfinite bandwidth. an expedition need not be limited to a single such assumption; however,proposals are expected to outline an approach to the exploration of a vision withinthe context of the assumptions. the bottom line: think big and bold.ósource: reproduced from the defense advanced research projects agency (1999).and responded to by a fixed staff already busy with ongoing responsibilities. extraordinary efforts were made to recruit experts to participate inthe necessary peer review. it will be years before the results of theserecent efforts by darpa, nsf, and other participants in the it2 initiativecan be evaluated, but current indications underscore the importance ofthe human infrastructure associated with the design and implementationof federal programs.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64making it betterindustry support for informationtechnology researchin the united states, industry is the leading supporter of it r&doverall, according to available statisticsñalthough these statistics raise asmany questions as they appear to answer.14 the committee chose toanalyze the available, albeit flawed, information in the belief that roughdimensions could be discerned and would be relevant to thinking abouthow to make progress, notably because the conduct and capacity ofindustry research are key to policy debates about whether and why thefederal government should support more it research. in an attempt tounderstand the sources of variation in reported aggregate data and todevise a more consistent set of data covering the 1990s, the committeemade special arrangements with the census bureau to secure access tothe raw data it collects on corporate r&d expenditures. in addition,committee members were able to enhance the utility of the data withquantitative and qualitative insights based on their own experiences. thatsaid, the committee underscores the inadvisability of reading too muchinto specific numbers and other details.federal statistics indicate that companies in the six industry sectorsmost closely related to the manufacture and supply of it products andprovision of information servicesñoffice, computing, and accountingmachines, communications equipment, electronic components, computerand data processing services, professional and commercial equipmentand supplies, and communications servicesñinvested some $52 billion inr&d in 1998. detailed data are not available for the professional andcommercial equipment and supplies industry. the five remaining sectorshad combined r&d expenditures of $45 billion in 1998 (table 2.3). thisfigure represents 7.3 percent of the combined annual sales revenues of thecompanies in these industries. more than onequarter of these r&dexpenditures, or $12.7 billion, was spent on research, with roughly 20percent of research funding, or $2.7 billion, classified as basic researchñthe best approximation of fundamental research that is available usingfederal statistics.15as the data in table 2.3 indicate, there are considerable sectortosector differences in the support of r&d. for example, in the office,computing, and accounting equipment industry, r&d expenditures totaledmore than 9 percent of sales revenues in 1998, whereas in the communications services industry (which might include companies such as at&t,mci, sprint, and the regional bell operating companies), expenditures onr&d represented less than 1 percent of sales revenues. equally significant differences exist in support for research. manufacturers of office,computing, and accounting machines, communications equipment, andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research65table 2.3 company investment in research and development ininformation technology industries, 1998 (millions of dollars)investmentr&d as %totaltotalbasicindustry sectorof salesr&dresearchresearchoffice, computing, and accountingequipment9.28,8903,441276communications equipment11.210,1732,2961,148electronic components8.49,7764,661635communications services0.91,76834956computing and data processing servicesa12.414,2971,996599total7.344,90412,7432,714note: does not include data for the professional and commercial equipment and suppliesindustry, which had estimated r&d investments of $7.2 billion in 1998.acomputing and data processing services includes prepackaged software, programmingservices, systems integration, and other computerrelated services.source: national science foundation (2000b).electronic devices (including semiconductors)ñòcomponent vendorsó inthe terminology developed in chapter 1ñfunded more than 80 percent ofthe research reported by it firms in 1998. communications service providersñwhich can be considered òend usersó in the terminology of chapter 1ñfunded less than 6 percent of the total. the computer and dataprocessing services industry, despite its significant r&d expendituresboth in nominal terms and as a percentage of sales, also invests relativelylittle in research: its research expenditures accounted for just 14 percentof the it industry total in 1998. the computer and data processing services industry encompasses firms engaged in a wide variety of activities,from the development of prepackaged software (another òcomponentó)to custom programming and systems integration (òsystemsó work in theterminology of chapter 1) to computer support and repairs. as theanalysis below demonstrates, much of the r&d in this industry is attributable to software developers, such as microsoft, implying that systemsintegrators themselves fund little research.most industryfunded it research targets the discovery of new technical opportunities, usually within the sponsorõs line of business. thetime horizon is longer and the risk is higher than would be the case forproduct development, but the work does not pursue fundamental knowledge and it typically is completed within 3 years. targeted researchmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66making it betterusually is done only by larger companies with $3 billion or more in annualrevenues; smaller companies do little or no explicit research. a few largecompanies, such as ibm corporation, lucent technologies, microsoftcorporation, and xerox corporation, support fundamental research conducted in their own laboratories and, to a much lesser extent, in universities. this research addresses fundamental questions not necessarilylimited to the sponsorõs line of business, and it has resulted in a number ofmajor industry innovations, from the transistor to relational databases.without exception, such work accounts for only a small fraction of thesponsorõs overall research portfolio, because the emphasis is on targetedwork.the following sections examine trends in industrial research support,r&d at large companies, disincentives to corporate r&d investment, gapsin systems integration research, research by enduser organizations, andventure capital support for innovation.trends in industry supporttrends in industrial support for it research over the past decade aredifficult to discern because of limitations in data collection and inconsistencies in the available data. over the past 20 years, the census bureauhas expanded the three relevant standard industrial classification (sic)categoriesñbusiness services, electronics, and computing equipmentñon two different occasions, meaning that each one has twice been segmented into a larger number of subsectors.16 the reclassification of itcompanies cannot be tracked because the census bureau cannot say whichcompanies are in which categories. (the business category declared by acompany in its filings to the securities and exchange commission (sec)is not relevant because census makes its own classification decisionsbased on the composition of the companyõs domestic payroll.) to complicate matters, a change in a firmõs business focus (e.g., from telephoneservices to equipment manufacturing or communications business consulting) also leads to a reclassification of the firm and its research.17 thereare also data gaps because the census bureau did not collect r&d statistics from servicesector companies (whether in telecommunications orbanking) prior to 1995, nor does it break out the itrelated component ofr&d expenditures by firms in other industries (i.e., end users of it), suchas the boeing company, general motors corporation, and merrill lynch.furthermore, companies have different cultures and definitions for research;even within a single company it is often impossible to get an accurateestimate of spending on research that is spread thinly among divisionsand researchers. often the most important research is conducted informally by individuals without explicit corporate approval. in the past, itmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research67was somewhat easier to estimate spending because research was concentrated in the centralized laboratories of a few large companies.industry support for it research is in the midst of significant transformation, driven in large part by burgeoning demand for itbased productsand services. large it firms and startups are attempting to meet thedemand by bringing new technologies to market at an increasing rate, atrend that has profound implications for research. as new competitorsenter the industry, the traditional process of performing inhouse researchand incorporating the results into new products and services is beingsupplemented by some firmsõ attempts to, in effect, purchase researchresults. some companies buy research explicitly by supporting universityresearch, buying other companies (e.g., startups that have developedinnovative products or technologies), or licensing technology from them,thereby obviating the need to fund their own research directed at developing similar solutions. many companies engage in no explicit research,instead buying it indirectly through the activities of their vendors. someassemblers of personal computers, such as dell computer corporationand gateway, inc., for example, conduct virtually no research, choosinginstead to assemble components (e.g., microprocessors, disk drives, operating systems) purchased from vendors such as intel corporation, seagatetechnologies, and microsoft, which do conduct r&d. the same is truefor many communications service providers, which perform limited r&dbecause they build networks out of communications equipment developed by vendors (although they often participate in testing equipmentsupplied by vendors and are actively involved in designing their ownnetworks). supply chains in it industries are, therefore, important tounderstanding the flow of innovation, in addition to furnishing components for larger products and services. this trend has significant implications for research throughout the it industry.federal statistics suggest that industry spending on it r&d grewrapidly between 1990 and 1998 (figure 2.4). the sheer magnitude of theswings in the reported data for individual industry sectors calls into question the reliability of the data and indicates the degree of reclassificationof firms among sectors over time.18 nevertheless, the data suggest thatfirms in the office, computing, and accounting industry and in the professional equipment industry reduced their r&d expenditures in the early1990s before boosting them later in the decade. r&d in computing anddata processing services appear to have grown, while r&d in communications services declined.these trends mirror the data on r&d reported by firms in their annualfilings to the securities and exchange commission, although the magnitude of the changes is considerably less dramatic (table 2.4). among adozen or so top it firms whose combined r&d investments constitutedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68making it better05,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,00040,00045,00050,00055,000199019911992199319941995199619971998millions of constant 1998 dollarsoffice, computing, and accounting equipmentcommunications equipmentelectronic componentscomputing, data processing, and communications servicecommunications servicescomputer and data processing servicesprofessional and commercial equipment and suppliestotalfigure 2.4 reported company investments in research and development in itindustries, 1990 to 1998. data for the professional and commercial equipmentand supplies industry estimated in 1998. source: compiled from u.s. censusbureau statistics.almost threequarters of all reported it industry r&d in 1998,19 suchspending declined moderately in real terms between 1991 and 1994 andthen grew rapidly between 1995 and 1999. only three companies reported1999 r&d investments lower than those of 1991 (in real terms). ibmõsinvestments in r&d declined from $7.6 billion in 1991 to $4.4 billion in1995 before rising to $5.2 billion in 1999, digital equipmentõs investmentsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69table 2.4 research and development investment by large information technology companies, 19911999(millions of constant 1998 dollars)company199119921993199419951996199719981999ibm7,6447,3346,0954,6774,3784,7944,9395,0465,205at&t3,5833,2883,4123,3343,903847862662543lucent technologies2,6283,2263,9034,452ncr389388360336hewlettpackard1,6831,8221,9312,1732,4172,8003,1103,3283,393motorola1,3031,4691,6681,9942,3072,4662,7832,8933,394intel7118771,0641,1911,3611,8622,3772,5093,071microsoft2703965156549031,3661,8872,6012,932texas instruments1,0531,0021,0761,1208841,2161,5761,2251,316sun microsystems4104304885365916738371,0141,246xerox1,0241,0379689599981,0751,0791,043966digital equipment1,8571,8541,9241,6401,0921,0941,0275330compaq computer4894644784915807168271,3531,639cisco systems00481152224117111,0261,574 total23,60823,25923,08022,21923,53726,19930,10432,42135,397note: at&t spun off lucent technologies and ncr in 1996. digital equipment corporation was purchased by compaq computer in june1998; the data shown for digitalõs 1998 r&d expenditures are estimates for the two quarters of the year during which it operated as a separatecompany. compaqõs 1998 and 1999 figures reflect its acquisition of digitalõs r&d operations. source: company annual reports.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70making it betterdropped from $1.9 billion in 1991 to $1 billion in 1997 before the companywas purchased by compaq computer in 1998, and xeroxõs r&d spendingdropped slightly, from $1.02 billion to $966 million. most companies postedreal gains in r&d spending during the course of the decade. microsoftõsr&d spending jumped from $270 million to $2.9 billion in real terms between 1991 and 1999 and intelõs leapt from $711 million to $3.1 billion. ciscosystems, a relative newcomer to the field, increased its r&d investment tomore than $1.5 billion in 1999. people in these industries or knowledgeableabout them recognize that the figures apply primarily to development orhighly applied activity rather than to more fundamental research, but thefigures do suggest an increase in innovative activity in the it industry.despite impressive gains, companyfinanced r&d has not grown asquickly as have the sales of it goods and services. several of the companies listed in table 2.4 saw their r&d investments decline as a percentageof net sales between 1991 and 1999 (table 2.5), despite growing absoluter&d investments by many of them. intel, for example, boosted its r&dspending almost fivefold between 1991 and 1999, but its r&d as a percentage of sales dropped from 13 percent to 10.5 percent. although therewere signs that many of the numbers improved in the late 1990s, the dataoverall indicate that r&d funding by large it companies has declined inproportion to the it marketplace, as noted earlier in this chapter.furthermore, the decline in the rate of r&d investment has beenmagnified by a shift toward more nearterm, targeted research or development in many industry labs. over the past decade, the share of it r&dconducted by the 12 largest firmsñthose most likely to conduct longterm researchñhas declined by more than 10 percentage points. in addition, several large it companies that operate central research divisionshave redirected their research to track more closely areas of clear businessinterest. these changes have been driven by a desire to (1) better coupleresearch activities with product development as a means of bringing newtechnologies to market more quickly and improving overall corporateperformance,20 (2) shift resources into computing and communicationssystems research, and (3) emphasize a more problemoriented way ofselecting research topics (box 2.2). research is coupled more closely nowto the needs of the marketplace. ibm, for example, still supports theindustryõs largest inhouse research program, but more of its work isconcentrated on systems and software, the underpinnings of ecommerce,than on mathematics and physics.disincentives to corporate investment in research and developmentlike most commercial enterprises, it firms have strong economic reasons to refrain from investing in research, especially longterm research.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71table 2.5 research and development as a percentage of sales in large information technology companies, 1991to 1999company199119921993199419951996199719981999ibm10.310.18.96.85.86.16.26.26.0at&t4.84.44.54.14.71.61.61.20.9lucent technologies11.012.112.311.8ncr5.45.85.55.5hewlettpackard10.19.78.58.07.07.07.17.06.8motorola10.09.89.08.48.18.69.29.811.1intel12.913.311.09.68.08.79.49.510.6microsoft12.712.712.412.914.214.715.617.015.0texas instruments13.512.011.510.17.411.915.614.214.1sun microsystems11.110.610.310.79.59.29.610.410.8xerox6.66.46.25.95.76.05.55.45.4digital equipment11.611.812.610.67.57.37.88.20.0compaq computer7.37.14.93.63.33.53.34.34.3cisco systems6.88.09.59.710.912.113.1note: at&t spun off lucent technologies and ncr in 1996. digital equipment corporation was purchased by compaq computer in june 1998;the data shown for digitalõs 1998 r&d expenditures are estimates for the two quarters of the year during which it operated as a separate company.compaqõs 1998 and 1999 figures reflect its acquisition of digitalõs r&d operations. source: company annual reports.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72making it betterbox 2.2redirection of research at large industrial laboratoriesibm corporationwhen ibm corporation experienced substantial operating losses in the early1990s, ibm research underwent significant restructuring. skeptical of the researchdivisionõs contributions to the companyõs bottom line, ibm executives cut the companyõs total research and development (r&d) expenditures from $7.7 billion in1991 to $4.4 billion in 1995, and the divisionõs budget dropped from $550 million to$430 million. although most of the cuts were accommodated by trimming overhead and eliminating redundant or unpromising programs, total r&d employmentdeclined from a peak of about 3,400 to approximately 2,800 in late 1997.to deal with this situation, ibm managers attempted to couple research moreclosely to corporate objectives. ibm reoriented its research to focus less onphysics and materials science and more on information systems, storage, software, applications, and solutions. accordingly, the number of researchers workingon networking, internet technologies, solutions, and services grew, whereas thenumber of physicists and materials scientists declined. electronic commerceemerged as a main focus of research. this research is clearly marketdriven butstill requires fundamental advances in computing and mathematics. it has produced innovations such as secure encrypted transactions.in recent years, ibm research has experienced a resurgence. by 1999, ibmõsr&d spending had increased 19 percent (in real terms) over its 1995 level, and theresearch divisionõs budget reached an alltime high. between 1995 and 1999,ibm established three new research facilities across the world: a lab in austin,texas (1995) that works on microprocessor technology; a lab in beijing (1995) thatfocuses on speech recognition and digital library applications; and a facility in india(1998) that addresses cuttingedge customer solutions. ibm research also hasproduced some muchheralded successes. work on speech recognition contributedto the successful viavoice product; researchers found a way to replace aluminumwith copper in microprocessors, paving the way for smaller, faster chips; and workon magnetoresistive data recording technology enabled ibm to capture 40 percentof the laptop storage market and produced the microdrive, a 1squareinch storagedevice for digital cameras and handheld computers. paul horn, director of research,says these technologies and others derived from the companyõs research contribute $25 billion a year in revenues for ibmñonethird of its total.at&t and lucent technologiessince splitting off from at&t in 1996, lucent technologies (which retained belllaboratories) committed itself to funding research at 1 percent of total revenues,which gives researchers an incentive to contribute to the companyõs growth. research expenditures have grown with the company at roughly 19 percent a yearsince 1996, reaching $4.5 billion in 1999. to increase the value and effectivenessof its research, lucent established a variety of mechanisms to accelerate the commercialization of research results. it established an internal venture capital operation to fund innovative ideas that do not fit into existing business units. it haslaunched a dozen or so internal businesses that have their own presidents andvirtual stock, as well as several independent spinoffs, such as visual insights,which sells software that can detect billing fraud by analyzing large amounts ofcontinuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research73data; veridicom, inc., which markets bell labsõ patented fingerprintauthenticationtechnology; lucent digital radio, which is developing technology to convert analogfm radio signals to highquality digital sound for broadcasters and greatly improvethe quality of am radio; and persystant technologies, which offers a softwareserver that creates virtual environments linking networked usersñwhether onwired or wireless phones, laptops, or multimedia personal computersñover thepublic internet or corporate intranets. some of these ventures have moved theirresearch results to the marketplace in just 8 months.at&t also remains committed to funding research, but at a level not to exceed0.3 percent of total revenues. actual expenditures for research at at&t havebeen closer to 0.2 percent of revenues since the two companies split, because thesize of the staff grew more slowly than had originally been anticipated. at&t alsohas allied research programs with newly defined strategic initiatives of its businessunits, especially those focusing on internetrelated technologies. for example,at&t formed a subsidiary, a2b music, in november 1997 to provide secure downloading of music over the internet. the company uses at&tõs encryption technology to protect the digital content rights of music labels and artists.xerox corporationmost of xerox corporationõs computing and communicationsrelated researchis conducted at its palo alto research center (parc), which views itself as providing the equivalent of genetic diversity for xerox. parcõs goals are to create surprising technological opportunities and ensure resilience against dramatic changesin the information technology industry. the center maintains small research programs in several topical areas that are expanded or contracted as technologytrajectories and each programõs relative importance to the company become clearer.over time, parcõs research agenda has shifted to emphasize computing overareas such as mathematics and physics, and the centerõs overall level of effort hasincreased slightly, reflecting xeroxõs commitment to research.to avoid repeating past mistakes, xerox parc has established mechanismsto improve its ability to capture the value of its research. researchers are encouraged to work more closely with xerox business units, and parc routinely usesòspininsó (cases in which xerox forms a corporation to develop a technology, takesa majority ownership position, and offers participants stock) and òspinoutsó (inwhich separately operating companies are formed that license the technology fromxerox) to encourage the commercialization of research results. research problems still are chosen in a highly decentralized fashion, with researchers proposingnew projects, but parc has emphasized a problemoriented approach to projectselection. the idea is to focus on projects that are important to the company, suchas how to make a totally silent copier. a challenge like this allows a range ofresponses, from incorporating sounddeadening devices in the copiers to facilitating the use of computer displays instead of paper copies. such problemorientedresearch often results in multidisciplinary work teams. work on òsmart matteró (thecreation of materials with embedded computing capabilities), for example, involvesboth solidstate physicists and computer scientists.sources: buderi (1999); carey (1999); neil marx, internet division finance, ibm softwaregroup, personal communication, november 20, 1997.box 2.2 continuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74making it betterwithin their relatively small research budgets, vendors are understandably reluctant to invest in projects from which they are unlikely to reapmany or all of the benefits. economists call this the òappropriabilityóproblem: because good ideas diffuse rapidly and can be only partiallyprotected by patents, individual firms cannot be assured of reaping (orappropriating) the benefits of their investments. practical companiestherefore tend to underinvest in the generation of new knowledge andtechnologies (see box 2.3).but it firms face additional hurdles that make the problem of fundingresearch especially acute. first, the it industry is known for a rapid paceof innovation, which by all reports has accelerated in recent years. withproduct cycles as short as 6 to 9 months in many areas of it, companiesmust pour resources into product development or risk being quickly leftbehind. the future is harder for research managers to predict than it wasin the 1980s, a shift that increases the perceived risk for companies thatinvest too much in a particular vision of the future. it companies thatcommit resources to projects that extend more than 3 years or so can findthemselves abandoned by an unexpected direction of the industry. insuch an environment, longterm research is risky unless broadly distributed across a portfolioñas prescribed by the diversity principle explainedat the beginning of this chapter.other disincentives may be further reducing interest in it research.one is the socalled network effect: the value of a networked applicationgrows with the number of its users.21 because of this effect, the marketcan lock in popular applications, which quickly become difficult to displace. the value of prototype applications in such an environment issmall. for example, there is little incentive to do research on technicallysuperior alternatives to common standards such as tcp/ip, microsoftwindows, or the intel microprocessor architecture; the rewards are moreobvious for products that leverage these de facto standards.22 in thisenvironment, there is less innovation in the form of fundamental improvements, which would challenge the dominant technologies; instead,innovation tends to be seen in new products and services that cleverlyadapt these technologies to new market needs.23 for example, theinternetõs basic protocol, ipv4, which provides only about 4.3 billionunique addresses, may not provide a large enough address space to meetfuture demands as the internet grows. a replacement, ipv6, which isgenerally thought to not only provide a vastly larger address space butother technically superior features, was developed in anticipation of thisneed, but because of the high cost of getting everyone to switch protocolsit has thus far failed to catch on in the marketplace. to surmount theswitching problem, a variety of coexistence strategies are being pursuedin the internet community, but none have yet caught on with a largemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research75box 2.3the economics of research fundingover the past 30 years, economists have developed a solid body of theory thatdemonstrates the limitations of the marketplace in supporting research, as well asthe need for public support. this theory is based on the observation that knowledgeñespecially scientific and technical knowledge generated by researchñhasmany of the characteristics of socalled public goods: research results are widelyavailable to people and organizations whether or not they paid for or participated intheir creation, and the discoverers of new knowledge cannot easily prevent othersfrom making use of the knowledge without imposing additional costs on themselves and society. in economic terms, these characteristics are referred to asònonrival useó and òcostly exclusion,ó respectively. these characteristics are associated especially with longterm, fundamental research. together, they make itdifficult for firms that fund research to fully capture (or appropriate) the benefits ofthe resulting knowledge or to keep others from doing so. competitive marketswork well when the incremental costs and benefits of using a commodity can beassigned to the user; they do not work well for the creation of scientific and technical knowledge, and firms tend to underinvest in research.firms can try to protect new knowledge by seeking patent or copyright protection or by trying to keep it secret. patents and copyrights provide legally enforceable means of protecting knowledge, but they require public disclosure, enablingothers to learn from the work (by, for example, reverse engineering) and to findalternative means of achieving the same end. by keeping trade secrets, companies can avoid public disclosure, but this approach offers little means for legalrecourse should others learn the secret (unless they use unlawful means to do so).neither set of mechanisms, therefore, provides foolproof protection for new knowledge. moreover, each imposes some economic inefficiencies, akin to those of amonopoly, that result from the restrictions placed on the use of the ideas. suchrestrictions can result in duplicative research programs in different firms and theinsufficient exploitation of new ideas.despite appropriability problems, firms do support some fundamental research.their motives range from monitoring progress at the frontiers of science, to identifying ideas for potential lines of innovation that may emerge from the research ofothers, to better positioning themselves to penetrate the secrets of rivalsõ technicalpractices. by conducting fundamental research, firms can also hope to attract toptechnical and scientific talent, who can contribute to research as well as development activities. cohen and levinthal (1990), in their theory of absorptive capacity,argue that firmlevel investment in research creates an absorptive capacity in thefirm that makes it better able to realize the benefits of research conducted byothers. nevertheless, funding fundamental research is a longterm strategy that issensitive to commercial pressures to shift the research toward developing newproducts and services and improving existing ones.source: condensed from chapter 2 of computer science and telecommunications board(1999); additional discussion of the appropriability problem can be found in nelson (1959) andarrow (1962).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76making it betternumber of users. so internet users have been forced to adopt variousworkarounds, such as network address translation, that provide a quickfix for the address shortage but have significant side effects. the ultimateoutcome is, as of this writing, unclear.further pressure to reduce expenditures on longterm research isbeing created by companies that successfully compete in certain segmentsof it markets without incurring research expenses. as noted earlier,companies such as dell computer and gateway have captured largeshares of the market for pcs by offering products that incorporate standard components purchased from other vendors. their products exploittechnical advances made by supplier firmsñmany of which maintainextensive r&d programs.24 in effect, these assemblers buy research conducted by their component vendors and benefit from the economies ofscale that the vendors enjoy by selling to numerous assemblers.another disincentive to fundamental innovation may be the limitedcapacity of users to absorb new technology.25 for example, the difficultyand risk associated with upgrading software can deter users from adopting new programs as quickly as vendors can generate them; similarly,end users may not be able to incorporate increases in processing speeds asfast as manufactures can provide them. another limiting factor is the natureof the customer base for potential it innovations. because many potentialusers (both individuals and organizations) are less sophisticated and ablethan the early adopters of it, vendors have limited incentive to invest infundamental research unless they can hope to penetrate new markets withrapidly improving technology. considerable energy is instead devoted tolaunching tactical product innovations and letting the marketplace sort outthe winners from the losers. the enormous amount of activity and marketing hype should not be confused with fundamental advances in it.a countertrend in central research laboratoriescompetitive pressures have not forced the traditional it research labsto give up on fundamental research entirely. for example, lucent technologies supported a bell labs cosmologist who was attempting to detecthidden dark matter in the universe. interestingly, the work contributedto a software product that detects billing fraud by analyzing patterns inlarge amounts of data. other lucent researchers are investigating neuralpathways of the slug to learn how to build selfhealing information networks or exploring computers based on quantum mechanics and theinformation processing capabilities of genetic material (carey, 1999).nevertheless, the breakup and divestiture of at&t has steadily diminished the flow of fundamental it research historically associated with thebell labs name (see box 2.4).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research77box 2.4changes in telecommunications researchthe telecommunications sector provides a compelling example of the transformation from a vertically structured to a horizontally stratified industry. before 1984,at&t maintained a regulated monopoly over the nationõs telecommunicationsservices. as both an equipment manufacturer and a service provider, the companyhad strong interests in endtoend systems issues, and its research laboratories(most notably bell laboratories) supported those interests. with its divestiture in1984, at&tõs research divisions were divided between at&t and the bell communications research corporation (bellcore), which was formed to conduct research in support of the seven newly established local exchange service providers,the regional bell operating companies (rbocs). bellcoreõs applied research organization started out with approximately 350 professional research staff, drawnalmost entirely from the original bell laboratories, and grew to its target staff sizeof 501 within 3 years. by 1990, its budget peaked at about $135 millionñnearly allof which was provided by the rbocs.1then, amid increasing competition in the telecommunications sector, therbocsõ funding for applied research at bellcore steadily and rapidly declined, andby 1998 bellcoreõs applied research staff was back down to about 350. approximately 20 percent of bellcoreõs researchers were funded by government contractsin 1998; another 50 percent were funded by bellcoreõs business units to supportthe companyõs software system and professional services products (e.g., technology and architectures for internet telephony products, new types of softwarebased tools for efficiently finding y2k problems, and, more generally, for testingsoftware). less than 30 percent of bellcoreõs research budget was directed atbroader industry research issues. furthermore, bellcoreõs customer base hadgrown substantially beyond the rbocs, so the share of bellcoreõs research supported by the rbocs declined. further separating bellcore from the service providers, the rbocs sold bellcore (now called telcordia technologies) to scienceapplications international corporation in 1998, divesting themselves of their coreresearch capability.some of the rbocs (e.g., nynex, u s west) supported large internalresearch organizations in 1990, with combined research expenditures of $75 million to $100 million. but these research programs were eliminated or dramaticallyscaled back during the 1990s. as a result, by 1999, the rbocs no longer supportedfundamental research (i.e., research that may not generate a return on investmentuntil more than 3 years in the future), and even their support for more targetedresearch (i.e., attempts to discover innovative approaches for addressing clearlydefined immediate problems) declined precipitously. the spinoff of lucent technologies from at&t in 1996 reinforced the separation between equipment providers and service providers, as roughly twothirds of at&tõs original researchcapacity (including bell labs) went to lucent technologies and only onethirdremained within at&t (in the form of at&t research). research at lucent continues to move toward systems and software, but with a less direct connection tothe operational issues faced by telecommunications service companies.continuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78making it betterall of these changes occurred during a 15year time period when the need tobetter understand how to design large, complex information networks, includingtheir associated applications, greatly increased.2 as a result, the majority ofresearch supporting the nationõs telecommunications industry now is conducted byequipment suppliers, such as lucent technologies, nortel, and cisco systems,with fundamental research performed by some of the largest of these firms. theseorganizations, in effect, conduct research for a rapidly growing sector comprisingrbocs, longdistance carriers (such as mci and sprint), and internet serviceproviders.1a small portion came from southern new england telephone and cincinnati bell (independent entities that purchased bellcoreõs products as part of a package).2the history recounted here, and the estimates of r&d support by the rbocs, wereprovided by stewart personick, former vice president of information networking at bellcore,personal communication, april 26, 1999.box 2.4 continuedsome it companies have created new corporate research laboratoriesto extend their horizons. intel, for example, established a microcomputerlab in 1996 to conduct pioneering research on microprocessors. with anoriginal staff of 70, the groupõs objective was to identify technical roadblocks to improved microprocessor performance and find ways to overcome them (takashi, 1996). in november of 1998, motorola created acentral research lab, motorola labs, as a way of combining and bettermanaging the approximately 1,000 researchers who had previously workedin separate research groups focusing on wireless communications, semiconductors, and other products. at the same time, motorola began increasing its funding for research, especially fundamental research, to bring itup to what it describes as a standard level of research funding amonglarger it companies, 1 percent of the prior yearõs revenues.26 researchtopics range from highquality displays for cellular phones to work withgenetic material aimed at finding ways of using the attraction betweenpairs of organic acids to lay down patterns of circuitry on integratedcircuits (hardy, 1999).the most obvious newcomer to corporate research is microsoft, whichin 1991 established a research division that has attracted some of the toptalent in it. microsoft research grew to some 200 researchers by 1999,even expanding to include a facility in england, and further growth hasbeen planned. research groups are maintained in a dozen areas, including speech recognition, decision theory, and computer graphics. theymaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research79pursue research with longterm implications for the company that alsomay also feed into ongoing development projects.27 systems to checkspelling and grammar, assist users in real time, facilitate remote collaboration, and translate among languages are among the fruits of microsoftõsr&d that have been commercialized; more speculative work includesefforts to develop a tablet computerña portable, wireless device withouta keyboard that could serve a range of personal computing and communications purposesñand to develop largescaleimage databases withintuitive interfaces (markoff, 1999; barclay et al., 1999).gaps in the research base: systems integrationas noted in an earlier report by the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb, 1992), systems integration first became anissue in the 1960s, when federal agencies began hiring contractors todesign largescale systems for data processing, communications, and aerospace and defense applications. over the next 40 years, the emergence ofdistributed personal computing, local area networks, and, more recently,the internet, drove a growing need for systems integration. the integration challenge goes beyond making incompatible machines communicatewith each other; it is a problemsolving activity that harnesses and coordinates the power and capabilities of it to meet customersõ needs. theresult is generally oneofakind systems that increase productivity, flexibility, responsiveness, and competitive advantage. considerable effort isexpended on customized consultingñmodification, interfacing, coding,and installing hardware and softwareñto integrate the individual components into a cohesive whole.systems integration is now a thriving u.s. industry that is finding newopportunities in the efforts across the economy to engage in ecommerce.total revenues for custom integrated system design and custom programming services topped $76 billion in 1997, up from $34 billion in 1990.28different types of firms provide such services. companies such asandersen consulting, electronic data services (eds), and computer sciences corporation earn the majority of their revenues from systems integration activities. many of the large accounting/business services firms,including pricewaterhousecoopers, kpmg, and ernst & young, also haveestablished systems integration and services practices. large diversifiedcomputer manufacturers, such as ibm and hewlettpackard, have movedinto systems integration and related services, creating new divisions forthese activities. ibmõs global services division is the fastestgrowing partof the company; its revenues increased almost 30 percent between 1997and 1999 and accounted for 37 percent of the companyõs revenues in 1999.also participating in the industry are a number of defense contractors,making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80making it bettersuch as lockheed martin and the boeing company, which developedtheir systems integration experience by designing complex weapons orcommandandcontrol systems for the military and by operating theirown substantial information and communications systems.in general, systems integrators support limited r&d, and most ofwhat is funded is development. neither andersen consulting nor edsñtwo of the largest systems integration firmsñreport r&d expenditures intheir annual reports (table 2.6). andersen does have a small researchdivision that employs about 200 computer scientists and business analyststo identify interesting technologies and build prototype applications fortesting with potential customers; however, the division constitutes a smallpart of the company.29 its work focuses on areas such as ecommerce,intellectual asset management, and work group productivity.30 lockheedmartin, a diversified company with approximately $1 billion in r&dtable 2.6 research and development investments of representativesystems integrators, 1998 (millions of dollars)systems integrationsystems integrationcompanyrevenuesr&dservicesonly firmsa andersen consulting8,3070 american management systems1,05877 computer sciences corporation7,6600 electronic data services16,8910 keane1,0763.5diversified firmsb ibm28,91625% of researchdivision budget hewlettpackard6,95650 lockheed martin5,21236.4adata on the servicesonly firms was taken from annual reports to the securities and exchangecommission. andersen consulting reports no research and development expenditures inits annual filings to the securities and exchange commission, but it does operate a researchgroup with about 200 members.bdata for the diversified firms shows systems integration revenues out of total corporaterevenues and systems integration r&d out of total r&d. data on ibm provided by irvingwladawskyberger, vice president of technology and strategy at ibm, personal communication, october 6, 1999. data on hewlettpackard provided by curtis hoyle, special assistant to the director, hewlettpackard laboratories, personal communication, november 2,1999. data on lockheed martin provided by b. clovis landry, vice president of technology, lockheed martin information and services sector, personal communication, october11, 1999.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research81expenditures, spends only 0.7 percent of its it systems integration revenueson r&d, reflecting its reliance on offtheshelf components researchedand developed by it vendors and the academic research community.31taken together, these facts suggest that most of the research includedin federal statistics for computer and data processing services is performedby firms in the prepackaged software industry (e.g., microsoft, oracle,and sap) rather than firms in the custom programming and systemsintegration industries, and insiders discount the amount of researchreflected in the figures. indeed, the largest supporter of research on systems and services appears to be ibm. although detailed breakouts of thecompanyõs r&d expenditures are not available, managers in the researchdivision estimate that about 25 percent of the companyõs research budgetis devoted to services and solutions. this figure is only a rough approximation, because some software research (e.g., speech recognition) couldhave been considered part of services and solution work but was not. butthe 25 percent share is much higher than the corresponding share in theearly 1990s, when services and solutions accounted for just a tiny percentage of the research budget.32the apparent lack of attention to largescale systems issues is accentuated by changes in the structure of the it industry. historically, largevendors of computer and communications technology such as ibm andat&t were vertically structured. they enjoyed both significant returnson investment that could be devoted to systems research and a clearcompetitive advantage from doing so. over the past decade, the it industry structure has changed, becoming horizontal rather than vertical, withindividual companies focusing on only certain portions of the it valuechainñmicroprocessors, software, or pcsñand addressing a full range ofapplications within that functional group. examples of horizontal structure are evident in the computer industry, with microsoft specializing inoperating systems and applications software, intel in microprocessors,compaq in computer platforms, and sap in systems integration and business applications. the communications industry exhibits a similar pattern, with the separation of voice and data communications service providers (such as at&t and america online) from manufacturers ofnetworking equipment (such as lucent technologies and cisco systems)and underlying communications facilities (see box 2.4). horizontallystructured companies have less incentive to invest in largescale systemsresearch, because each is responsible for only a piece of the overall infrastructure and none has a holistic view of the systems created from itscomponents. although ibm has increased its emphasis on systems, fewother it companies conduct research in these areasñand, as suggestedearlier and elaborated upon in the next section, organizations that integrate systems or build custom applications do not support research.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82making it bettertable 2.7 r&d spending on it in 500 enduser organizations(percentage)it budgetr&destimated itas sharebudgetr&d as shareof projectedas shareof projectedindustryrevenuesof itsales revenuesbanking and financial services950.45professional services740.28telecommunications640.24health care4.540.18construction and engineering360.18information technology440.16pharmaceuticals and medical equipment350.15transportation340.12media and entertainment430.12insurance3.530.11manufacturing2.540.10metals and natural resources250.10retail and distribution2.540.10energy330.09utilities2.530.08chemicals2.530.07consumer goods3.520.07electronics320.06hospitality and travel240.06food and beverage processing1.530.05median/average3.640.14source: information week (1999).research by enduser organizationsmost large companies in industries as disparate as automobiles, banking, and health care maintain a growing staff of it professionals whosework consists primarily of deploying, operating, and supporting thecompanyõs information systems. many of these companies develop itapplications to suit their specific needs; a handful engage in highly targeted itrelated research.33 information week magazine recently polled500 organizations considered to be top end users of it regarding their itbudgets and r&d activities. the poll revealed that these organizationsplanned to spend an average of 3.6 percent of their expected annual revenues on it in 1999, and that 4 percent of the it share would supportrelated r&d (table 2.7). banking and financial services firms topped therankings by a wide margin, with it r&d budgets equivalent to 0.45 permaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research83cent of their sales revenues; professional services and telecommunications followed with it r&d budgets of 0.28 and 0.24 percent of salesrevenues, respectively (information week, 1999). food and beverage processing firms came in at the low end, with it r&d expenditures of 0.05percent of their projected sales (information week, 1999). the figures showthat on average, even in the 500 most itintensive enduser organizations,less than 0.15 percent of sales revenues are devoted to it r&d.in short, most large end users who invest massively in developingand deploying it systems fund only limited research, although they oftendo invest in developing custom applications for their own purposes.these are the companies most likely to benefit from attention to theresearch challenges inherent in it applications (discussed in chapter 3and chapter 5), yet they are the least likely to support research. thecompanies that do support research, mostly equipment suppliers, do notbenefit directly from research on largescale systems and applications andcannot be expected to assume the entire burden of supporting such work.clearly, the industry as a whole underinvests in this type of research.end users of it focus almost exclusively on applied r&d. for example, a large hospital or health care system might conduct applied researchto evaluate whether expert systems reduce the inappropriate use of medications and which system features are needed. boeing employed approximately 150 workers (out of its total workforce of 231,000) in its computerscience area in 1998 to develop systems to support aircraft manufacturingoperations (e.g., tools for collaborative design of aircraft, advanced computeraided design (cad) technologies); to implement corporate information infrastructures; and to design systems for boeing aircraft (e.g., onboard networks, entertainment systems).34 online retailer amazon.comspent $47 million to enhance the features, content, and functionality of itsweb sites and transactionprocessing systems and upgrade its systemsand telecommunications infrastructure.35 merrill lynch spent hundredsof millions of dollars to develop a new computing platform for its financial advisors and a webbased interface that allows customers to accesstheir accounts and company research, consult with their financial advisors, and conduct ecommerce. 36 the much smaller online investmentfirm, e*trade, spent $33 millionñ13 percent of its total revenuesñontechnology development in 1998 to enhance its product offerings andmaintain its web site.such efforts can result in innovative technologies. companies such asaetna, amazon.com, citicorp, merrill lynch, and the sabre group (whichprocesses airline reservations) have been awarded a handful of patents oninventions related to it and related systems (table 2.8).37 e*trade hasapplied for a patent on its proprietary stateless architecture, which enables its web site to handle more than 1 million visitors and place up tomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84making it better150,000 orders at the same time. although the total number of patentsheld by these companies is dwarfed by the hundreds of thousands ofpatents held by major it vendors such as ibm, at&t, and xerox, endusers are clearly pursuing innovative work to address their it needs.38innovation by end users is not a new phenomenon, nor is it limited tothe it arena. research conducted by eric von hippel in the sloan schoolof management at mit found that well over half of the innovations inscientific instruments, semiconductor and printed circuit board equipment, and pultrusion equipment (used for making fiberreinforced plasticproducts) were attributable to end users as opposed to vendors of suchproducts (von hippel, 1988). such end users tend to have an understanding of their particular needs, the expertise to satisfy their needs throughinnovation, and an expectation that they can improve their competitivepositions through innovation. end users who must apply technology to atable 2.8 representative itrelated patents assigned to enduserorganizationscompanypatent titleaetnainsurance classification plan loss control system.expert system for providing interactive assistance in solvingproblems such as health care management.threelevel distributed control for networking input/output devices.amazon.comsystem and method for providing multimedia bookmarks forhypertext markup language files.secure method for communicating credit card data when placing anorder on a nonsecure network.secure method and system for communicating a list of credit cardnumbers over a nonsecure network.citicorpsystem and method for delivering financial services.merrill lynchdistributed network agents.check alteration detection system and method.integrated system for controlling master account and nestedsubaccount(s).securities trading workstation.sabre groupinformation aggregation and synthesization system.system to predict optimum computer platform.source: compiled from information contained in the u.s. patent and trademark officeõsweb patent database. available online at <http://www.uspto.gov>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research85particular need often have greater insight into the issues involved than doequipment vendors, but they are limited with regard to the types of r&dthey can perform. indeed, many lack the expertise to conduct researchaltogether. they may have intelligent, capable staffs in their it departments, but they typically lack computer scientists who can contribute tofundamental as opposed to applied research. furthermore, investmentsin r&d are examined closely to make sure they have a good chance ofimproving organizational performance. many organizations run on tightmargins, and if the expected returns are too far into the future or are onlyweakly linked to profit margins and overall performance, then the proposed r&d generally does not survive the budget process. also, contemporary managementõs focus on core competenciesñthe essential businessof a companyñencourages skepticism about r&d.venture capital support for innovationventure capital (vc) plays a significant role in accelerating innovation in it in the united states, although not necessarily through directsupport of r&d. vc firms are concerned primarily with earning a returnon investment. they raise funds from private investors to make equityinvestments in new firms. they also provide management and othernontechnical assistance to the firms in which they invest, serving onboards of directors and helping to attract top management talent to thesefirms. the technologies developed by vcbacked companies typicallydraw on research conducted in other corporate or university laboratories.indeed, vc firms tend not to invest in companies that require technological breakthroughs; instead, recipients of vc must have viable technologiesñand business plansñin hand. much of the work conducted withvc relates to marketing and business development.yet vc funding does contribute to innovation and, less directly, toresearch. by helping to establish and expand companies, vc enablesnovel ideas generated by previous research to be exploited and broughtto the marketplace through continued development. as the congressional budget office (1999) has noted, òventure capitalists increase thenumber of new ideas introduced into the economy from the stock of ideasgenerated in the laboratory,ó thereby enhancing the efficiency of r&d.startup companies do a lot of work on systems architectures and designtradeoffs, understanding of user needs and refinement of applications,and ancillary tools (e.g., cad tools, verification methodologies). theytend not to focus on longterm research or on developing a deep understanding of the phenomena exploited in their innovations. although thiswork is not intended to be research in the narrow sense of the word and isnot published in academic papers, it does generate new knowledge, andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86making it betterthat knowledge diffuses through the industry in the form of patents and,more importantly, a flow of people among companies.39from another perspective, vc firms are even more fundamental toinnovation in internet and it technologies than in other venues. increasingly, much of the innovation in these areas is related to new businessmodels and social innovation rather than technology. an example is theuse of the internet to bring together buyers and sellers at online auctions.the research related to these models seems to be carried out by startingnew companies that succeed or fail in the real marketplace. looked at inthis way, the market itself is the laboratory and arbiter of success, and thewhole system of vc firms can be thought of as a new way of conductingresearch.studies demonstrate that venture capitalists have a disproportionateimpact on technological innovation relative to the size of their investments. although they fund only a few hundred of the nearly 1 millionbusinesses begun in the united states each year, venture capitalists backedroughly onethird of all the companies that went public in the past twodecadesñincluding several of the most successful it firms, namelyamazon.com, cisco systems, microsoft, intel, and yahoo (gompers andcohen, 1999; lerner, 1999a,b). these companies have a significant impacton the economy. a study conducted by the venture firm kleiner, perkins,caufield, and byers found that the companies it had financed since itsfounding in 1971 had created 131,000 jobs, generated $44 billion in annualrevenues, and had $84 billion in market capitalization (peltz, 1996).in the it industry, vc firms are a growing source of funding, although insiders wonder how long the gold rush that took place duringthe period in which this report was written will last. total vc investments in u.s. firms jumped from less than $4 billion in 1994 to $14.7billion in 1998, with investments in itrelated companies rising from lessthan $2 billion to roughly $9 billion during that time.40 in the 4yearperiod between january 1995 and december 1998, vc firms invested atotal of $46.6 billion in startup companies in all industries; of that amount,$26 billionñor 56 percentñwas invested in the it sector. roughly half ofthe itrelated investments went to firms in the computer software andservices sector, with investments in communications, semiconductors, andcomputer hardware accounting for the rest (table 2.9).41 internetrelatedcompanies (e.g., yahoo, amazon.com, and ebay) also have garnered agrowing share of vc investments. venture capitalists reportedly invested$3.8 billion in internetrelated companies in the second quarter of 1999,up from $1.4 billion in the second quarter of 1998 and more than the $3.3billion invested during all of 1997.42in contrast to the much smaller amounts of vc in europe and japan,almost half of vc investments in the united states represent earlystagemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research87capital. this includes socalled seed capital that firms use to research,assess, and develop initial concepts, as well as startup financing, whichsupports product development and initial marketing. recipients of startup funding may be in the process of setting up or may have been inbusiness for a short time, but without selling products commercially.earlystage financing is distinguished from expansion financing, whichdominates foreign vc investments and supports the growth and expansion of firms already operating in the commercial marketplace. expansion funds may be used to finance increased production capacity, formarket or product development, or as a source of additional workingcapital.43 these differences show that the vc system in the united statesis more able than vc systems elsewhere to stimulate innovation.university researchuniversities play two important roles in it research. they are majorperformers of research funded by both government and industry, andthey are the source of the educated professionals who populate industrialand government research laboratories as well as university faculties. university research has had a significant impact on the evolution of it andrelated practices. as documented in other reports (cstb, 1995, 1999),many important information technologies were first investigated intable 2.9 venture capital investments, january 1995 throughdecember 1998 (millions of dollars)industryinvestmentinformation technology computer services and software12,722 communications8,054 semiconductors and electronic components2,659 computer hardware2,529 it subtotal25,964other industries medical and healthrelated6,624 other products4,786 consumerrelated4,000 biotechnology3,670 industrial and energy1,593 total46,636source: congressional budget office (1999).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88making it betteracademia or largely developed there. significant examples include theinternet, reducedinstructionset computing, redundant arrays of inexpensive disks for storage, objectoriented programming, cad of integrated circuits, and computer graphics. universities can be particularlyimportant performers of fundamental and longterm research.unlike industrial research, most university research is conducted inthe public domain. results of university research are disseminated widelythroughout the research community, maximizing the impact of the research,and university graduates serve as key conduits of technology transfer asthey move into jobs in other universities, government, and industry.universities are fertile sources of innovation; free from pressures to makea nearterm impact on the next generation of products, they often providenew ideas for established companies and seed the establishment andgrowth of numerous startup companies. maintaining the strength ofuniversity research is therefore key to ensuring the vitality of the itindustry. the following sections discuss trends in support for universityresearch, gaps in such research, and commercialization of the researchresults.trends in support for university researchthe available statistics present a mixed picture of funding for university research focusing on it. universities report that, between 1990 and1998, constantdollar funding for r&d in computer science grew from$614 million to $754 million, and constantdollar funding for r&d inelectrical engineering grew from $791 million to $1.02 billion. approximately twothirds of those funds came from federal sources, with thebalance coming from industry, state and local governments, universityfunds, and other sources. statistics on federal funding for universityresearch indicate that federal support for itrelated research in universities grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent between 1990 and 1998(figure 2.5). but these statistics indicate that the rise is attributable almostentirely to increases in federal funding for computer science research,which expanded from $336 million to $470 million during the period ofinterest; federal funding for university research in electrical engineeringrose at a rate of only 0.9 percent between 1990 and 1998 (from $165 millionto $177 million) and actually declined in real terms after 1993.44additional itrelated research is conducted in university departmentsother than computer science and electrical engineering, but it tends not tobe captured fully in federal statistics. historically, this work has beenpursued in science and engineering departments and has been directedtoward large simulations of physical phenomena and technological systems. it has been a primary driver for research into highperformancemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research89figure 2.5 federal funding for university research in it, 1990 to 1998. source:national science foundation (2000a).0100200300400500600700800199019911992199319941995199619971998millions of constant 1998 dollarscomputer scienceelectrical engineeringtotalcomputing and parallel processing. more recently, the number of departments engaged in itrelated work appears to have grown as it has become more deeply ingrained in science and engineering, as well as a hostof nontechnical fields. business schools and departments of industrialengineering, for example, are studying the ways in which it affects business processes. medical schools and biology departments are conductingmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90making it betterresearch to enable better use of it in providing patient care and insequencing the human genome. the department of aeronautics andastronautics at the massachusetts institute of technology recently hireda computer scientist (nancy leveson) with expertise in software safety.as discussed in greater detail in chapter 4, a number of universities haveestablished new schools or departments to investigate issues at the intersection of it and the social sciences. in all of these cases, it is difficult todetermine the extent to which the work advances the state of the art in it(i.e., should be considered it research) versus the extent to which it isused to advance research in another discipline (i.e., supports development of it systems to support research in another discipline). this reportargues that there is great value in the former.industry support for university research has grown over the pastdecade but still represents less than 10 percent of all university researchfunding. moreover, it tends to be concentrated at a select set of universities. at carnegie mellon university, mit, stanford university, and theuniversity of california at berkeley, funding from industry constitutes 20to 30 percent of it funding for research. such support can take severalforms. companies may sponsor research of potential interest to them,providing support for a faculty member and graduate students, or theymay participate in collaborative programs in which industrial and academic researchers work side by side to bring new technology to market.45organizations such as the semiconductor research corporation (src),whose members include most of the nationõs largest manufacturers ofintegrated circuits, pool research funds and make grants to universitiesfor nonproprietary research that will help a range of member companies.in august 1998, for example, the src announced that it would establishsix national focus centers with a total of $60 million per year in newfunding to pursue longterm research of interest to the semiconductorindustry.46 the trend toward itrelated startups originating in universities (discussed below) also fosters a type of collaboration. these variedforms of collaboration have a number of benefits: they can compensatefor fluctuations in federal research budgets, increase the relevance of academic research, and, at times, generate revenues from licensing. industryalso benefits because academic research allows it to access new technologies of particular interest, keep abreast of new developments, and, perhaps most importantly, identify promising young researchers.gaps in academic researchto some extent, research conducted in academic research laboratoriesis aligned with the research agendas of its sponsors. because muchresearch funding in it comes from government and industry, both ofmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research91which appear to allocate most of their resources to component research,academic research has been slow to respond to emerging requirementsfor interdisciplinary research connected to the largescale systems and itapplications that are responding to business and societal needs. this isnot to say that academia has failed to develop highly innovative programsto educate students and conduct research on interdisciplinary topics butsimply that there is substantial room for improvement. just as industryresearch can become compartmentalized along product lines and industry sectors, academic research can track individual disciplines too closely.faculty members tend to be rewarded on the basis of their contributionsto a particular field, so setting off in new directions can have adverseconsequences.universities face difficult problems in conducting research on networks and largescale systems: primarily they lack access to large operational systemsñmost of which are owned and operated by private firmsñas well as tools for simulating the performance of such systems. thisproblem has persisted for decades (cstb, 1994), and its consequenceshave worsened as interest grows in the social applications discussed inthis report. as the framers of federal networking research programs havelong known, only large networks populated by real users demonstratethe behaviors that need to be studied and understood. even if academicresearchers gain access to these systems, it is extremely difficult, if notimpossible, to change their operation for experimental purposes, becauseusers and their applications demand stability and availability. this problem was first noted when the research communityõs use of the internetgrew rapidly in the 1980s; the commercialization of the 1990s only exacerbated the problem (cstb, 1994).47 the limited ability to simulate suchsystems is reflected in the poor understanding of their behavior.commercialization of university researchuniversity students, professors, and researchers often start new companies to commercialize the results of their research. universities alsolicense technology to industry, especially since the passage of the bayhdole act of 1980, which allows universities to license technologies emerging from federally funded research programs. the large number of newcompanies created to sell products based on university research, and thethousands of licenses that universities grant to firms, testify to the dramatic impact of university research on the private sectorñand the effectiveness of the nationõs innovation system in converting research resultsinto new products and processes.across all industries, the number of startup companies emergingfrom university research is growing rapidly. a 1998 survey by the assomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92making it betterciation of university technology managers (autm) reported that, since1980, more than 2,200 companies had been created to commercialize theresults of research conducted in u.s. and canadian universities, researchhospitals, and other research institutions (autm, 1998). almost half ofthose companies had been created since 1993. in 1997, 258 of the 333 startup companies in the survey came out of university research. in 1996, only248 startups were reported by all the institutions combined. althoughthe number of startup companies is increasing, the percentage of technologies licensed to startup (as opposed to established) companies isdecreasing. from 1977 to 1993, 50 percent of licenses were granted tostartup companies. since 1993, only 29 percent of licenses were extendedto startup companies, and 61 percent were extended to existing companies. the implications of this trend are as yet unclear, and further study isneeded; the trend could signify greater recognition within establishedcompanies of the value of university research, or it could suggest established companiesõ growing dependence on university research.the it industry is home to a large number of firms that emerged fromuniversity research. stanford university, for example, gave rise to a number of wellknown silicon valley companies, including sun microsystemsand cisco systems. mit also gave rise to a number of firms, ranging fromopen market, inc., an ecommerce firm, to rsa data security, whichspecializes in public key encryption, and more recently akamai, whichstreamlines the downloading of content from popular web sites. theautm survey reports that mit contributed to the creation of 17 startupcompanies in 1997, second only to the university of washington, with 25.a report by bankboston found that mit graduates and faculty had beeninvolved in founding 4,000 companies that employed 1.1 million peopleand had annual world sales of $232 billion in 1995; 57 percent of theemployment resulted from firms in electronics and instruments(bankboston, 1997). carnegie mellon university has licensed technologies to many small software and robotics companies, as well as lycos,one of the wellknown players in the internet search engine market.the characteristics of startup companies that arise out of academiavary significantly among universities. for example, both stanford andthe university of california at berkeley have provided many new technologies to silicon valley, but their approaches are quite different. berkeleyprofessors have tended to remain in academia. at stanford, by contrast,òitõs almost expected that a successful faculty member will at some pointstart a companyó (hamilton and himelstein, 1997), although an individual may return to stanford after the company is well launched.berkeleyõs style is to òdevelop technology, convince existing companiesto use the ideas, and then go back and develop more technologyó(hamilton and himelstein, 1997). this pattern seems to be changingmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research93rapidly: in any given year about 10 percent of berkeleyõs electrical engineering and computer science faculty members are on leave starting acompany. each pattern illustrates one way in which faculty and studentsmigrate between universities and startups. it is too early to tell whetherthe late1990s trend of faculty across the country leaving academia toestablish startups will persist, but the prospect is debated actively amongacademics. all other things being equal, the trend raises questions aboutthe longterm capabilities of universities.conclusionthis review indicates that the recent growth in spending on itresearch does not alleviate all concerns about the nationõs research enterprise. several underlying trends could ultimately limit the nationõs innovative capacity and hinder its ability to deploy the kinds of it systemsthat could best meet personal, business, and government needs. first,expenditures on research by companies that develop it goods and services and by the federal government have not kept pace with the expanding array of it. the disincentives to longterm, fundamental researchhave become more numerous, especially in the private sector, whichseems more able to lure talent from universities than the other wayaround. second, and perhaps most significantly, it research investmentscontinue to be directed at improving the performance of it components,with limited attention to systems issues and applicationdriven needs.neither industry nor academia has kept pace with the problems posed bythe largescale it systems used in a range of social and business contextsñproblems that require fundamental research. with the exceptionof ibm, most companies involved in developing it systems for enduserorganizations invest little in research. academic researchers also havetended to ignore work on largescale systems and social applicationsbecause they require interdisciplinary teams and very large budgets andbecause it is hard for them to obtain access to operational systems forexperimental purposes. new mechanisms may be needed to directresources to these growing problem areas.referencesarrow, kenneth. 1962. òeconomic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,óin richard nelson, ed., the rate and direction of innovative activity. princeton university press, princeton, n.j.association of university technology managers (autm). 1998. fy 1998 autm licensingsurvey. autm, norwalk, conn.bankboston. 1997. mit: the impact of innovation. mit technology licensing office, cambridge, mass., march. available online at <http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders/>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94making it betterbarclay, tom, jim gray, and don slutz. 1999. microsoft terraserver: a spatial data warehouse.technical report mstr9929, microsoft corp., redmond, wash., june. available onlineat <http://research.microsoft.com/~gray/papers/msrtr9929terraserver.pdf>.buderi, robert. 1999. òinto the big blue yonder,ó technology review, july/august:4653.carey, john. 1999. òan ivory tower that spins pure gold,ó business week, april 19, pp.167168.christensen, clayton. 1997. the innovatorõs dilemma. harvard business school press, boston.cohen, w., and d. levinthal, 1990. òabsorptive capacity: a new perspective on learningand innovation.ó administrative science quarterly 35:128152.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1992. keeping the u.s. computer industry competitive: systems integration. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. academic careers for experimental computer scientists and engineers. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to supportthe nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.2000. the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age. national academy press, washington, d.c.congressional budget office (cbo). 1999. òcurrent investments in innovation in the information technology sector: statistical background,ó april. available online at <http://www.cbo.gov>.defense advanced research projects agency (darpa). 1999. òinformation technologyexpeditions,ó baa 9907. available online at <http://www.darpa.mil/ito/solicitations/cbd9907.html>.dertouzos, michael l. 1999. òthe future of computing,ó scientific american 281(2):5255.gompers, paul a., and josh cohen. 1999. the venture capital cycle. mit press, cambridge,mass.hamilton, joan, and linda himelstein. 1997. òa wellspring called stanford,ó businessweek, silicon valley special report (august 26). available online at <http://www.businessweek.com/1997/34/b354112.htm>.hardy, quentin. 1999. òmotorolaõs new research efforts look far afield,ó wall streetjournal (june 17):b6.information week. 1999. òinformation week 500: industries at a glance,ó september 27.available online at <http://www.informationweek.com/754/99iw500.htm.lerner, josh. 1999a. òsmall business innovation and public policy,ó in are small firmsimportant? zoltan acs, ed. kluwer academic publishing, new york.lerner, josh. 1999b. òsmall business, innovation, and public policy in the informationtechnology industry,ó paper prepared for the conference understanding the digitaleconomy: data, tools, and research, washington, d.c., may 2526.markoff, john. 1999. òmicrosoft brings in top talent to pursue old goal: the tablet,ó newyork times (august 30):c1,c10.national science and technology council (nstc), it2 working group. 1999a. informationtechnology research for the twentyfirst century: a bold investment in americaõs future.implementation plan. national coordination office for computing, information, andcommunications, arlington, va., june.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research95national science and technology council (nstc), committee on technology, subcommittee on computing, information, and communications r&d. 1999b. information technology frontiers for a new millennium: supplement to the presidentõs fy 2000 budget,national coordination office for computing, information, and communications,arlington, va., april.national science foundation (nsf). 1999. òinformation technology research: programsolicitation, nsf 99167,ó september 28, available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/1999/nsf99167/nsf99167.htm>.national science foundation (nsf), division of science resources studies. 2000a. federalfunds for research and development: fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000. arlington, va.,forthcoming.national science foundation (nsf), division of science resources studies. 2000b. researchand development in industry: 1998. arlington, va., forthcoming.nelson, richard. 1959. òthe simple economics of basic research,ó journal of politicaleconomy 67(2):297306.organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd). 1999. sti scoreboard ofindicators. oecd, paris, france.peltz, michael. 1996. òhigh techõs premier venture capitalist,ó institutional investor 30(june):8998.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future. national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, arlingon, va., february.semiconductor industry association (sia). 2000. the silicon century. semiconductorindustry association, san jose, calif.smith, douglas k., and robert c. alexander. 1988. fumbling the future: how xerox invented,then ignored the personal computer. william morrow and company, new york.streitfeld, david. 1999. òcapital and ideas: financiers of the information age serve upcachet, cash,ó washington post (august 15):h1.takashi, dean. 1996. òintel shifts its focus to original research,ó wsj interactive edition(august 26):1. available online at <http://interactive3.wsj.com/edition/articles/sb841015179745727000.htm>.von hippel, eric. 1988. the sources of innovation. oxford university press, new york.white house. 2000. òinformation technology research and development: informationtechnology for the 21st century.ó press release dated january 21, office of the presssecretary, washington, d.c.notes1.diversity is not, of course, the only factor in research success. the quality of theresearch is also of paramount importance. quality can be assured through mechanismssuch as peer review.2.the internet, for example, traces its roots to the dodõs arpanet, built in the late1960s and 1970s. early work in virtual reality was supported by the government, andcontinued government investments in the technology sustained the field even when earlycommercial interest waned. many of the most important advances in artificial intelligencecame from governmentfunded research.3.all data on federal funding for it research in this paragraph were derived from thenational science foundation (2000a).4.the growth rate cited includes sales in five industry sectors defined in the standardindustrial classification (sic) codes: office, computing, and accounting machines (sic 357),making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96making it bettercommunications equipment (sic 366), electronic components (sic 367), communicationsservices (sic 48), and computer and data processing services (sic 737).5.according to preliminary estimates from the national science foundation, defenser&d spending will decrease even further in fy00.6.many important, lasting it developments sprang from darpaõs experimentalprojects, such as the arpanet (which laid the groundwork for the internet) and the verylarge scale integrated circuit program, which helped advanced reducedinstructionsetcomputing.7.research supported by the nsf has contributed significantly to the evolution of it.an important capability, scientific visualization, grew out of nsf sponsorship of computing in the service of science. visualization, which uses carefully designed images to allowscientists and engineers to glean insight from computer simulations of natural phenomena,is now widely used in scientific computing and advanced engineering applications such asjet engine design.8.for more information on the ngi, see <www.ngi.gov>.9.the university centers established as part of asci are the center for integrated turbulence simulation at stanford university, the computational facility for simulating thedynamic response of materials at the california institute of technology, the center forastrophysical thermonuclear flashes at the university of chicago, the center for simulation of accidental fires and explosions at the university of utah, and the center for simulation of advanced rockets at the university of illinois at urbanachampaign.10.for more information on project oxygen, see dertouzos (1999).11.additional information on the university of california at berkeleyõs endeavor projectis available online at <http://endeavor.cs.berkeley.edu>.12.additional information on the university of washingtonõs portolano/workscapeproject is available online at <http://portolano.cs.washington.edu/>.13.as of april 2000, darpa planned to transform its expeditions program into a program that would explore òubiquitous computing,ó a term used to describe the incorporation of computing and communications capabilities into a range of everyday devices.14.it should also be cautioned that it is notoriously difficult to separate research fromdevelopment, especially given that fundamental research advances sometimes emanatefrom focusing on development projects. most often research and development are lumpedtogether in the statistics, and attempts to separate out the research should be viewed withsome skepticism.15.the 20 percent figure reported in the 1998 data is unusually high, suggesting someinconsistencies in the collection or reporting of the data. it firms reported that 10 percentof their research dollars were allocated to basic research in 1997, which is more consistentwith earlier reports and anecdotal reports from research managers.16.the census bureau is in the process of shifting from the sic to a new system, thenorth american industry classification system, which features significant changes such asthe introduction of an information sector and is undergoing additional modification andrevision. additional information on the transition to the new industry classification system is available online at <http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html>.17.despite the difficulties in tracing the movements of firms among industry sectors,federal statistics are still the best source of data for tracking research in the it industry.corporate annual reports and other public documents cannot be used because individualcompanies do not report research investments in these documents, although most list combined research and development investments.18.indeed, there is reason to believe that much of the decline in reported research anddevelopment investments in the office and computing equipment industry between 1990and 1991 resulted from the reclassification of large firms to other industries.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.resources for information technology research9719.combined r&d investments for these firms totaled $32 billion in 1998. r&d investments for all firms contained in the nsf survey of industrial r&d in the office and computing equipment, communications equipment, electronic components, communicationsservices, and computing/data processing services industries in 1998 totaled $45 billion.20.many large it firms were criticized in the 1980s and early 1990s for failing to takeadvantage of technologies developed in their own labs. xerox, for example, developed oneof the earliest personal computers (the alto) but never successfully marketed it. see smithand alexander (1988).21.robert metcalfe, a founder of 3com inc., has said that the value of the network scalesas the square of the number of users. this is now called metcalfeõs law.22.this is not to say that there will be no effort to displace the prevailing technology, asthe opensource software movement and the linuxbased initial public offerings demonstrate.23.of course, there can be benefits to the rapid adoption of new technologies, and lockin as well, in that they allow other innovators to build on top of a commonly acceptedplatform. it is only when limitations in the platform itself become evident and impedefurther innovation that lockin becomes problematic.24.such companies have forced many of the traditional computer manufacturers, suchas ibm, to streamline their pc operations, sometimes establishing them as separate business lines with their own cost structures.25.a notable proponent of this theory is christensen (1997).26.for motorola, which has roughly $30 billion in sales, this ratio would imply about$300 million in research funding.27.for example, work in natural language processing has longterm goals, but it alreadyhas contributed to the grammar checker in microsoft office.28.these activities correspond to sic codes 7371 and 7373.29.andersen consulting employs about 50,000 workers, so the research group represents just 0.4 percent of its workforce.30.the information on andersen consultingõs research activities was obtained fromjoseph carter, andersen consulting, in a presentation to the study committee in palo alto,california, on february 10, 1998.31.the data on lockheed martinõs r&d expenditures were obtained from b. clovislandry, vice president of technology, lockheed martin information & services sector,october 11, 1999.32.personal communication from irving wladawskyberger, vice president of technology and strategy for ibm, october 6, 1999.33.amazon.com reported $47 million in product development expenses in 1998, most ofwhich were related to continual enhancement of the features, content, and functionality ofthe companyõs web sites and transaction processing systems, as well as investments insystems and telecommunications infrastructure. merrill lynch reported in 1997 that itwould spend $200 million to complete the development of a technology platform for itsfinancial consultants by the third quarter of 1998.34.needless to say, most of boeingõs $1.9 billion r&d budget is allocated to nonitactivities.35.these data are from amazon.comõs annual 10k report to the sec.36.merrill lynch reported in 1997 that it was investing some $200 million in the development of a new platform for its financial consultants called the trusted global advisorsystem. in keeping with new accounting standards, merrill lynch amortized $72 million indevelopment costs for internaluse software in 1998. these amounts are amortized over theuseful life of the developed software (generally 3 years).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98making it better37.most of these patents have been awarded since 1998, although the patent applications were submitted several years before the awards.38.in the late 1990s, enduser organizations also began applying forñand receivingñpatents covering methods of doing business. considerable controversy has arisen aroundthis subject. the computer science and telecommunications board is developing aprospectus for a study of this issue. for additional background on the patenting of business practices, see cstb (2000), especially pp. 192198.39.anoop gupta, a stanford university professor on leave at microsoft at the time,characterized this distinction to the committee on february 10, 1998, as follows: òthe difference between black and white magic is really in its symbolism and intent.ó symbolism andintent seem to determine the perceptions of whether something is research or not. whetherknowledge is created is often overlooked. from this òintentbasedó perspective, the workof startups is not research, whereas from the perspective of producing knowledge, it certainly is.40.these data are from a pricewaterhousecoopers moneytree survey.41.preliminary statistics from pricewaterhousecoopers indicated that for the secondquarter of 1999, 63 percent of vc investments went to firms in the communications, software and information, and computers and peripherals industries.42.data from ventureone corporation, as reported in streitfeld (1999).43.the definitions of seed, startup, and expansion financing used here are derivedfrom oecd (1999).44.the apparent disparities between the research funding numbers reported by universities and by federal agencies are due largely to differences in the ways the surveys areadministered to collect these data.45.the federal government has attempted to stimulate collaboration between industryand academia as a means of improving the competitiveness of u.s. companies and of betterexploiting the results of federally sponsored research. for example, nsf established theongoing engineering research centers program in the 1980s to foster partnerships amonggovernment, industry, and universities in research and engineering. this program is morefully described in chapter 4 of this report.46.two focus centers had been established as of may 2000. the first is led by researchersat the university of california at berkeley; the second, by researchers at the georgia instituteof technology. each involves researchers from a number of other universities. additionalinformation on the program is available in sia (2000).47.congressional hearings that predated the 1995 commercialization of the nsfnet featured debates over òexperimentaló versus òproductionó networks.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.993research on largescale systemssystems research has long been a part of the information technology(it) landscape. computer scientists and engineers have examinedways of combining componentsñwhether individual transistors,integrated circuits, or devicesñinto larger it systems to provide improved performance and capability. the incredible improvements in theperformance of computer systems seen through the past five decadesattest to advances in areas such as computer architectures, compilers, andmemory management. but todayõs largescale it systems, which containthousands or even millions of interacting components of hardware andsoftware, raise a host of technical and nontechnical issues, some of whichexisted in the early days of computing and have now become critical andothers of which arose recently as a result of the increases in scale and thedegree of interconnection of it systems. as computing and communications systems become more distributed and more integrated into the fabricof daily life, the scope of systems research needs to be broadened toaddress these issues more directly and enable the development of morereliable, predictable, and adaptable largescale it systems. some haveargued that the notion of computer systems research needs to be reinvented (adams, 1999).todayõs largescale it systems crest on a shaky foundation of ad hoc,opportunistic techniques and technologies, many of which lack an adequate intellectual basis of understanding and rigorous design. there areat least three concrete manifestations of these deficiencies. first, there hasbeen an unacceptably high rate of failure in the development of largemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100making it betterscale it systems: many systems are not deployed and used because of anoutright inability to make them work, because the initial set of requirements cannot be met, or because time or budget constraints could not bemet. wellpublicized failures include those of the governmentõs tax processing and air traffic control systems (described later in this chapter), butthese represent merely the tip of the iceberg. the second manifestation ofthese deficiencies is the prevalence of operational failures experienced bylargescale systems as a result of security vulnerabilities or, more often,programming or operational errors or simply mysterious breakdowns.the third sign of these deficiencies is the systemsõ lack of scalability; thatis, their performance parameters cannot be expanded to maintain adequate responsiveness as the number of users increases. this problem isbecoming particularly evident in consumeroriented electronic commerce(ecommerce); many popular sites are uncomfortably close to fallingbehind demand. without adequate attention from the research community, these problems will only get worse as largescale it systems becomemore widely deployed.this chapter reviews the research needs in largescale it systems. itbegins by describing some of the more obvious failures of such systemsand then describes the primary technical challenges that largescale itsystems present. finally, it sketches out the kind of research program thatis needed to make progress on these issues. the analysis considers thegeneric issues endemic to all large it systems, whether they are systemsthat combine hardware, software, and large databases to perform a particular set of functions (such as ecommerce or knowledge management);largescale infrastructures (such as the internet) that underlie a range offunctions and support a growing number of users; or largescale softwaresystems that run on individual or multiple devices. a defining characteristic of all these systems is that they combine large numbers of components in complicated ways to produce complex behaviors. the chapterconsiders a range of issues, such as scale and complexity, interoperabilityamong heterogeneous components, flexibility, trustworthiness, and emergent behavior in systems. it argues that many of these issues are receiving far too little attention from the research community.what is the problem with largescale systems?since its early use to automate the switching of telephone callsñthereby enabling networks to operate more efficiently and support agrowing number of callersñit has come to perform more and morecritical roles in many of societyõs most important infrastructures, including those used to support banking, health care, air traffic control, telephony, government payments to individuals (e.g., social security), andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems101individualsõ payments to the government (e.g., taxes). typical uses of itwithin companies are being complemented, or transformed, by the use ofmore it to support supplychain management systems connectingmultiple enterprises, enabling closer collaboration among suppliers andpurchasers.many of the systems in these contexts are very large in scale: theyconsist of hundreds or thousands of computers and millions of lines ofcode and they conduct transactions almost continuously. they increasingly span multiple departments within organizations (enterprisewide)or multiple organizations (interenterprise) or they connect enterprises tothe general population.1 many of these systems and applications havecome to be known as òcritical infrastructure,ó meaning that they are integral to the very functioning of society and its organizations and that theirfailure would have widespread and immediate consequences. the critical nature of these applications raises concerns about the risks and consequences of system failures and makes it imperative to better understandthe nature of the systems and their interdependencies.2the it systems used in critical intra and interorganizational applications have several characteristics in common. first, they are all large,distributed, complex, and subject to high and variable levels of use.3second, they perform critical functions that have extraordinary requirements for trustworthiness and reliability, such as a need to operate withminimal outages or corruption of information and/or a need to continueto function even while being serviced. third, the systems depend on itbased automation for expansion, monitoring, operations, maintenance,and other supporting activities.all three of these characteristics give rise to problems in building andoperating largescale it systems. for example, applications that run ondistributed systems are much more complicated to design than corresponding applications that run on more centralized systems, such as amainframe computer. distributed systems must tolerate the failure ofone or more component computers without compromising any criticalapplication data or consistency, and preferably without crashing the system. the designs, algorithms, and programming techniques required tobuild highquality distributed systems are much more complex than thosefor older, more conventional applications.largescale it systems are notoriously difficult to design, develop,and operate reliably. the list of problematic system development effortsis long and growing (table 3.1 provides an illustrative set of failures). insome cases, difficulties in design and development have resulted in significant cost overruns and/or a lack of desired functionality in fieldedsystems. in others, major it systems were cancelled before they wereever fielded because of problems in development. to be sure, the reasonsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102making it bettertable 3.1 examples of troubled largescale information technologysystemsprojectproblemfederal aviationproject begun in 1981 is still ongoing; major pieces ofadministration airproject were canceled, others are over budget and/ortraffic controldelayed. the total cost estimate now stands atmodernization$42 billion through the year 2004.internal revenue servicein early 1997, the modernization project wastax systemscancelled, after expenditures of $4 billion and 8 yearsmodernizationof work.national weather serviceproject begun in 1982 to modernize systems fortechnologyobserving and forecasting weather was over budgetmodernizationand behind schedule as of january 2000. the cost ofthe system is estimated to be $4.5 billion.bureau of land managementafter spending more than 15 years andautomated land andapproximately $411 million, the program wasmineral records systemcanceled in 1999.california vehiclevehicle registration and driverõs license databaseregistration, driverõswas never deployed after $44 million in developmentlicense databasecostsñthree times the original cost estimate.california deadbeat dads/even at a total cost of $300 million (three times themoms databaseoriginal budget estimate), the system was still flawed,and the project was canceled.florida fingerprint systemincompatible upgrades resulted in inability of thepalm beach county police to connect to the mainstate fingerprint database (a failure that prevents thecatching of criminals).hershey foods, inc., ordera $112 million system for placing and filling storeand distribution systemorders has problems getting orders into the systemand transmitting order information to warehouses forfulfillment. as of october 1999, the source of theproblem had not been identified.bell atlantic 411 systemon november 25, 1996, bell atlantic experienced adirectory service outage for several hours after thedatabase server operating system was upgraded andthe backup system failed.new york stock exchangethe stock exchange opened late on december 18,upgrade1995 (the first such delay in 5 years) because ofproblems with communications software.denver international airportin 1994, problems with routing baggage delayed thebaggage systemairport opening by 11 months at a cost of $1 millionper day.confirm reservationsthe project was canceled in 1992 after 32 years ofsystem (hilton, marriott,work in which $125 million was spent on a failedand budget rentacar,development effort.with american airlinesinformation services)making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems103for failures in the development of largescale systems are not purely technological. many are plagued by management problems as well (see box3.1). but management problems and technical problems are often interrelated. if system design techniques were simpler and could accommodatechanging sets of requirements, then management challenges would begreatly eased. conversely, if management could find ways of better defining and controlling system requirementsñand could create a process fordoing soñthen the technical problems could be reduced. this dilemmahas existed from the earliest development of computer systems.the direct economic costs of failed developments and systems failures is great. u.s. companies spend more than $275 billion a year onapproximately 200,000 system development projects (johnson, 1999). bysome estimates, 70 to 80 percent of major system development projectseither are never finished or seriously overrun cost and development timeobjectives (gibbs, 1994; jones, 1996; barr and tessler, 1998).4 the reporteddata may well underestimate the problem, given that many entities would(understandably) prefer to avoid adverse publicity. however, the accountability required of government programs ensures that system problems ingovernment at all levels do get publicized, and a steady stream of reportsattest to the ongoing challenges.5 individual failures can be expensive.for example, the state of california abandoned systems developmentprojects in recent years worth over $200 million (sunday examiner andchronicle, 1999). the federal aviation administration (faa) will havespent some $42 billion over 20 years in a muchmaligned attempt to modernize the nationõs air traffic control system (see box 3.2), and the internalrevenue service (irs) has spent more than $3 billion to date on tax systems modernization.6 the potential cost of economic damage from asingle widespread failure of critical infrastructure (such as the telephonesystem, the internet, or an electric power system) could be much greaterthan this.7the potential consequences of problems with largescale systems willonly become worse. the ability to develop largescale systems has improved over the past decade thanks to techniques such as reusability andobjectoriented programming (described below), but even if the rate ofproblem generation has declined, the number of systems susceptible toproblems continues to grow. a large number of system failures and costoverruns in system development continue to plague the developers andusers of critical it systems (gibbs, 1994; jones, 1996). as recently asoctober 1999, hershey foods, inc., was attempting to understand why itsnew, $112million, computerbased order and distribution system wasunable to properly accept orders and transmit the details to warehousesfor fulfillment (nelson and ramstad, 1999). several universities alsoreported difficulties with a new software package designed to allow stumaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104making it betterbox 3.1the confirm hotel reservation systemthe confirm hotel reservation system is one of the bestdocumented casesof system development failure in industry. the confirm system was intended tobe a stateoftheart travel reservation system for marriott hotels, hilton hotels,and budget rentacar. the three companies contracted with amris, a subsidiary of american airlines, to build the system. the four companies formed theintrico consortium in 1988 to manage the development of the system. amrisoriginally estimated the cost of the project to be $55.7 million. by the time theproject was canceled 4 years later, the intrico consortium had already paid amris$125 million, more than twice the original cost estimate.amris was unable to overcome the technical complexities involved in creatingconfirm. one problem arose from the computeraided software engineering(case) tool used to develop the database and the interface. the toolõs purposewas to automatically create the database structure for the application, but the taskended up being too complex for the tool. as a result, the amris developmentteam was unable to integrate the two main components of confirmñthe interactive database component and the pricing and yieldmanagement component.an amris vice president involved in the development eventually conceded thatintegration was simply not possible. another problem was that the developerscould not make the systemõs database faulttolerant, a necessity for the system.the database structure chosen was such that, if the database crashed, the datawould be unrecoverable. in addition, the development team was unable to makebooking reservations costeffective for the participating firms. originally, amrisestimated that booking a reservation would cost approximately $1.05, but the costestimates rapidly grew to $2.00 per reservation.the difficulties plaguing confirm were exacerbated by problems with theprojectõs management, both on amrisõs side and on the side of the end users.even though the marriott, hilton, and budget executives considered confirm tobe a high priority, they spent little time involved directly with the project, meetingwith the project team only once a month. an executive at amris said, òconfirmõs fatal flaw was a management structure. . . . you cannot manage a development effort of this magnitude by getting together once a month. . . . a system ofthis magnitude requires quintessential teamwork. we essentially had four differentgroups. . . . it was a formula for failure.óthe actions of amris middle managers also contributed to the delays andeventual complete failure of confirm. some amris managers communicatedonly good news to upper management. they refrained from passing on news ofproblems, delays, and cost overruns. there were allegations that òamris forcedemployees to artificially change their timetable to reflect the new schedule, andthose that refused either were reassigned to other projects, resigned, or werefired.ó the project employees were so displeased with management actions that,by the middle of 1991 (1 year before the project was canceled), half of the amrisemployees working on confirm were seeking new jobs. had developers atamris informed upper amris management or the other members of intrico aboutthe problems they faced with confirm, it might have been possible to correct theproblems. if not, then at least the end users would have had the opportunity tocancel the project before its budget exploded.sources: ewusimensah (1997), oz (1997), and davies (1998).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems105box 3.2modernization of the air traffic control systemthe federal aviation administration (faa) began modernizing its air trafficcontrol (atc) system in 1981 to handle expected substantial growth in air traffic,replace old equipment, and add functionality. the plan included replacing or upgrading atc facilities, radar arrays, data processing systems, and communications equipment. since that time, the system has been plagued by significant costoverruns, delays, and performance shortfalls, with the general accounting office(gao) having designated it as a highrisk information technology initiative in 1995.as of early 1999, the faa had spent $25 billion on the project. it estimated thatanother $17 billion would be spent before the project is completed in 2004ñ$8billion more and 1 year later than the agency estimated in 1997.the gao has blamed the problems largely on the faaõs failure to develop ordesign an overall system architecture that had the flexibility to accommodatechanging requirements and technologies. when the atc program began, it wascomposed of 80 separate projects, but at one point it grew to include more than200 projects. by 1999, only 89 projects had been completed, and 129 were still inprogress1ñnot including several projects that had been canceled or restructuredat a cost of $2.8 billion. the largest of these canceled projects was the advancedautomation system (aas), which began as the centerpiece of the modernizationeffort and was supposed to replace and update the atc computer hardware andsoftware, adding new automation functions to help handle the expected increasein air traffic and allow pilots to use more fuelefficient flight paths. between 1981and 1994, the estimated cost of the aas more than doubled, from $2.5 billion to$5.9 billion, and the completion date was expected to be delayed by more than 4years. much of the delay was due to the need to rework portions of code to handlechanging system requirements. as a result of the continuing difficulties, the aaswas replaced in 1994 by a scaledback plan, known as the display system replacement program, scheduled for completion in may 2000. a related piece of themodernization program, the $1 billion standard terminal automation replacementsystem, which was to be installed at its first airport in june 1998 has also beendelayed until at least early 2000.the faa is beginning to change its practices in the hope of reducing the costescalation and time delays that have plagued the modernization effort. in particular, it has begun to develop an overall architecture for the project and announcedplans to hire a new chief information officer who will report directly to the faaadministrator. in addition, instead of pursuing its prior òall at onceó developmentand deployment strategy, the faa plans on using a phased approach as a meansof better monitoring project progress and incorporating technological advances.1some of the highpriority projects that remain to be completed include the integrated terminal weather system, intended to automatically compile realtime weather data from severalsources and provide shortterm weather forecasting; the global positioning system augmentation program, transferring groundbased navigation and landing systems to a system basedon dod satellites; and the airport surface detection equipment, which encompasses threeprojects to replace the airport radar equipment that monitors traffic on runways and taxiways.see u.s. gao (1998), p. 9.sources: u.s. general accounting office (1994, 1997, 1998, 1999a,b,c), li (1994), andoõhara (1999).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106making it betterdents to register online for classes.8 as networking and computing becomemore pervasive in business and government organizations and in societyat large, it systems will become larger in all dimensionsñin numbers ofusers, subsystems, and interconnections.future it applications will further challenge the state of the art insystem development and technical infrastructure:¥information management will continue to transition from isolateddatabases supporting online transaction processing to federations of multiple databases across one or more enterprises supporting business processautomation or supplychain management. òsupplychain managementóis not possible on a large scale with existing database technology and canrequire technical approaches other than data warehouses.9¥knowledge discoveryñwhich incorporates the acquisition of datafrom multiple databases across an enterprise, together with complex datamining and online analytical processing applicationsñwill become moreautomated as, for example, networked distributed sensors are used tocollect more information and user and transaction information is captured on the world wide web. these applications severely strain thestate of the art in both infrastructure and database technology. data willbe stored in massive data warehouses in forms ranging from structureddatabases to unstructured text documents. search and retrieval techniques need to be able to access all of these different repositories andmerge the results for the user. this is not feasible today on any largescale.¥large financial services web sites will support large and rapidlyexpanding customer bases using transactions that involve processingintensive security protocols such as encryption. todayõs mainframe andserver technology is strained severely by these requirements.¥collaboration applications are moving from centralized deferredapplications such as email to complicated, multipoint interconnectiontopologies for distributed collaboration, with complex coordination protocols connecting tens or hundreds of millions of people. the deployment of technology to support distance education is a good example.todayõs internet is able to support these requirements only on a relativelymodest scale.¥advances in microelectromechanical systems (mems) and nanoscaledevices presage an era in which large numbers of very small sensors,actuators, and processors are networked together to perform a range oftasks, whether deployed over large or small geographic areas.10 thesheer number of such devices and the large number of interconnectionsamong them could far exceed the number of more conventional computmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems107ing and communications devices, exacerbating the problems of largescalesystems.¥information appliances allow computing capabilities to be embedded in small devices, often portable, that realize single functions or smallnumbers of dedicated applications.11  information appliances will greatlyincrease the number of devices connected to the network, increasing thescalability problem. they will also magnify problems of mobility. asusers roam, all the while accessing their standard suite of applications,their connectivity (in both the topological and performance dimensions)shifts with them. from an application perspective, the infrastructurebecomes much more dynamic, creating a need to adapt in various ways.these applications exemplify a technology infrastructure strained bycurrent and evolving requirements. obviously, many systems are fieldedand used to good effect. but as the requirements and level of sophistication grow, old approaches for coping and compensating when problemsarise become less effective if they remain feasible at all.12 this situationña proliferation of systems and of interconnections among themñcalls forbetter understanding and greater rigor in the design of largescale systems to better anticipate and address potential problems and to maximizethe net potential for benefit to society. achieving that understanding andrigor will require researchñresearch that will develop a better scientificbasis for understanding largescale it systems and new engineering methodologies for constructing them. the high cost of failures suggests thateven modest improvements in system design and reliability could justifysubstantial investments in research (the federal governmentõs budget forit research totaled $1.7 billion in fiscal year 2000). of course, the goal offurther systems research should be more than just modest improvementsñit should be no less than a revolution in the way such largescalesystems are designed.technical challenges associated withlargescale systemswhy are largescale systems so difficult to design, build, and operate?as evidenced by their many failures, delays, and cost overruns, largescale systems present a number of technical challenges that it researchhas not yet resolved. these challenges are related to the characteristics ofthe systems themselvesñlargeness of scale, complexity, and heterogeneityñand those of the context in which they operate, which demandsextreme flexibility, trustworthiness, and distributed operation and administration. although the characteristics may be identified with specific application requirements, they are common across a growing number of systemsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108making it betterused in a diversity of applications. as explored in greater detail below,fundamental research will be required to meet these challenges.large scaleby definition, scale is a distinguishing feature of largescale systems.scale is gauged by several metrics, including the number of componentscontained within a system and the number of users supported by thesystem. as systems incorporate more components and serve increasinglylarge numbers of users (either individuals or organizations), the challenges of achieving scalability become more severe. both metrics are onthe rise, which raises the question, how can systems be developed thatare relatively easily scaled by one or more orders of magnitude?13the internet provides an example of the need to scale the hardwareand software infrastructure by several orders of magnitude as the userbase grows and new services require more network capacity per user.the internet contains millions of interconnected computers, and it experiences scaling problems in its algorithms for routing traffic, naming entities connected to the network, and congestion control. the computersattached to the network are increasing in capability at a pace tied tomooreõs law, which promises significant improvements in a matter ofmonths. because so much of the activity surrounding the internet in thelate 1990s was based in industry, the academic research community hasbeen challenged to define and execute effective contributions. the natureof the research that would arise from the research community is not obvious, and the activities in current networking research programsñasclustered under the next generation internet (ngi) program or otherprograms aimed at networking researchñseem not to satisfy either theresearch community or industry.complexitylarge systems are not complex by definition; they can be simple if, forexample, the components are linked in a linear fashion and informationflows in a single direction. but almost all largescale it systems are complex, because the system components interact with each other in complicated, tightly coupled waysñoften with unanticipated results.14 by contrast,consider the u.s. highway system: it contains millions of automobiles(i.e., the system is large in scale), but at any given time most of them donot interact (i.e., the system is low in complexity).15 much more complexare it systems, which contain thousands of hardware components linkedby millions of lines of code and elements that interact and share information in a multitude of ways, with numerous feedback loops. indeed, it ismaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems109often impossible for a single individual, or even a small group of individuals, to understand the overall functioning of the system. as a result,predicting performance is incredibly difficult, and failures in one part ofthe system can propagate throughout the system in unexpected ways(box 3.3). although nature has succeeded in composing systems far morecomplex than any information system, largescale information systemsare among the most complex products designed by humans.scale and complexity interact strongly. as it systems become larger,they also tend to become more complex. the asyetunattained goal is tobuild systems that do not get more complex as they are scaled up. ifbox 3.3performance prediction in largescale systemsthe performance of largescale systems is difficult to predict, because of boththe large numbers of interacting components and the uncertain patterns of usagepresented to the system. performance can seldom be predicted by modeling,simulation, or experimentation before the final deployment. as a result, complexsystems of dynamically interacting components often behave in ways that theirdesigners did not intend. at times, they display emergent behaviorñbehaviors notintentionally designed into the system but that emerge from unanticipated interactions among components. such behaviors can sometimes benefit a system, butthey are usually undesirable.an example of an emergent behavior is the convoying of packets that wasobserved in the packetswitched communications networks in the late 1980s.although the routing software was not programmed to do so, the system sentpackets through the network in bursts. subsequent analysis (using fluid flowmodels) discovered that certain network configurations could cause oscillations inthe routing of packets, not unlike the vibration of a water pipe with air in it. thistype of behavior had not been intended and was corrected by upgrading routingprotocols.unexpected performance issues (including emergent behaviors) are amongthe most common causes of failure in software projects. improved methodologiesfor characterizing and predicting the performance of large, complex, distributedsystems could help enhance performance and avoid dysfunction before systemsare deployed. more powerful mechanisms are needed to deal effectively withemergent behavior in complex hardware and software systems. design methodologies are needed that incorporate into a system some type of structure that limitssystem behavior and can reason about subsystem interaction. also needed aremore effective ways of modeling and simulating or otherwise testing largesystembehavior.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110making it betterscaling can be achieved merely by replicating existing components, and ifthe management and operation of components do not change as theirnumbers grow, then the system has been scaled up successfully. on theother hand, if software must be rewritten or reconfigured, or if new hardware structures must be introduced to achieve larger scale, then complexity increases as well. for example, the demand for database storage andquery speed is growing at a rate of 100 percent per year, a rate faster thanthe improvement in processor performance predicted by mooreõs law. asa result, demand must be satisfied not by scaling up the system directly,but by parallel and distributed processing, which introduces additionalcomplexity associated with the replication and reconciliation of data.heterogeneitylargescale it systems are increasingly heterogeneous. in the past,computing capabilities generally were provided by standalone systemssupplied by a single vendor who designed the system from the top down.today, largescale systems are stitched together from components andsubsystems drawn from many vendors; they are increasingly constructedfrom commercial offtheshelf (cots) technology, and the products ofany one vendor (equipment or software) must fit into a larger systemcontaining components from many other vendors. this process results ina high level of heterogeneity within systems and heightens the need forinteroperability among components. it requires sound techniques fordesigning large systems from components òout of the box,ó especiallywhen they are mixed and matched in ways unanticipated by theirmakersña process that makes systems difficult to design and maintain.a related problem of growing importance is how to design trustworthysystems from untrustworthy components, as articulated by another cstbcommittee.16heterogeneity means much more than accommodating different processor architectures or different operating systems, which are dauntingproblems in their own right. systems increasingly are composed of software objects and components that are written by different entities, perhaps using different object architectures. these parts may be built on topof different operating systems or middleware architectures.17 it is oftennot feasible to determine ahead of time which sets of objects will interactwhen any given user (with a particular machine, operating system,browser, etc.) connects to the system and requests a service. nomadicityñthe mobility of individuals and their use of different hardware and software under different circumstancesñadds to the uncertainty. techniquesare needed to help design robust, reliable, and secure software in this newand highly challenging environment.18making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems111further complicating matters is the reality that largescale it systemsdo not generally come out of a centralized, topdown design process.rather, they often result from the bottomup integration of many individual components and subsystems. systems are not designed as a whole;instead, each added component must incorporate, elaborate on, and interoperate with the preexisting parts. largescale it systems (and personalsystems) tend to be customconfigured for particular users and applications, compounding the difficulties associated with testing (box 3.4). 19furthermore, interoperability is needed over the lifetime of a system(which can be years, if not decades) because the ensemble must continueto evolve as new hardware replaces old or as software is repaired orenhanced. these requirements are difficult to accommodate using traditional reductionist engineering approaches, and methodologies to successfully engineer such systems are poorly understood. the publicizedsystem failures presented in table 3.1 and boxes 3.1 and 3.2 reflect thesituation: the design of largescale it systems is characterized not byconsistent, wellunderstood engineering methodology but rather by considerable trial and error.flexibilitythe ad hoc nature of design as a consequence of the heterogeneitydescribed above suggests another challenging characteristic of largescaleit systems: the need for flexibility. flexibility is important both duringthe design process and after deployment. the development of largescaleit systems can take so long that mission requirements and componenttechnologies change before the system is fielded.20 an inability to accommodate these changes and to integrate subsystems that were designedand implemented separately is a main reason that many major it systemsare never deployed.21 once deployed, large it systems tend to have longlifetimes, during which additional functionality is often desired, old components must be replacedñoften with more modern technologyñor thescale of the system must be expanded. the need for system upgrades andexpansions can be particularly pressing for businesses, whose requirements evolve more rapidly than those of government. companies wantto establish new products and services quickly, either to beat competitorsto market or to match their innovations. doing so almost always requiresreconfigured information systems; the challenge is to òchange the software as fast as the business.óa complementary trend driving the need for flexibility is a shift awayfrom the standardization of products and toward rapid innovation, shortproduct cycles, and òmass customization.ó this trend has been forecastby business analysts since at least the 1980s, but it is becoming a realitymaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112making it betterbox 3.4the challenges of testing largescale systemstiny programs (systems) can be tested exhaustively by enumerating everystate the system can enter and checking to be sure that, when started in that state,the system conforms to its specification. but the combinatorial explosion of possible states in a largescale system defeats this technique very quickly. testing ahardware design for a 32bit adder or multiplier (as in the case of the famous intelfailure) is not practical. there are techniques, including theorem proving andmodel checking, for verifying the correctness of somewhat larger designs. thesetechniques have been used recently to find errors in network protocol designs,(hardware) bus designs, and the like. these are subsystems of interesting sizebut still far smaller than any product component as the term is used in this report(see chapter 1).at the level of a modestsized computer program, such as a word processor ora world wide web browser, proof techniques cannot be applied. instead, testingis used in various forms. two forms of testing are common. in unit testing, themain modules of a system are tested separately, each against test cases derivedfrom its specification. this technique takes advantage of hierarchical decomposition used in the design of the system. it helps reduce testing time by not testingmodules that have not changed. often modules have simple, easytounderstandinterfaces, which lead to good, thorough test suites, thereby also improving testing. when code does not have simple specifications, a form of testing called pathcoverage is used, in which every possible path through the system is executed atleast once as part of a test program. to do so may require writing a huge quantityof test cases. these techniques are used in both hardware and software designs(in hardware, it is often called simulation, whereby a chip design is simulatedagainst a large number of test cases before it is fabricated).testing can demonstrate the presence of bugs but never their absence. it doesnot enumerate all the possible states into which a system can enter or all combinations of paths through the system, so it is not definitive. furthermore, testingbecomes costly as systems become large. today, a serious limitation on theability to design microprocessors (and in their timetomarket) is the amount ofsimulation that must be done.the forms of testing described apply to a single system of modest size. whenthe system is a large, distributed systemofsystems, the cost of testing becomesso high that only a tiny fraction of possible system behaviors is tested. the scaleproblem means that either (1) testers cannot afford to assemble a large enoughsystem to test all interesting cases (e.g., for routers, lines, clients) or (2) they cannot explore a significant fraction of the system states or configurations (e.g., loadson the network, routing table entries, link congestion, routing policies). thus, testing can quickly get out of hand.another complicating aspect of largescale systems is that they have very complex failure modes. when a single personal computer running a single systemstops, it is obvious that it is broken, and users no longer expect the system to meetits specification until the problem is fixed. however, when a single element of alarge system (such as the internet) fails, the rest of the system is often required tocontinue functioning properly. system designs are often intended to remain robustdespite this type of failure, but testing in the presence of all these failure modes ismore difficult still. in addition, testing is of little use in identifying security vulnerabilities in an it system, because it is hard to determine what to test for.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems113now because of the cumulative advances in it. as a result, flexibilityñspecifically, the ability to meet changing needs rapidlyñhas become oneof the most fundamental and important requirements of many applications. the pursuit of flexibility is complicated by the context in preexisting organizations, where new enterprise applications usually need toincorporate legacy departmental applications and thus cannot be developed from scratch. in the case of a merger or divestiture, informationsystems may need to be integrated or dismantled. another source ofcomplication that is growing along with economic globalization is theinternationalization of functions within businesses. such internationalization demands multifaceted support, not only for multiple languagesbut also for business processes that differ from one geographic area toanother. the internet is a global phenomenon, and research needs to besensitive to international differences, including differences in technologyand in issues of privacy, taxation, content regulation, and so on. technologies such as automated language translation, which could be easilycustomized for different countries, would facilitate the internationalization of it. research is needed to understand the other differences mentioned above, perhaps through international or comparative researchprojects.22system upgrades and expansions have proven particularly difficultin practice. one reason is that the original system may not be fully understood, and the developers attempting to augment it may have played norole in its design. changes or additions to the system can therefore produce unexpected and unanticipated results.23 another source of difficulty is that many systems are designed without the modularity andencapsulation of functionality needed to facilitate future upgrades. inmany hardware and software projects, the emphasis is on getting a systemup and running. less attention is paid to designing largescale applications that will be easy to modify and maintain over a long lifetime. as aresult, many systemsñsometimes poorly designed in the first placeñaremodified repeatedly with great effort, to the point where their complexityvirtually precludes further modification. such systems may have to bescrapped long before they ordinarily would have been, at a high cost tothe organizations that created them. an additional complication is adearth of expertise in systems architecture. some large government itsystems that have experienced problems, for example, have been faultedfor the lack of architecture planning and perspective.24largescale systems require architectures that are flexible enough thatnecessary modifications can be made easily, at low cost, and with littleimpact on system availability. beyond paying more attention to it designsthat support flexibility, it will be important to gain an understanding ofwhich forms of flexibility are desirable and which are unnecessary.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114making it betterunfettered flexibility can lead to too many options for end users to consider, making interactions cumbersome. when a system is customizedfor a particular application, interactions tend to become relatively shortand efficient, but the system itself is less capable of accommodatingchanging specifications. a balance needs to be struck between unfetteredflexibility (which doubtless would be too expensive and also degradeperformance) and the present state of inflexibility, which increasinglycannot meet the needs of realworld systems. this is a variation on atraditional engineering theme: the tradeoff between specialized and flexible technology.trustworthinessbecause they increasingly support missioncritical functions in industry, government, and other societal organizations, largescale it systemsmust also be extremely trustworthy. that is, they must do what they arerequired to doñand nothing elseñdespite environmental disruption,human user and operator error, and attacks by hostile parties (cstb,1999a). they must be available for service when needed (perhaps continuously) and perform their tasks reliably, with adequate security andwithout error. failure to meet these standards can disrupt the service theit systems provide, causing loss of business revenues or even human life.trustworthiness increasingly is recognized as one of the most importantchallenges in it, because systems are increasingly used to support criticalfunctions and are increasingly networked, which can introduce new vulnerabilities. ensuring trustworthiness is particularly difficult in largescale it systems because of their size and complexity.the challenges are much broader and deeper than security alone. thetrustworthiness of systems and applications encompasses a number ofissues, including correctness, reliability, availability, robustness, andsecurity; some analysts would also include privacy and other issues thatadd more subjective coloring to the tradeoffs by clearly blending technical and social elements. for example, how one approaches the need foraccountability and the value of anonymous speech will affect approachesto system design. these issues are central to ongoing discussions anddevelopments relating to electronic identity. gaining a deeper understanding of trustworthiness, and measures to ensure it, is in large part anoperational and managerial challenge as well as a technical problem. eventhe most secure installations or reliable systems are subject to humanerror, inattention, or dishonesty.25making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems115securitylargescale information systems are vulnerable to malicious attacksthat can render them unable to perform their intended tasks; result in theloss of confidential information; or cause information to be lost, modified,or destroyed. the security issue is obvious in areas such as ecommerce,where the potential for financial loss is huge, and in health care, wheredivulging a patientõs medical record could result in an irreparable loss ofprivacy. but security gaps in any sort of it system can lead to widespreadsystem failure and disruption, financial loss, or theft of private or proprietary information in a very short time. the defense information systemsagency (disa) estimates that the department of defense (dod) mayhave experienced as many as 250,000 attacks on its computer systems in arecent year, and that the number of such attacks may be doubling annually. most of these attacks have been unsuccessful, but in some casesintruders have been able to take control of systems, steal passwords, andretrieve classified information (e.g., about troop movements in the gulfwar). a swedish hacker shut down a 911 emergency call system inflorida for an hour, according to the fbi, and in march 1997 a series ofcommands sent from a hackerõs personal computer disabled vital servicesto the faaõs control tower in worcester, massachusetts.26 such vulnerabilities are not limited to government computer systems, whose problems are more likely to be publicized; they apply as well to a growingnumber of privatesector systems, which become attractive targets ofcorporate espionage as attackers come to recognize that proprietary information is stored on networked systems. the wave of denialofserviceattacks launched against highprofile commercial web sites in february2000 underscores the vulnerability of such systems.largescale systems are especially vulnerable to security flaws. thelarge number of client computers attached to them means an even largernumber of portals at which a lapse in security (e.g., a weak or divulgedpassword) can allow entry into a system. furthermore, many such systems are distributed among several administrative domains, makingsecurity more difficult to manage and assure. additional vulnerabilitiesare introduced by the connection of largescale it systems to the internet.although the attraction of many of todayõs largescale systems stems fromtheir attachment to the global network, this network connection alsomakes the systems vulnerable to misuse or attack.how can systems be designed to retain information securely andoperate correctly while under attack from intruders? how can intrudersbe deterred, while accommodating more open or less predictable interactions over computer networks? existing technologies such as encryption, authentication, signatures, and firewalls can provide some degree ofmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116making it betterprotection. but flaws in these systems and in operating systems are foundand exploited regularly, leading to incremental improvements while alsoraising fundamental questions about the state of the art. more researchon new methodologies for creating secure and trusted software systemswould be of great benefit to the nation.availability and reliabilityas it applications increasingly address critical needs such as disasterrecovery, ecommerce, and health care, the requirements for availability(i.e., assurance that a system is available for use when and as needed) andfault tolerance (i.e., assurance that a system can function even when problems arise) have increased dramatically. largescale system designsclearly differ from, say, desktop office suites in that they must operate inunknown, changing environments. unfortunately, most algorithms anddesign techniques for computer hardware and software assume a benignenvironment and the correct operation of every component. there is anurgent need for new algorithms based on different assumptions that willlead to algorithms that work correctly in spite of failures. the study ofdistributed computing (i.e., computer systems interconnected by networks) has begun to address the problem. algorithms have been developed that work correctly even when a data packet sent into the networkfrom a computer fails to arrive at its intended destination. the algorithmsused to route packets through the internet are not only robust in thepresence of dropped packets but also adapt to changing network performance (e.g., when a communication link fails or resumes operation afterfailure). although considerable progress has been made in critical algorithms, they are far from perfect (e.g., routing algorithms cannot alwaysprevent network congestion), and they fulfill only a small fraction of therequirements of todayõs largescale systems.ensuring the availability and reliability of largescale it systems isespecially challenging (box 3.5). as noted earlier, the number of components in these systems and the deepseated interactions among them makeattempts to predict performance especially difficult. the fact that they areusually custombuilt for a particular application makes testing themextremely difficultñespecially when they may be operated by a largenumber of users under a wide variety of operating conditions and whencompanies are under intense competitive pressure to field new systemsquickly. in this environment, how can a largescale system be designed tobe so robust that it is guaranteed to be available all but, say, 30 secondsper year no matter what, even in cases of hardware failure, software bugs,or human error? individual components of it systems (such as routersand computing platforms) can be made reliable,27 but making the largemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems117box 3.5availability problems experienced ininformation technology systemsnumerous wellpublicized failures of major systems show that current technology and operating practices are not meeting expectations. for example, the3yearold central computer system that monitors the position of trains in the washington, d.c., metrorail system reportedly crashed 50 times in the first 15 monthsafter its deployment. in september 1999, it failed for unknown reasons, delayingmorning startup by 45 minutes and causing significant delays in the rush hour. anumber of highprofile internet companies have also experienced problems withworld wide web sites for electronic commerce, many stemming from problems inupgrading systems and growing traffic volume. charles schwabõs online brokerage service, for example, experienced more than a dozen outages in 1999, duringwhich users could not access realtime quotes, check account information andmargin balances, or execute trades. online retailer beyond.com experienced anextended outage in october 1999 as a result of complications stemming from ascheduled upgrade. in 1998, problems with unscheduled maintenance causedamazon.com to take its site offline for several hours; ebay and e*trade securitiesare experiencing intermittent outages as the volume of visitors to their web sitesincreases. indeed, a survey conducted in late 1999 by the consulting companydeloitte & touche found that the primary business concerns of online brokeragefirms were system outages and an inability to accommodate growing numbers ofonline investors. performance and reliability were also cited as significant concerns.sources: junnarkar (1999), layton (1999), luenig (1999), and meehan (2000).scale systems themselves reliable is more difficult. the telephone system,which is based heavily on software, may be the closest to reaching thisgoal, but its robustness has been achieved only at considerable cost andwith delays in development.28 the race to develop new critical applications, driven by the rapid pace of innovation in internet applications andservices, has resulted in inadequate, even dangerously poor, robustness.often prototypes or simplistic implementations become so popular soquickly that expectations far exceed the reliability achievable with theinitial design. moreover, even when systems are designed carefully toaddress reliability concerns, their complexity makes it doubly difficult toachieve reliability and robustness goals.the spread of it bears witness to the fact that, overall, hardwarereliability has advanced significantly but software reliability has laggedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118making it better(think of the frequency with which standard desktop computers crash).techniques for assuring robustness in hardware have been of criticalimportance in, for example, space flight; by performing each computationusing three independent hardware systems and attaching a òvotingó circuit to the outcome to determine the majority answer, one can catch andovercome many hardware failure modes. however, this approach wouldnot catch so many software bugs.29 the implementation of softwaremodules in three different ways probably would catch some bugs, but ata high cost. in a complex situation, how could one determine whichversion was behaving correctly? clearly, new ideas are needed on how toassure the robustness of complex hardware and software systems. experimenting with and qualifying these ideas will be a daunting challenge,given the nature of these largescale systems and their myriad and infrequently observed failure mechanisms.distributed operation and administrationthe challenges inherent in largescale it systems are further complicated by the frequent distribution of their operation and administrationacross different organizational units. in the past, most it applicationswere compartmentalized into individual organizations and independently administered. now, applicationsñwhether designed for social,information access, or business purposesñare executed across a networkedcomputing infrastructure spanning whole organizations and enterprises,and indeed multiple enterprises and consumers (see box 3.6 for a discussion of ecommerce as a distributed system). such an infrastructurecannot be administered effectively in a centralized fashionñthere is nocentral administrative authority. new tools and automated operationalsupport methodologies could improve the operation and administrationof such distributed systems. these potential solutions have yet to beconsidered seriously by the research community; network management isan area that has long needed more research (cstb, 1994).improving the design and implementation oflargescale systemsto date, it research has failed to produce the techniques needed toaddress the challenges posed by largescale systems. standard computerscience approaches, such as abstraction, modularity, and layering (box3.7), are helpful at separating functionality and establishing clear interfaces between components, but even with these techniques engineers havegreat difficulty designing and refining large, complex systems. thesetools are apparently insufficient for dealing with the enormous complexmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems119box 3.6electronic commerce applications as distributed systemselectronic commerce (ecommerce) demonstrates the issues of heterogeneityand multiple administrative domains cropping up in largescale systems. inbusinesstobusiness ecommerce applications, the system cannot be integrated,nor is it deployed, by a single organization or professional service firmñeven whenparties nominally use the same product (e.g., popular enterprise resource planningsystems). a vendor offering to sell its product over the internet controls only itsown servers and databases. the customerõs client software is likely to be a genericworld wide web browser; the web, of course, is implemented by numerous internet service providers running routers and other systems and software that has towork right to support the communications aspects of ecommerce. the vendorõssoftware is likely to be part of a complex information technology system that mustbe integrated with a payment mechanism (e.g., credit card verification or maybe anelectronic cash service) as well as the software of a shipping firm to track thestatus of orders. it also interacts with suppliers to manage and pay for the flow ofmaterials and component parts. such an ecommerce application spans multipleadministrative domains, including firms and individual consumers. no single entityhas access to, or control over, the complete system for systematic testing; nordoes anyone have access to all the source code that defines the system. it is notsurprising, for example, that even with the best intentions, privacy or securityglitches arise because of the difficulty of assuring the appropriate design and performance of so many systems and system levels.ity and crossmodule, crosslayer interactions that arise in large it systems. the it community needs to understand better the root causes of theproblems exhibited in largescale systems and to articulate that understanding in ways that will bring more good minds and ideas to bear onthe problems. better softwarebased tools are needed for managing complexity, and best practices need to be codified and propagated so that,collectively, designers and engineers repeat methods and approaches thatappear to work and avoid those whose failure has been demonstrated.limitations of past researchpart of the reason that better approaches to designing scalable, reliable, flexible largescale it systems do not yet exist is a lack of attentionfrom the research community. traditionally, it systems research hasemphasized advances in performance, functionality, and cost, primarilyto improve device (or component) characteristics (hennessy, 1999). themaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120making it betterbox 3.7abstraction, modularity, and layeringcomputer scientists have long used a set of tools known as abstraction, modularity, and layering to help them deal with the complexity of designing informationtechnology (it) systems. the limits of these approaches are tested by largescalesystems in a variety of ways:¥abstraction is the process of simplifying the description of an element of asystem to hide unnecessary details and allow greater focus on attributes that areimportant to system analysis or design. the trick is to select an appropriateabstraction that preserves the necessary attributes of the element without becoming unrealistic. using abstraction, for example, one can form a simplified abstractmodel of a packet router and actually prove things about the interconnections ofsuch routers. to some extent, however, performance is the enemy of abstraction.when an algorithm or system is tuned to improve performance, it usually departsfrom its simple, abstract form, giving up many of the benefits of reasoning aboutthe abstraction.¥modularity refers to the decomposition of a system into smaller subsystemsthat can be developed separately (and in parallel). modules encapsulate the internal details of a system component and specify a set of interfaces for allowinginteraction among components. as such, changes in the internal configuration ofone module do not necessarily require changes to other modules. by reducing thecomplexity of intersystem dependencies, modularity facilitates more rapid reconfiguration of systems to meet operational requirements. as the scale and complexity of it systems grow, however, it becomes more difficult to separate functionality cleanly, and the set of interfaces can become more complicated, increasingthe possibility of errors in implementation or the possibility that particular circumstances will not be sufficiently addressed.¥layering is a form of modularity that decomposes systems into horizontalstrata (layers), each of which depends on the layer below and provides services tothe layer above (by adding its own capabilities to those of the lower layers). layering allows capability to be added to a system by building on what already exists inlower layers. it also allows the implementation of one layer to be changed withoutnecessarily affecting the layers above. layering is helpful in largescale systems,but only to a point. it can lead to reduced performance because of the additionaloverhead associated with moving between layers. furthermore, when the lowerlayers fail to do their jobs, the upperlevel abstractions fail, and in ways that maynot be easily recognizable. a common layer in networks is the transport layer,which allows users to assume that each node in a distributed computation hassome number of reliable transport paths to other nodes. if one or more of thesefail, then users can quickly find it hard to reason about the system as a whole,unless care has been taken when implementing the lower layers to reduce thedifficulties involved in analyzing failures.sources: the definitions of abstraction, modularity, and layering derive from those in cstb(1999b) and messerschmitt (2000).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems121problems in largescale systems stem not so much from the componentsbut rather from the way they are customized, assembled, tested, deployed,operated, and modified to serve a particular purpose, especially whenthey are combined with other components into larger systems and whensuch systems span organizational boundaries or connect even larger numbers of embedded devices working in concert.30 the organizations thatmight be best positioned to understand these issues, namely, systemsintegrators and end users, tend not to conduct the types of research thatmight yield greater insight.this is not to say that problems of scalability, complexity, heterogeneity, flexibility, trustworthiness, and distributed management have beenabsent from the it systems research agenda. several programs over thepast decade have made forays into this arena, but with shifting prioritiesand emphases. the high performance computing and communicationsinitiative (hpcci) began with a priority familiar to researchers from earlier decadesña push for higherperformance it systems (e.g., increasedprocessing and communications speed). by the mid1990s, attention toissues such as scale and heterogeneity was growing; these issues wereemphasized in the recommendations in cstbõs brookssutherland report,evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative tosupport the nationõs information infrastructure (cstb, 1995b). the mid1990s also saw concerns about information systems trustworthiness beginto coalesce, as evidenced by the 1995 workshop on highconfidence systems sponsored by the committee on information and communications(cic, 1995) and a 1997 workshop on the same topic by the committeeõssuccessor, the committee on computing, information, and communications of the national science and technology council (ccic, 1997). thehigh confidence systems research program was added under the hpcciumbrella, but concerns about the limitations of existing research effortswere expressed in a variety of reports on critical infrastructure and in theassociated calls for research.31the information technology for the twentyfirst century (it2) initiative, begun in 1999, carries these themes forward. this new initiative, ledby the national science foundation (nsf) but joined by several otherfederal agencies, is pursuing breakthrough research and research to applyit successfully in applications that benefit society. to a lesser extent, itmay support research directed at the challenges of building large, complex information systems. in particular, nsfõs information technologyresearch (itr) initiative will fund large research projects that bring together interdisciplinary teams for several years. issues such as scalabilityand software are clearly on the agenda. work in these areas may build ona workshop nsf convened in the summer of 1997 to identify significantnew approaches to systems research. some of the themes that emergedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122making it betterfrom that workshop included developing highconfidence systems withpredictable properties at predictable cost, developing globalscale systems, and making architectures dynamic and adaptive (kavi et al., 1999).these three themes are congruent with the research needs identified inthis chapter.a number of other programs sponsored by the nsf and the defenseadvanced research projects agency (darpa) in late 1999 and early 2000promise continued exploration of systems issues:¥information assurance and survivability (darpa)ñthis large, multidimensional program is focused on research that will enable the dodand the nation to build it systems that are trustworthy, meaning that theywill be able to quickly detect intrusions and attacks, be reasonably secureagainst them, and recover quickly from them. the program is clearlyfocused on systems issues, such as the joint design of new protocols,distributed intrusiondetection mechanisms, and information integrationmethods that can collectively be used to design, build, and operate networks that are trustworthy and secure. program managers are making aconscious effort to bring new people with new ideas and new approachesinto the program, and they are encouraging interdisciplinary approaches,with an emphasis on testbeds. researchers are encouraged to combinetheir respective competencies to pursue breakthrough system approachesrather than continue work in more established directions. the projectsare proposed by industry, universities, and government agencies, bringing together a wide range of perspectives.¥scalable enterprise systems (nsf)ñthis is a new research programsponsored by the engineering directorate of nsf. a solicitation for proposals was issued in 1999, and the funding decision process is in progressfor proposals submitted in late 1999. in principle, this program could bea first step toward addressing challenges related to the design, deployment, and operation of large enterprise systems that are reliable. it aimsfor systems that are predictable in their behavior and meet the performance requirements of their users. the nsf has asked for phase 1 proposals for small, exploratory projects, a good approach for soliciting andfunding a reasonably large number of innovative approaches. it is toosoon to tell whether this program will address systems needs of the sortoutlined in the chapter. one issue is whether the program will attempt todevelop practical engineering approaches to the full range of problemsassociated with scalable systems. another concern is the traditional nsfpeer review process. if the peer review process emphasizes past publications and other evidence of past results at the expense of novelty and thepotential relevance of the approaches proposed, and if the peer reviewersfail to adequately appreciate proposals that bring together interdisciplimaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems123nary teams with competencies that allow them to address the challengesfrom new perspectives (even if the teams have not addressed these particular problems in the past), then the program will discourage researchersfrom extending their competencies into new areas in which they can collectively have an impact. this concern is not limited to this one programñit extends to a range of initiatives nsf is entering into that attemptto push research in new directions or bring together researchers frommultiple disciplines.¥next generation internet (ngi) (darpa and nsf along with thedepartments of energy, commerce, and health and human services, and thenational aeronautics and space administration)ñthis program is supporting a substantial number of multidisciplinary research initiatives, bothlarge and small, aimed at understanding and addressing the challengesassociated with highspeed networks capable of transmitting data atspeeds 100 to 1,000 times those possible on the internet. it has threecomponents: (1) research on highspeed networking, (2) development ofrevolutionary applications that take advantage of improved networkingcapability, and (3) deployment of highspeed testbed networks for experimentation. although some of the ngi research is properly directed attraditional technology problems, such as creating higherspeed devicesand subsystems, a substantial portion of the projects is directed at problems associated with large, complex, distributed systems, addressingquestions such as how to provide quality of service in a network constructed of distributed and autonomous subnetworks and network management.what is missing from existing federal research programs is a coherentapproach to attacking the gamut of systems problemsña thrust that specifically targets largescale systems and their associated problems andpursues fundamental research to address them. such an effort wouldneed to support research along many different dimensionsñtheory, architecture, design methodologies, and the likeñbecause no single approachto system design will be able to address the full scope of challengespresented by largescale systems.32 it is possible (although, in the committeeõs judgment, unlikely) that dramatically improved methodologiesfor the design of largescale systems are beyond human capabilityñcertainly, it is difficult to get oneõs arms around the challenge (especially forresearchers who have little handson experience with largescale systems)and validate the outcomes. but the problems in large systems are toopervasive, expensive, and fundamental to be largely ignored any longer.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124making it bettertoward an expanded systems research agendatwo distinct but complementary styles of research can provide insightinto largescale systems:¥case researchñresearch that attacks a specific largescale systemapplication (whether a distributed database or the internet) and attemptsto improve it to make it more functional, scalable, robust, and so on; and¥methodology researchñresearch that addresses the issues involvedin designing largescale systems generally, looking for architectures, techniques, and tools that can make significant advances in the ways thatlargescale systems are designed.methodology research is distinguished from case research in that itaddresses generic issues that plague most or all largescale systems andlooks for dramatic improvements in the methodologies for the design ofall largescale systems. the goal of such work is not to make incrementaladvances in existing systems (which is frequently the agenda of caseresearch), but rather to create new design methodologies that result inlargescale systems that are intrinsically superior to existing systems inthe dimensions of concern (such as vulnerability or flexibility orscalability). this objective makes methodology research potentially muchmore beneficial to the nation (financially and otherwise).case research and methodology research are complementary: caseresearch identifies specific shortcomings and problems in largescale system design methodologies that can be more fully explored through methodology research, and improved methodologies arising from methodology research can be validated by trying them out on one or more specificcases using case research. case research is by far more common todaythan methodology research, in part because the latter is riskier and lesslikely to have nearterm payoff. this is not to say that methodologyresearch is nonexistent. there have been a few notable successes in(1) architectural techniques, including abstraction and encapsulation, thatwere conceptualized in the 1970s and used in the design of many itsystems, (2) transaction processing, which encompasses a collection oftechniques that make large distributed systems much easier to developñsome would say even feasible (gray and reuter, 1993),33 (3) applicationcomponents, generic and reusable collections of functionality that contribute to system correctness and stability because elements that arewidely reused are inherently more extensively tested, and (4) security,which is receiving increasing attention because of the current attention toecommerce. individually and collectively, these examples fall far shortmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems125of resolving the serious challenges that lie ahead in the design and operation of largescale it systems, but they provide some indication of theadvances that could come out of additional methodological research.there is a need for dramatically new ideas about how to approach thedesign of largescale systems, with the goal of dramatically improvingoutcomes in terms of successful deployment and the desirable qualitiesmentioned earlier. the investment in methodology research needs to begreatly expanded to stimulate more research that pursues highriskapproaches to system design and to foster greater collaboration among itresearchers in universities and industry and end users with operationalknowledge of largescale system problems.an expanded research agenda would need to address systems thatare (1) large in scale, meaning there are massive numbers of elementsinteracting within the system, and (2) highly complex, meaning that theinteractions among those elements are both highly heterogeneous andcomplicated in nature. the low rate of success in designing largescalesystems today does not mean that research should focus solely on knownfailures, although they would offer useful insight. rather, much of theresearch should target systems that are much larger in scale and complexity than the systems that have been attempted to date. the goal of theresearch should be to explore methodologies for structuring and architecture that will enable practical, largescale systems to be successfullyconstructed and deployed. measures of success in this program wouldinclude the following:¥a dramatic, or at least substantial, improvement in practitionersõsuccess in constructing and deploying largescale systems and¥a dramatic, or at least substantial, increase in the scale and complexity of systems that practitioners will reasonably attempt to develop.because of the tremendous resources being wasted in largescale itsystem failures today, success in the first of these two measures alonecould justify considerable investment in research. of course, favorableoutcomes will become evident only with time, as largerscale systems areattempted. thus, the research programs will have to rely on qualitativemeasures in the short term, such as a better understanding of largescalesystems, clearer reasoning about the correct behavior of such systems,and even optimism about improved prospects for largescale systems onthe part of practitioners. in the longer term, metrics and benchmarkscould be developed for assessing improvements in system design andcomparing the merits of competing approaches.34making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126making it betterdesigning a research programa range of approaches needs to be pursued if progress is to be madeon largescale it systems. these approaches include theoretical computerscience, computer systems architecture, analogies to large systems in thenatural and social sciences, programming methodologies, and continuedextensions of ongoing work in areas such as software components andmobile code. experimental work will be extremely important and, in thiscontext, inherently problematic, because the systems of interest arebeyond the current capability of engineers to implement and because theconstruction of largescale it systems is especially difficult in a researchenvironment. nevertheless, experiments can be done in the context ofexisting largescale systems, attempting incremental improvements. furthermore, useful insights into the behavior of largescale extensions canbe inferred from smallscale prototypes. of course, the best ideas forpursuing research in largescale systems will come from the research community itself, but the following examples show the range of approachesneeded in a comprehensive attempt to develop a stronger scientific andengineering basis for largescale it systems.theoretical approachesone element of any approach to studying the properties of systems ofa scale and complexity exceeding current capabilities is to develop theoretical constructs of behaviors. theoretical computer science has beenquite successful in applying such methodologies to, for example, the computing requirements for algorithms of arbitrary complexity, quantifyingwhich algorithms have desirable properties and which algorithms do not.there have also been some efforts and successes in reasoning about protocols (algorithms executed among autonomous actors), which gets closerto the heart of largescale systems.35 similar methodologies could beapplied to largescale systems. one direction for research would be toconstruct certain constraints on the behaviors of elements of the systemand then to reason deductively about desirable properties of the systemas a whole. another approach would be to define helpful properties oflargescale systems and draw inferences about the characteristics of constituent actors that ensure these properties.architectural approachesefforts are also needed to develop further the nascent fields of systemor software architecture (shaw and garlan, 1996; rechtine and maier,1997). system architectsñsoftware architects, in particularñare similarmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems127to building architects in that they need to understand the needs and interests of their users and be aware of the characteristics of the componentsthat the users had developed previously. the architectõs job is then tomarry user needs to the available resources in such a way that the resulting system will be useful for many years, even if it undergoes significantchange during its lifetime.work on architectural approaches could help extend existing principles of abstraction, modularity, and layering to largescale systemsñorto augment them with additional architectural tools. recent work sponsored by darpa, for example, recognized the difficulties introduced intothe modeling of complex systems by insufficient understanding, information, and computer processing power, and evaluated a number of different frameworks of abstraction for modeling such systems.36 this workcombined an architectural approach to largescale system problems withthe theoretical basis advocated above, and it illustrates the promise ofarchitectural methodologies for largescale system design. another approach may be to investigate alternatives to the topdown approach todecomposing systems advocated by structured programming (whichtends to work on a small scale only) and to the bottomup approach tosystem design embodied in notions of component software (describedbelow). for example, a middleout approach that breaks systems intohorizontal layers or platforms that are standardized across systems andcan be tuned to particular applications might be worth further evaluation.inspiration from natural and social systemswork on largescale it systems could also draw on analogies in naturaland social systems. some natural and social systems display a scale andcomplexity far beyond what has been achieved in technological systems.research may determine how such characteristics are achieved in naturaland social systems, and whether those lessons can be applied to it systems. two such systems that are systematic and purposefulñachievinguseful higher goals through the composition of many elementsñare ecological systems and the economy, both of which might usefully serve asmodels (box 3.8). darpa has already supported research on informationsystems trustworthiness that draws on biological models, and its exploration of other intersections between computing and biology suggest thepotential for more crossfertilization between these two disciplines.37software development processesthe ability of programmers to design and develop largescale software systems could, in principle, benefit from better methodologies, promaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128making it betterbox 3.8ecological and economic systems as models for largescaleinformation technology systemsbiological and economic systems could serve as models of complex systems.as such, they could inform the development of largescale information technologysystems. an ecological system achieves a remarkable level of diversity andheterogeneity with mutual dependence, through a process of natural selection.researchers could examine processes like natural selection for possible applicability to technological systems and study the specific mechanisms of interactionand coordination that have evolved in such systems. of course, analogies havebeen shown between technological and biological systems for many years, andthe concept has been pursued concretely in, for example, genetic algorithms andneural networks.the economy also achieves a scale of purposeful heterogeneity with mutualdependence far beyond that in any technological system. experience suggestsstrongly that central planningñthe systematic design of an economy topdown,much as technological systems are designed todayñis not a viable methodology.the most successful economic systems are composed of semiautonomous actorswho act in accordance with selfinterest within the imposed constraints of an incentive system. this approach differs from technological systems in that it uses incentives rather than dogmatic behavioral expectations and in terms of the degree ofautonomy delegated to its agents and the degree of intelligence (human and organizational) with which those agents are endowed. this latter feature is likely todistinguish economic systems from technological ones for some time to come,although of course there has been considerable effort to emulate human intelligence in limited ways in the context of artificial intelligence research.1arguably the greatest opportunity lies in the application of economic theory to themethodology of largescale system design. microeconomic and macroeconomictheories are limited by the approximations that need to be made in certain modeling assumptions about the behavior of economic actors and organizations. thissame limitation need not apply to technological systems constructed in accordancewith economic principles, because these systems can follow prescribed principlesby construction. theoretical economics is replete with tools, such as game theory,that are interesting to consider in this context. a handful of organizations, including the santa fe institute, are pursuing interdisciplinary research along these lines,examining the way aggregate behaviors can arise from the actions of independentagents.1 this work provides an interesting link to the biological analogies mentioned above, given thathuman intelligence itself arose through an evolutionary process.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems129gramming environments, and tools for software development. the fieldof software engineering was created 30 years ago to deal with the predictability, time, and cost issues related to software development, and manyproblems identified in the 1960s persist today (as cstb committees reportregularly). good engineering practice has contributed to improvementsin the development of small and even mediumsized modules, yieldingmodest improvements in the productivity of programmers (boehm,1993).38 further improvements are needed in largescale systems and inmethods for addressing their inherent problems. in particular, softwareengineering techniques must scale to very large and complex systems.software development is itself an intense collaborative task, which couldmake better use of tools that can greatly facilitate collaborative development. there is also room for improvement in software testing, a timeconsuming and expensive aspect of the development process. challenging issues include the testing of large, concurrent software systems aswell as multimedia systems. other issues include the development ofprocesses that work well even when people have lessthanoptimalskills.39extensions of existing approachesexisting approaches to largescale system design, including some thatare in commercial practice, show promise for facilitating the developmentof largescale systems and could benefit from greater attention from theresearch community. two approaches worth mentioning are methodologies based on component software and mobile code.the ideal of component software is to construct systems by assembling and integrating preexisting modules of code with known functionality. the elements are purchased as is, rather than constructed specifically for system needs, and combined in new ways, possibly with othernewly developed elements, to create a system. two existing approachesare the reuse of components (reusable modules) and the reuse of frameworks (reusable architectures for specific application domains). component reuse is common in the manufacture of physical goods and was oneof the major innovations of the industrial revolution.40 among the practical advantages of this approach are the time and cost efficiencies gainedfrom avoiding a new development effort and the improved quality ofcomponents that are tested by reuse in many systems. the most promising approach is the containment of complexity by the substitution ofassembly for traditional programming, with the possibility of this assembly being performed by end users.41 reuse is common in computing andnetworking infrastructure. increasingly, existing software design patterns are adapted and applied as an alternative to customcrafting majormaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130making it bettersoftware structures. for example, many clientserver applications usesimilar designs and code. emerging component software frameworks,such as javabeans, exploit libraries of predefined elements that fit withina common design framework. applications are built by assembling existing components as well as by creating new, unique components that fitwithin the framework.several factors, some technological and some economic, have limitedthe utility of component software to date (szyperski, 1998). the biggestobstacle to software reuse is the complexity of software structure andinteraction, which is much greater than that found in the physical partsand assemblies of industrial production. reuse via very high level languages has proven effective for small systems but does not scale well(boehm, 1999). furthermore, the fragmentation of the software industryñresulting in part from the lower transaction and coordination costs madepossible by networked computingñhas made it difficult to implementreuse on a large scale, and modest improvements in programming productivity are being swamped by expanding needs. improvements intechniques for finding and validating chunks of reusable code mayimprove the prospects for this technique. more research is required todetermine how well this approach applies to largescale systems.another approach receiving commercial attention is mobile code,which abandons the architectural principle that the elements of a systemare static in their behaviors and interaction with other elements andinstead allows elements to influence the behavior of other elements inricher ways beyond simple interaction. more generally, the capabilities ofcomponents can be dynamically extended and modified by providingthem with programming code. of course, simply moving the executionof code around a system provides no fundamental change in the expressiveness of such code, but it does fundamentally alter architecturalassumptions about the type and flexibility of functionality encapsulatedin system elements. it therefore illustrates the possibilities for substantially new architectural approaches to system design that could improvethe ability to make systems more reliable or easier to build (although suchpotential still needs to be demonstrated). examples of interesting research(of the case variety rather than the methodology variety) include jini (i.e.,opportunistic cooperation of internet appliances) and active networks(i.e., using mobile code to add new flexibility and capability to networks).at the same time, mobile code can introduce new concerns regardingsystem trustworthiness. addressing those concerns may add to the perceived complexity of a system.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems131support for research infrastructureresearch on largescale systems will have a significant experimentalcomponent and, as such, will necessitate support for research infrastructureñartifacts that researchers can use to try out new approaches and canexamine closely to understand existing modes of failure.42 researchersneed access to large, distributed systems if they are to study large systems, because the phenomena of interest are those explicitly associatedwith scale, and the types of problems experienced to date tend to beexhibited only on such systems. furthermore, researchers must be able todemonstrate convincingly the capabilities of the advanced approachesthat they develop. they will not be able to convince industry to adoptnew practices unless they can show how well these practices have workedin an actual largescale system. through such demonstrations, researchthat leverages infrastructure can improve the performance, cost, or otherproperties of it systems.43access to research infrastructure is especially problematic when working with largescale systems because systems of such large size and scaletypically cannot be constructed in a lab, and because researchers cannotgenerally gain access to operational systems used in industry or government. such systems often need to operate continuously, and operatorsare understandably unwilling to allow experimentation with missioncritical systems. in some contexts, additional concerns may arise relatingto the protection of proprietary information.44 such concerns have longroots. in the late 1970s, the late jonathan postel complained that thesuccess of the arpanet (a predecessor of the internet) and its use as aproduction system (that is, for everyday, routine communications) wasinterfering with his ability to try new networking protocols that mightòbreakó the network. in the early 1990s, with the commercialization ofthe internet looming, congress held hearings to address the question ofwhat it means for a network to be experimental or production, and theprospects for experimental use of the internet dimmedñeven though itsusers at the time were limited to the research and education community.that todayõs internet is much larger than the internet of a decade ago andcontinuing to grow quickly makes even more remote the prospect ofresearch access to comparably largescale network systems. at the sametime, it increases the value of researcher access to òlargeenoughóscalenetwork systems to do the research that can help to justify the dependence on the internet that so many want to see.several largescale infrastructures have been put in place by government and privatesector organizations largely for purposes of experimentation. the ngi program mentioned above, for example, is deployingtestbed networks across which technologists can demonstrate and evalumaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132making it betterate new approaches for improving security, quality of service, and network management. but even then, only òstableó technologies are to bedeployed so that the network can also be used to demonstrate new, highend applications (lsn next generation implementation team, 1998).the internet 2 and abilene networks being deployed by the privatesector have similar intentions. in the early and mid1990s, the corporation for national research initiatives organized the creation of a set offive testbeds to demonstrate highspeed networking technologies, systems, and applications. participants came from industry, government,and academia, and each testbed was a relatively large research project.many lessons were learned about the difficulties involved in implementing very high speed (1 gbps) networks and very high speed networkingapplications on an endtoend basis. lessons learned from these testbedshave been, and continue to be, incorporated into current and emergingcomputers and networks. because these testbeds brought together interdisciplinary teams and addressed complex endtoend system issues, theywere representative of the research in largescale systems that this chapter describes; however, because the testbeds were operational over largegeographical areas (spanning hundreds of miles), a large share of theeffort and cost was associated with the construction and operation of thephysical infrastructure rather than the research itself. with the benefit ofhindsight, it might have been possible to achieve a better balance to ensurethat building, maintaining, and operating a research testbed did not inadvertently become the principal objective, as opposed to gaining researchinsights. yet this tension between funding for infrastructure, per se, andfunding for the research that uses it continues to haunt federally fundednetworking research.existing infrastructure programs have a critical limitation with respectto the kind of research envisioned in this report: they help investigatorsin universities and government laboratories routinely access dedicatedcomputers and networks used for scientific research or related technicalwork, but they do not provide researchers with access to experimental oroperational largescale systems used for purposes other than scienceñcomputers and networks used for everything from government functions(tax processing, benefits processing) through critical infrastructure management (air traffic control, power system management) to a wide rangeof business and ecommerce application systems. given the problemsexperienced with largescale it systems, gaining some kind of access isimportant. even indirect access in the form of data about system performance and other attributes could be valuable.45 instrumenting operational systems to collect needed data on their operations and allowingresearchers to observe their operation in an active environment wouldgreatly benefit research. figuring out what is possible, with what kindsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems133of precautions, compensation, and incentives, will require focused discussions and negotiation among key decision makers in the research community and among candidate system managers. the federal governmentcan facilitate and encourage such discussions by linking the it researchcommunity to system managers within federal agencies or by brokeringaccess to elements of the commercial infrastructure.46experimental academic networks could, with some additional effort,be made more useful to it researchers. most such networks, such as theinternet 2, are limited by acceptable use policies (aups) to carrying academic traffic and may therefore not be used to study business applications. one option would be to modify aups to allow some forms ofbusiness traffic to use the research internet, so as to create a laboratory forstudying the issues. firms might be willing to bear the cost of maintaining backups for their commercial traffic on the commercial internet if theycould use the research network at below market prices.47 governmentcould also fund some data collection activities by internet service providers (isps) that would be helpful to researchers trying to understandthe evolution of networking. the commercialization of the internet alsoput an end to systematic public data collection on network traffic. unlikethe regulated common carriers, who must report minutes of telephonecalling statistics to the fcc, unregulated isps do not regularly discloseinformation on aggregate traffic or traffic by type. thus, for example,published estimates of the portion of internet traffic that is related to theweb vary widely.moving forwarddespite the myriad problems associated with largescale it systems,a coherent, multifaceted research program combining the elementsdescribed above could improve the ability to engineer such systems. suchwork would help avert continuing problems in designing, developing,and operating largescale systems and could open the doors to manymore innovative uses of it systems. it could also lead to expanded educational programs for students in computer science and engineering thatwould help them better appreciate systems problems in their future work,whether as researchers or users of it. because it is less limited by physical constraints than are other technologies, much of what can be imaginedfor it can, with better science and engineering, be achieved. it is not clearwhich techniques for improving the design, development, deployment,and operation of largescale systems will prove the most effective. eachhas its strengths and weaknesses. only with research aimed at improvingboth the science and the engineering of largescale systems will thispotential be unlocked. this is a challenge that has long eluded the itmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134making it betterresearch community, but given the role that largescale it systems play insocietyñand are likely to play in the futureñthe time has come to addressit head on.referencesadams, duane. 1999. òis it time to reinvent computer science?ó working paper.carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa. may 4.barr, avron, and shirley tessler. 1998. òhow will the software talent shortage end?óamerican programmer 11(1). available online at <http://www.cutter.com/itjournal/itjtoc.htm#jan98>.bernstein, lawrence. 1997. òsoftware investment strategy,ó bell labs technical journal2(3):233242.boehm, barry w. 1993. òeconomic analysis of software technology investments,ó inanalytical methods in software engineering economics, thomas gulledge and williamhutzler, eds. springerverlag, new york.boehm, barry w. 1999. òmanaging software productivity and reuse,ó ieee computer32(9):111113.brooks, frederick p. 1987. òno silver bullet: essence and accidents of software engineering,ó ieee computer 20(4):1019.committee on information and communications (cic). 1995. america in the age of information. national science and technology council, washington, d.c. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ccic/cicforumv224/cover.html>.committee on computing, information, and communications (ccic). 1997. research challenges in high confidence systems. proceedings of the committee on computing, information, and communications workshop, august 67, national coordination officefor computing, information, and communications, arlington, va. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/pubs/hcsaug97/>.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. academic careers for experimental computer scientists and engineers. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995a. continued review of tax systems modernization for the internal revenue service.national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995b. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997. the evolution of untethered communications. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999a. trust in cyberspace, fred b. schneider, ed. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999b. realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges. national academy press,washington, d.c.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems135davies, jennifer. 1998. confirm: computerized reservation systemñcase facts. case studymaterial for course on ethical issues of information technology, university ofwolverhampton (u.k.), school of computing and information technology, march 20.available online at <http://www.scit.wlv.ac.uk/~cm1995/cbr/cases/case06/four.htm>.ewusimensah, kweku. 1997. òcritical issues in abandoned information systems development projects,ó communications of the acm 40(9):7480.fishman, charles. 1996. òthey write the right stuff,ó fast company, december. availableonline at <www.fastcompany.com/online/06/writestuff.html>.gibbs, w.w. 1994. òsoftwareõs chronic crisis,ó scientific american 264(9):8695.gray, jim, and andreas reuter. 1993. transaction processing concepts and techniques.morgan kaufman, san francisco.hennessy, john. 1999. òthe future of systems research,ó ieee computer 32(8):2733.johnson, jim. 1999. òturning chaos into success,ó software magazine, december. available online at <http://www.softwaremag.com/archives/1999dec/success.html>.jones, c. 1996. applied software measurement. mcgrawhill, new york.junnarkar, sandeep. 1999. òbeyond.com revived after extended outage,ó cnet news.com,october 22. available online at <http://news.cnet.com/news/01007200922552.html>.kavi, krishna, james c. browne, and anand tripathi. 1999. òcomputer systems research:the pressure is on,ó ieee computer 32(1):3039.large scale networking (lsn) next generation implementation team. 1998. next generation internet implementation plan. national coordination office for computing, information, and communications, arlington, va., february.layton, lyndsey. 1999. òcomputer failure puzzles metro: opening delayed, rush hourslowed,ó washington post, september 25, p. b1.li, allen. 1994. òadvance automation system: implications of problems and recentchanges.ó gao/trced94188. statement of allen li, associate director, transportation issues, resources, community, and economic development division, u.s.general accounting office, before the subcommittee on aviation, committee on publicworks and transportation, u.s. house of representatives, april 13.luenig, erich. 1999. òschwab suffers repeated online outages,ó cnet news.com, october22. available online at <http://news.cnet.com/news/01007200922368.html>.lyytinen, kalle. 1987. òdifferent perspectives on information systems: problems andsolutions,ó acm computing surveys 19(1):546.meehan, michael. 2000. òupdate: system outages top online brokerage execsõ concerns,ó computerworld, april 4. available online at <http://www.computerworld.com/home/print.nsf/all/000404d212>.messerschmitt, david g. 2000. understanding networked applications: a first course. morgankaufman, san francisco.national security telecommunications advisory committee (nstac). 1997. reports submitted for nstac xx (volume i: information infrastructure group report, networkgroup intrusion detection subgroup report, network group widespread outagesubgroup report; volume ii: legislative and regulatory group report, operationssupport group report; volume iii: national coordinating center for telecommunications vision subgroup report, information assurance, financial services risk assessment report, interim transportation information risk assessment report), washington, d.c., december 11.nelson, emily, and evan ramstad. 1999. òtrick or treat: hersheyõs biggest dud hasturned out to be its new technology,ó wall street journal, october 29, pp. a1, a6.network reliability and interoperability council (nric). 1997. report of the network reliability and interoperability council. nric, washington, d.c.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136making it betternorman, donald a.. 1998. the invisible computer: why good products can fail, the personalcomputer is so complex, and information appliances are the solution. mit press, cambridge, mass.oõhara, colleen. 1999. òstars delayed again; faa seeks tech patch,ó federal computerweek, april 12, p. 1.oz, effy. 1997. òwhen professional standards are lax: the confirm failure and itslessons,ó communications of the acm 37(10):2936.perrow, charles. 1984. normal accidents: living with highrisk technologies. basic books,new york.presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection (pccip). 1997. critical foundations. washington, d.c.ralston, anthony, ed. 1993. encyclopedia of computer science, 3rd ed., international thomsonpublishers.reason, james. 1990. human error. cambridge university press, cambridge, u.k.rechtine, e., and m.w. maier. 1997. the art of systems architecting. crc press, new york.shaw, m., and d. garlan. 1996. software architecture. prenticehall, new york.standish group international, inc. 1995. the chaos. standish group international, westyarmouth, mass. available online at <http://www.standishgroup.com/chaos.html>.sunday examiner and chronicle. 1999. òsilicon valley expertise stops at capitol steps,óaugust 8, editorial, sunday section, p. 6.szyperski, c. 1998. component software: beyond objectoriented programming. addisonwesley, reading, mass.transition office of the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection(topccip). 1998. òpreliminary research and development roadmap for protectingand assuring critical national infrastructures.óu.s. general accounting office (gao). 1994. air traffic control: status of faaõs modernization program. gao/rced94167fs. u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c., april.u.s. general accounting office (gao). 1997. air traffic control: immature software acquisition processes increase faa system acquisition risks. gao/aimd9747. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., march.u.s. general accounting office (gao). 1998. air traffic control: status of faaõs modernization program. gao/rced9925. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c.,december.u.s. general accounting office (gao). 1999a. major performance and management issues:dot challenges. gao/ocg9913. u.s. government printing office, washington,d.c.u.s. general accounting office (gao). 1999b. high risk update. gao/hr991. u.s.government printing office, washington, d.c., january.u.s. general accounting office (gao). 1999c. air traffic control: observations on faaõs airtraffic control modernization program. gao/trced/aimd99137. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., march.notes1.the term òenterpriseó is used here in its general sense to encompass corporations,governments, and universities; typical applications include ecommerce, tax collection, airtraffic control, and remote learning. a previous cstb report used the term ònetworkedinformation systemó to cover the range of such systems. see cstb (1999a).2.see, for example pccip (1997), topccip (1998), nstac (1997), and nric (1997).3.the complexity of some components is so great that they easily meet the definitionmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems137of system. for example, no single individual can understand all aspects of the design of amodern microprocessor, but compared to numbers of largescale it infrastructures, fewsuch designs are created. because microprocessors tend to be manufactured in great quantity, huge efforts are mounted to test designs. in fact, more effort is spent in verifying theperformance of microprocessors than in designing them. in the original pentium pro, whichhad about 5.5 million transistors in the central processing unit, intel found and corrected1,200 design errors prior to production; in its forthcoming willamette processor, which has30 million transistors in the central processing unit, engineers have found and corrected8,500 design flaws (data from robert colwell, intel, personal communication, march 14,2000). despite these efforts, bugs in microprocessors occasionally slip through. for example, intel shipped many thousands of microprocessors that computed the wrong answer forcertain arithmetic division problems.4.a 1995 study of system development efforts by the standish group found that only16 percent of projects were completed on time and within the predicted budget. approximately onethird were never completed, and more than half were completed later thanexpected, exceeded the budget, or lacked the planned functionality. projects that eitherexceeded budget or were canceled cost, on average, 89 percent more than originally estimated, with more than 10 percent of projects costing more than twice the original estimate.approximately 32 percent of the completed projects had less than half the functionalityoriginally envisioned, and fewer than 8 percent were fully functional. see standish groupinternational, inc. (1995). a subsequent study (johnson, 1999) showed some improvementin largescale system development, but continuing failures. the study reports that 28 percent of projects were canceled before completion and 46 percent were completed overbudget. the remaining 26 percent were completed on time and within the predicted budget.5.the general accounting office is a regular source of reports on federal system problems, for example.6.data on irs expenditures come from the gao (1999b). for a discussion of theproblems facing the irs tax systems modernization project, see cstb (1995a).7.in the late 1990s, concern about the y2k computer problem led to both overhauls ofexisting systems and projects to develop new systems to replace older ones. these activities put a spotlight on systems issues, but it is important to understand that they involvedthe application of existing knowledge and technology rather than fundamental advances.they are believed to have reduced the number of relatively old systems still in use, but theymay have introduced new problems because of the haste with which much of the work wasundertaken. it will be a while before the effects of y2k fixes can be assessed.8.these problems have been reported in several articles in the chronicle of highereducationõs online edition.9.there are many examples that demonstrate why it is a good idea to have separateknowledge management systems and data warehouses, not the least of which is a socialone. an information system that people will use to make informed decisions relies on avery different database design than a system for managing the integrity of transactions.10.mems technology is exploding in terms of its applicability. in a few years, memswallpaper will be able to sense and condition an environment. it could be used to createactive wing surfaces on aircraft that can respond to changes in wind speed and desiredflight characteristics to minimize drag. on a larger scale, a square mile of mems wallpapermay have more nodes than the entire internet will have at that time. clearly, scalabilitywill be a key factor.11.for a discussion of information appliances, see norman (1998).12.for example, in some instances, a manual fallback option may no longer exist or bepractical.13.as an example of the increasing scale of usage consider the following statistic:making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138making it betterbetween january 1997 and january 2000, the percentage of commissionbased trades beingconducted online by bostonbased fidelity investments institutional services company,inc., jumped from 7 percent to 85 percent. many online brokerages have discussed thepossibility of turning down potential online accounts as a means of addressing such growth.see meehan (2000).14.this discussion of complexity borrows from the work of perrow (1984) and reason(1990).15.however, as any commuter knows, just one small accident or other disturbance innormal traffic patterns can create significant delays on busy roadways.16.see cstb (1999a), especially chapter 5, òtrustworthy systems from untrustworthycomponents.ó17.middleware is a layer of software that lies between the operating system and theapplication software. different middleware solutions support different classes of applications; two distinct types support storage and communications. see messerschmitt (2000).18.a discussion of the fundamental problems in mobile and wireless communicationscan be found in cstb (1997).19.for example, a typical desktop computer contains an operating system and application software developed by many different companies. although an automobile may alsobe composed of components from a number of suppliers, they tend to be fitted together intoa test car before manufacture, and final assembly of each car takes place in a limited number of locations. a desktop computer is essentially assembled in each home or officeñanassembly line of one.20.this phenomenon is seen in the faa and irs systems modernization efforts.21.in the standish groupõs survey cited earlier in this chapter, respondents blamedincomplete or changing requirements for many of the problems they faced in system development efforts. the more a projectõs requirements and specifications changed, the morelikely it was that the project would take longer than originally planned. and the longer aproject took to complete, the more likely it was that the aims of the organization requestingthe system would change. in some cases, a project was delayed so long that the largerinitiative it was designed to support was discontinued.22.indeed, the very notion of sociotechnical systems that is discussed in this report hasbeen more thoroughly investigated outside the united states. u.s. researchers could benefit from more international cooperation. see, for example, lyytinen (1987).23.for example, simply upgrading the memory in a personal computer can lead totiming mismatches that cause memory failures that, in turn, lead to the loss of applicationdatañeven if the memory chips themselves are functioning perfectly. in other words, thesystem fails to work even if all of its components work. similar problems can occur when aserver is upgraded in a large network.24.architecture relates to interoperability and to ease of upgrading it systems. a usefuldefinition of the term òarchitectureó is the development and specification of the overallstructure, logical components, and logical interrelationships of a computer, its operatingsystem, a network, or other conception. an architecture can be a reference model for usewith specific product architectures or it can be a specific product architecture, such as thatfor an intel pentium microprocessor or for ibmõs os/390 operating system. an architecture differs from a design in that it is broader in scope. an architecture is a design, but mostdesigns are not architectures. a single component or a new function has a design that hasto fit within the overall architecture. this definition is derived from the online resourcewhatis.com (<www.whatis.com>) and is based on ralston (1976).25.for decades, financial services have been delivered by organizations composed ofelements that themselves are not perfectly trustworthy. few, if any, of the techniquesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems139developed by this industry have been adapted for use in software systems outside thefinancial services industry itself.26.the examples of attacks on critical infrastructures and it systems cited in this paragraph are derived from cstb (1999a).27.hewlettpackard, for example, claims that it can achieve 99.999 percent reliability insome of its hardware systems.28.as the telephone industry has become more competitive, with more providers oftelecommunications services and more suppliers of telecommunications equipment, thepotential for compatibility and reliability problems has grown.29.other techniques have been used to create highly reliable software, suggesting hopefor improvement in general practice. the software for the space shuttle system, for example, has performed with a high level of reliability because it is well maintained and theprogrammers are intimately familiar with it. they also use a number of the tools discussedin this chapter. see fishman (1996).30.as an example, customization usually is accomplished through the programming ofgeneralpurpose computers; huge computer programs often are built to form the core functionality of the system. how to design and construct such large computer programs is thefocus of research in software engineering. current research efforts, however, do not go farenough, as discussed later in this chapter. for a lengthier discussion of the challenges ofdeveloping better òglueó to hold together compound systems, see cstb (1999a).31.see topccip (1998) and cstb (1999a).32.in fact, a famous paper by fred brooks argues that there will be no single majorimprovement in the ability to develop largescale software. see brooks (1987).33.transaction processing does this by capturing some inherent challenges (such as anexplosion of failure modes and resource conflicts due to concurrency) that plague all distributed systems and by providing countermeasures within an infrastructure supportingthe application development.34.benchmarks play an important role in driving innovation by focusing system designerson improving particular attributes of a system. if the benchmark does not truly reflect thecapabilities of the system, then engineering effortñand consumersñcan be misdirected.an example might be the focus on microprocessor clock speeds as an indicator of performance. consumers tend to look at such statistics when they purchase computers eventhough the architecture of a microprocessor can significantly influence the performanceactually delivered.35.as a simple example, automata theory can reason about the properties (such asdecidability) of finite automata of arbitrary complexity. here, the term òcomplexityó isinterpreted differently than in the systems sense, in terms of the number of elements oroperations but not necessarily their heterogeneity or the intricacy of their interaction.36.to quote from the abstract of this study, titled representation and analysis for modeling, specification, design, prediction, control and assurance of large scale, complex systems:òcomplete modeling of complex systems is not possible because of insufficient understanding, insufficient information, or insufficient computer cycles. this study focuses on the useof abstraction in modeling such systems. abstraction of such systems is based on a semanticframework, and the choice of semantic framework affects the ability to model particularfeatures of the system such as concurrency, adaptability, security, robustness in the presence of faults, and realtime performance. a rich variety of semantic frameworks have beendeveloped over time. this study will examine their usefulness for modeling complex systems. in particular, questions to be addressed include the scalability (do the semanticssupport hierarchy? is it practical to have a very large number of components?), heterogeneity (can it be combined with other semantic frameworks at multiple levels of abstraction?),and formalism (are the formal properties of the semantics useful?). the study will alsomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140making it betteraddress how to choose semantic frameworks, how to ensure model fidelity (does the modelbehavior match the system being modeled?), how to recognize and manage emergentbehavior, and how to specify and guarantee behavior constraints.ó additional informationabout this project is available online at <http://ptolemy.eecs.berkeley.edu/~eal/towers/index.html>.37.the computer science and telecommunications board initiated a study in early 2000that will examine a range of possible interactions between computer science and the biological sciences, such as the use of biologically inspired models in the design of it systems.additional information is available on the cstb home page, <www.cstb.org>.38.by one estimate, based on the ratio of machine lines of code to source lines of code,the productivity of programmers has increased by a factor of ten every 20 years (or 12percent a year) since the mid1960s (see bernstein, 1997).39.problemridden federal systems have been associated with personnel who may haveless, or less current, training than their counterparts in leading privatesector environments.the association lends credence to the notion that the effectiveness of a process can varywith the people using it. see cstb (1995a).40.reuse was one of the foundations of the industrial revolution. standard, interchangeable parts used in industrial production can be equated to it components. the analogy toit frameworks came later in the industrial world but recently has become common. forexample, todayõs automobiles usually are designed around common platforms that permitthe design of different car models without major new investments in the underbody anddrive train.41.the ability to define, manipulate, and test software interfaces is valuable to anysoftware project. if interfaces could be designed in such a way that software modules couldfirst be tested separately and then assembled with the assurance of correct operation, thenlargescale system engineering would become simpler. much of the theory and engineering practice and many of the tools developed as part of it research can be applied to thesebig systems.42.an òartifactó in the terminology of experimental computer science and engineeringrefers to an instance or implementation of one or more computational phenomena, such ashardware, software, or a combination of the two. artifacts provide researchers with testbedsfor direct measurement and experimentation; proving new concepts (i.e., that a particularassembly of components can perform a particular set of functions or meet a particular set ofrequirements); and demonstrating the existence and feasibility of certain phenomena. seecstb (1994).43.for example, when the defense departmentõs arpanet was first built in the 1970s,it used the network control protocol, which was designed in parallel with the network.over time, it became apparent that networks built with quite different technologies wouldneed to be connected, and users gained experience with the network and ncp. these twoproblems provoked research that eventually led to the development of the tcp/ip protocol, which became the standard way that computers could communicate over any network.as the network grew into a large internet and applications emerged that require largebandwidth, congestion became a problem in the network. this, too, has led to research intoadaptive control algorithms that the computers attached to the network must use to detectand mitigate congestion. even so, the internet is far from perfect. research is under wayinto methods to guarantee quality of service for data transmission that could support, forexample, robust transmission of digitized voice and video. extending the internet to connect mobile computers using radio communications is also an area of active research.44.generally speaking, industryuniversity it research collaboration has been constrained by intellectual property protection arrangements, generating enough expressionsof concern that cstb is exploring how to organize a project on that topic.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research on largescale systems14145.networking researchers, for example, have been clamoring for better data aboutinternet traffic and performance. they have been attempting to develop broader and moreaccurate internet traffic and performance data for some time. federal support associatedwith networking research might provide vehicles for better internet service provider datacollection.46.the new digital government program being coordinated by the national sciencefoundation may yield valuable experience in the practical aspects of engaging organizationswith production systems problems for the purpose of collaborating with it researchers.more information on this program is contained in chapter 4.47.on the one hand, business users should not benefit from subsidies intended forresearchers (if they did, there would be a risk of overloading the academicresearch networks). on the other hand, given the expectation that a research network is less stable thana production one, business users would be expected to pay for backup commercial networking and would be motivated to use a research network only at a discount. systematicexamination of actual users and applications would be necessary for concrete assessment ofthe traffic tradeoffs.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1424research motivated by socialapplications of information technologythe diffusion of the internet, combined with advances in basiccomputing and communications technologies, is poised to fundamentally alter the nature of information technology (it) research.as it continues to move from the relatively simple realm of backofficetransactions processing and personal productivityenhancement tools intoless specialized, massmarket contexts that support electronic commerce(ecommerce), delivery of government services, and personal interactions,the set of problems that motivates it research is continuing to change.many of the new applications are social applications that serve groups ofpeople in shared activities. simple social applications support the collaboration of geographically dispersed groups of people engaged in ashared task, such as designing a new product or writing a report. moresophisticated social applications support a range of business, economic,and societal functions, such as manufacturing processes or distance education. social applications tend to integrate it into larger sociotechnicalsystems that involve people, organizations, and other technologies andthat derive their functionality from the complex interactions of it withnontechnical system elements. many of the social applications compriselargescale systems of the kind described in chapter 3, but social applications of it pose a number of additional interesting research problems, thesolutions to which will require more explicit collaboration among itresearchers, end users, and researchers in other disciplines. progressalong purely technical dimensions, such as processing power, communimaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications143cations speed, and data storage densities, will no longer suffice; a moreholistic view is needed (brown and duguid, 2000).this chapter examines the increasing integration of it into larger,social applications and the shortcomings of todayõs technology relative toa complex set of expectations. the first two sections lay the groundworkfor the analysis by identifying the characteristics of social applicationsand the many challenges they present. underlying this discussion is theidea that, because it is proliferating in social applications, research onsocial applications should be expanded in amount, scope, and depth and,furthermore, that this new research will require approaches that are somewhat different from those taken in much of the more narrowly technologyoriented research that is common today.the third section discusses ways in which interdisciplinary researchcan play an important role in this arena and identifies some initial steps inthis direction. just as scientific computing has benefited from closer interaction between technologists and natural scientists, so can the moresocialapplications of it deployed today benefit from collaboration betweentechnologists and social scientists (including experts in law and businessas well as psychology, sociology, anthropology, and economics). thefourth section examines mechanisms for pursuing technical and nontechnical research that could increase understanding of social applicationsof it and thereby enhance capabilities to design, develop, deploy, andoperate them. building on the groundwork laid in the present chapter,chapter 5 identifies specific steps that could be taken to stimulate more ofthis type of research.the development of appropriate mechanisms for funding and conducting research on the sociotechnical dimensions of it systems will be asignificant challenge. this work can build on some important foundations, notably research on humancomputer interactions and computersupported cooperative work. these existing research efforts are inherently multidisciplinary in outlook because they are concerned with theways in which people relate to systems. experience to date in these areasillustrates both the promise of social applications and the practical problems involved. multidisciplinary research is always problematic becauseof the difficulties inherent in bridging the gaps separating different communities of researchers. compounding these problems is the need implied by the concept of social applications to engage not only establishedresearchers in other disciplines but also end users of it systems whounderstand the context in which it systems operate and directly confrontproblems of implementation, ease of use, performance, and operation.many enduser organizations have little or no history of conductingresearch, especially itrelated research. new mechanisms may thereforemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144making it betterbe needed, and some ongoing activities are suggestive of the types ofstructures that may be effective.the discussion proceeds at a high level because it is intended to bridgeresearch themes each of which could justify detailed examination. suchexaminations have been provided already by the computer science andtelecommunications board (cstb) in more focused assessments. thischapter points to that other work, which established an intellectual historydeveloped through separate engagements with segments of the researchcommunity. that this chapter echoes and amplifies ideas raised previouslyis important enough to be acknowledged explicitly: research ideas andsuggestions for how to make progress in the field either recur or lingerlargely unaddressed because the problems are difficult, because the recommendations are aimed at subsets of the research community despitebroader relevance, and/or because there is a lack of readiness, whetherdue to insufficient insight and understanding of the needs or inadequatecapabilities. the committee recognizes that it has focused on difficultproblems but believes that the time is right to address them; its recommendations are aimed at promoting both understanding and capability.social applications of information technologythanks in large part to networking, it has become a factor in largeorganizational constructs, whether whole enterprises, groups of enterprises that interact in commerce, or the overarching mix of enterprisesand activities (economic and other) that constitute the nationõs economyof social structure. it also supports interactions among smaller groups ofuses (e.g., in chat rooms and discussion groups). information technologystands poised to dramatically transform the way people live, work, andplay and the way organizations large and small conduct business. withcontinued research, development, and deployment, it systems could enableusers to routinely access information of many types (text, images, video,etc.) from any location, participate in continuing education programs fromthe home or office, shop at their convenience, work from home ratherthan commute to a central office, consult with medical practitionersremotely, or access government services and receive government benefitselectronically.1as such, it joins mass transportation and more traditional telecommunications (i.e., telephony, broadcast media) as a foundation for thesocial interactions that form one basis of society, industry, and commerce(mitchell, 1996). those longstanding societal infrastructuresñtransportation and telecommunicationsñprofoundly affected aspects of society,contributing to the rise of suburbs, the globalization of industry, and thedecreasing isolation of political economies. similarly, networked it ismaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications145increasingly affecting society, as todayõs debates about topics such astechnological literacy and the digital divide attest (cairncross, 1997).these issues are not necessarily unanticipatedñone of the pioneers of theinternet, leonard kleinrock, recognized and wrote about some of thesechallenges in 1974 (kleinrock, 1974), but they have not been adequatelyaddressed by researchers in technology areas or other fields, and they aregrowing in importance as it becomes more pervasive in society.todayõs it systems put a premium on the explicit consideration of thecontext (e.g., organizational, societal, or business) in which it systems aredeployed and the organizational structures, human factors, and othertypes of technology (e.g., transportation and materials transformation)that are involved in completing a certain task. in these social applicationsof it, computing, storage, and communications technologies are profoundly influenced by the people involved, the choices they make, andvarious aspects of human behavior in the design and implementation ofthe system. such systems often display a host of other features that makethem especially challenging topics for research:¥they are often large in scale and high in complexity (see chapter 3).¥they can be geographically distributed and vulnerable to malicious attacks or unintentional errors.¥they are often deployed and operated in an environment that islargely uncoordinated.¥they have critical requirements for availability and security, withthe potential for significant losses (financial, human, or otherwise) if theyfail.¥they include people and organizations, along with technology, asessential elements.¥they are deeply affected by social, economic, and political considerations, such as privacy, productivity, strategic business advantage,national security, poverty, equitable access, and so on.¥their design must take into consideration the human and organizational context in which the systems are deployed and the interactionsamong people, organizations, and technology.although the first four of these characteristics are common to manylargescale it systems discussed in chapter 3, the last three characteristicsare especially true of social applications and demand special attention.consider, for example, the systems used in ecommerce or air traffic control. in both of these cases, the interactions among it, people, and organizational structures are fundamental to system performance. the it isplaced in an existing social and organizational environment in an attemptto improve quality, productivity, speed, and other performance attributes.2making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146making it betteroverwhelmingly, the most important opportunities lie not in simply automating existing applications, but rather in rethinking and remolding thestructure and organization of the business process to reflect the best usesof it and in redesigning and remolding the technology to make it mostvaluable in its (rethought) application context. the challenge is to reinvent both the application and the supporting technology to make the combination of technology and applications effective. in business, this isoften called reengineering or transforming a business process, but the concept applies to the full range of social applications of it.transformation requires a rethinking of the entire sociotechnical system, not just the it portion. because most social applications involveindividuals, brought together in organizations, and technologies that relateto the movement or alteration of materials or other physical items, a critical part of such a transformation is the identification of the capabilitiesthat each elementñpeople, it, and other technologiesñmost beneficiallycontribute to the process, and the determination of how these elementscan best work together. these processes are often constrained by complex social and regulatory issues and must take into account a number ofnontechnical factors, such as capital budgets, work rules, skill sets, andadministrative organizations. nevertheless, the creative use of new itcapabilities can result in new, transforming applications. ecommerce,for example, has given rise to electronic auctions. the auction concept isnot new, of course; what is new is its application to the selling of commongoods and services, both new and used, and the participation of largenumbers of buyers and sellers in an electronic marketplace, with newways for individuals to research price and value and new ways to negotiate. another example is air traffic control. advances in technology haveproduced a fundamental change in the way these systems are conceptualized and designed, moving away from a centralized commandandcontrolmodel that controls all aspects of an aircraftõs flight plan to a systemknown as free flight, which will give individual pilots greater autonomyñand more information on which to base judgments (wald, 2000).the changing nature of work is broadening the contexts in which itmust operate. employees are no longer expected to sit at a single computer in an assigned office to complete their work. even a simple application to enter employee expense reports must be accessible via many different devices in different locations: a desktop computer at work, adesktop computer at home, a laptop computer or handheld devices whentraveling, and perhaps even a wireless phone. if an organization cannotoffer remote access to it services, it may limit the effectiveness of its staff.as it systems are used to manage more aspects of a business, the properties of the it system and the behavior of employees become more tightlyinterlinked.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications147itinspired transformations occur at all levels within organizations,as is evidenced in, for example, the flattening of traditional hierarchies,globalization of many business organizations and activities, and emergence of new classes of nomadic workers who are not even assignedpermanent offices. as these trends demonstrate, the design of organizations is a matter of both people and it, leveraging the strongest capabilities of each (walton, 1989). new methodologies are needed for the designof enterprise applications that more deeply integrate the organizationaldesign and the it system design. such methodologies can be developedonly through collaborative research in the disciplines concerned, including technology, industrial engineering, business, psychology, and others.the challenges are compounded by the reality that all the informationsystems that must work together in support of an organization or societycannot be developed at once; rather, new elements are continually addedto an existing mix of legacy technologies and applications. capriciousorganizational requirements, particularly in a competitive business context, add another dimension to the challenge that has proven difficult toovercome.of course, it has always been designed and used in one context oranother. even traditional applications (e.g., word processing) that couldbe used on individual computers without networking or pursued independently of other applications have had important interactions with jobdefinitions and human relationships within organizations.3 social scientists studying such applications have reported on changes in status, hierarchy, work flow, job design, job satisfaction, productivity, and so on, allof which have contributed to ideas for enhancing early applications andevolving new ones.4 some of these ideas have contributed to computerscience in arenas such as humancomputer interaction (hci, which includesthe design of interfaces between people and systems and the design ofsystems for computersupported cooperative work), but compared to theopportunities emerging now, those instances of interdisciplinary researchare too few and too isolated.5 the evolution of hci is a promising indicator that progress is possible if social applications are addressed throughit research that draws on multiple disciplines: the subdisciplines òformintertwined roots in computer graphics, operating systems, human factors, ergonomics, industrial engineering, cognitive psychology, and thesystems part of computer scienceó and draw from òsupporting knowledge on both the machine and the human sideó (acm, 1992).a much greater degree of interaction between it applications andcontext is now possible.6 interest in optimizing that interactionñwhileaddressing issues of complexity and scaleñcreates an imperative forexplicit and substantial attention to context in application design andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148making it betterimplementation, which, in turn, implies explicit and substantial attentionto the behavior of people as individuals and as members of groups.great opportunities await progress in the sociotechnical systems thatunderlie it, because such progress would enable far greater capabilitiesthan have yet been implemented in all existing feature sets and theircombinations. the it itself can be used more effectivelyñand it can becombined better with people and their activities as they work, live, andplay. the challenge is twofold: (1) to reinvent social applications toimprove the combinations of behavior and it with the aim of producingbetter economic and social outcomes and (2) to invent new social applications that enhance the economy, culture, or quality of life.7 both processesbuild on past experience with it, which has demonstrated that tasks aretypically automated directly at first and subsequently reconceptualizedor reinvented to take better advantage of new technology. both processesfocus on the role of individual users and organizations as major players insocial applications.research challenges in social applications ofinformation technologysocial applications of it can motivate research on a range of questionsas broad as the applications themselves, with the questions reflecting theparticular circumstances in which specific applications are deployed.some social applications are associated with a given industry or industrysector (e.g., online stock trading systems or flight reservations systems),some cut across the economy (e.g., businesstobusiness ecommerce systems), and others are specific to a particular organization or function.despite the fact that it is motivated by applications, the research thatresults from an examination of social applications can be highly fundamental, in that it requires investigations into, and the development of,basic it capabilities that are widely applicable to a wide range of systems.the research also tends to be highly interdisciplinary, drawing on theexpertise of people in the it and social science communities, as well asend users who understand the way systems are used in different industries and functions.despite their diversity, the social applications of it tend to have incommon a set of elements that support (1) group interaction, (2) knowledgemanagement, (3) commerce, and (4) control and coordination. althoughsome social applications of it emphasize one or another of these elements, they usually emphasize at least two (box 4.1). each of these typesof functionality presents a set of interesting research challenges. anexamination of each one will provide a sampling of the types of problemsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications149box 4.1social applications of information technology:examples and features¥electronic commerceñbusinesstobusiness procurement of goods andservices involves the capture and presentation of large amounts of information onavailable goods and services (knowledgebased features); negotiation of termsand conditions for sale and fulfillment between purchasing agents in one organization and sales agents in another organization (groupbased features); periodicordering and shipment of, and payment for, goods and services in accordance withthose terms and conditions (commercebased features); infrastructure supportingpayments by credit card or bank transfer (controlbased features), and postsalesupport (groupbased features).¥delivery of government servicesñgovernment taxcollection applicationsinvolve the gathering and assimilation of data from throughout the economy(knowledgebased features); conveying of tax returns with tax payments(commercebased features); infrastructure supporting payments and refunds(controlbased features); and interactions among tax agents, citizens, and accountants in dealing with exceptional cases (groupbased features).¥manufacturing designñcomputeraided automotive design involves largerepositories of design information (knowledgebased features), coordination ofconcurrent design activities distributed over global design centers (controlbasedfeatures), and collaboration of the designers (groupbased features).¥air traffic controlñair traffic control systems are critical infrastructures thatcombine the coordination of planes and airport facilities (controlbased features)with the collaboration of pilots and air controllers (groupbased features) and information on aircraft type, flight plans and carriers, weather, and so on (knowledgebased features). air traffic control uses information technology of increasingsophistication to reduce the incidence of human error and extend human controllercapabilities to manage a volume of air traffic.that could be addressed if social applications were to play a more significant role in motivating it research.group applicationsan important feature of social applications and their context is thatthey involve people as members of groups. with networking, computingmoves from enhancing the productivity of individuals in tasks they perform alone to supporting the needs and enhancing the productivity orsocial interactions of groups of people, or helping people find other, likeminded peopleña class of applications called group applications in thismaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150making it betterreport. groupbased elements support activities, including interaction orcollaboration, among groups of individual users. individuals and groupscan now publish and manage information, literally on a global scale, asillustrated by many of the wellknown internet applications, such as electronic mail (email), discussion forums, and the world wide web. but theweb affords comparatively static, passive information sharing with relatively little accommodation for variation in individual capabilities or preferences. to improve on this technologyñand support a wider range ofinteractionsñresearchers must delve into group dynamics and interaction, human learning and cognition, human impairments, and othervariations on these themes and how they might be supported by it. suchresearch depends on insight from psychology and sociology as well ascomputer science and electrical engineering. it also depends on insightfrom specific domains that may shape realworld contexts: for example,different requirements will be associated with groups engaged in routineteaching and learning as opposed to groups collaborating on responses tonatural disasters, when one can expect extreme variations in availabletechnology, skill sets, responsibilities, and work environments and wherecrisis conditions affect needs for the type, delivery rate, and comprehensibility of information gathered, analyzed, and shared (cstb, 1996, 1999).knowledge managementknowledgebased elements support the capture, retrieval, and manipulation of knowledge, typically drawing on massive collections of information. although more and more data are being generated or recorded innetworked computers, finding essential information is increasingly difficult. as the nation shifts from an industrial to an information economy(shapiro and varian, 1998), the role of physical assets as a source of competitive advantage is diminishing. to see the role that knowledge isplaying in the economy, one need look no further than stock market valuations of internet startups that have negligible physical assets but considerable intellectual property. the acquisition or discovery of knowledge(which is derived from information), plus the strategic management andexploitation of that knowledgeña process called knowledge managementñare therefore an increasing focus of many companies, both newand established (oõleary, 1998).8 the goal is to be able to find, understand, and use the massive amounts of information and knowledge thatreside within an enterprise.tools for searching for information remain frustratingly poor. whileit may seem easy enough for people to express their information needs toone another, computer retrieval techniques are unable to filter out a largenumber of useless search results. to counter the technology shortcomings,making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications151organizations today manage knowledge using a combination of peopleand computers. much as a library contains books that record information, as well as librarians to organize and index it, computers are used tostore and transmit information but are able to organize and index onlydata that have a precise, logical structure. managing knowledge that isencoded as expository text is largely beyond todayõs it capabilities.historically, it contributed to information management throughsystems for collecting and storing information (i.e., databases), findingand retrieving it (i.e., information retrieval), and processing online transactions. these systems provided experience with the types of functionsthat people now want to extend, combine, and enhance in new and morepowerful ways. data warehousing, which captures a historical record ofan entire enterpriseõs transactions, and data mining, which attempts toanalyze data to identify hidden trends and correlations, represent thecurrent state of the art in knowledge discovery and management. for themost part, knowledge discovery and management strain current it.distributed transaction databases with properties such as automaticload balancing and historical archiving have been suggested, but they arebeyond the current state of the art.9 in addition, end users are beginningto recognize that knowledge management projects require as much socialscience as computer science because the systems must serve the evolvingmission needs of their users. according to some industry analysts, datawarehousing projects fail more often for organizational reasons than fortechnical ones (deck, 1999).commercecommercebased elements support the interaction of organizations(including businesses, government entities, and universities) with otherorganizations and with individuals, whether consumers, citizens and taxpayers, or students. todayõs most obvious example is ecommerce, thebuying and selling of goods and services, especially among organizations. businesstobusiness applications of it have expanded dramatically from straightforward replacement of paper documentation (such aspurchase orders and invoices) in electronic data interchange and electronic banktobank wiring of funds, both of which have been in use forsome time. in the emerging model, it is integrated into all businesstobusiness operational activities except for the flow of material goods. thisnew ecommerce (keen and balance, 1997) includes activities such as electronic money management (direct transfers of money in electronic formsbetween businesses), electronic business logistics (coordination of suppliers and customers) and supply chain management (integration of business processes across businesses with supplier/customer relationships).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152making it bettermost of these activities also apply to nonbusiness organizations, such asgovernment entities involved in procurement, tax collection, licensingfees, and so on.the development of internetbased ecommerce has important implications for it and related research. first, it has amplified the role ofinformation about individuals as an element of business strategy andtherefore of knowledge management. now it is being used to collect andanalyze information about individuals as actual or potential customersñinformation that can be used for product design, marketing, and customer service. the result is a predictable tension between those interested in the commercial exploitation of information about individualsand those concerned about protecting privacy (diffie and landau, 1997).new questions are being asked: who knows what about whom? whoowns information about individuals? who is authorized to use that information and for what purposes? these concerns are related to thosesurrounding the protection of intellectual property in a digital environment.10 second, as illustrated by the growing attention to privacy as wellas the concerns about reliability, dependability, and trustworthiness discussed in chapter 3, government entities are scrutinizing the nature anduse of it in ecommerce. the result may well involve a combination ofvoluntary industry actions and governmentmandated actions to promoteor avoid certain uses of it, which would have implications for systemdesign and implementation constraints. one certain result would be afurther change in the nature and impact of government, whichñlike businesses and other organizationsñis itself affected by the use of it.11finally, ecommerce is redefining the business processes that spantraditional administrative and organizational boundaries (davenport,1993) and altering the relationships among organizations.12 even beforethe commercialization of the internet, industry witnessed a strong trendaway from vertical integration and toward more specialized or horizontally diversified firms, driven in part by lower coordination and transaction costs enabled by it. there is speculation about the prospects forconsolidation and concentration. the equilibrium boundary of a firm islargely set by the relationship between internal and external transactionand coordination costs, and those costs are being profoundly influencedby it (grenier and metes, 1996). furthermore, the judicious applicationof new it can greatly influence these boundaries and the efficiency of theeconomy as a wholeñanother area deserving of research.coordination and controlcontrol or coordinationbased features support the coordination oflarge numbers of distributed elementsñoften a combination of technomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications153logical, informational, and humanñin achieving the reliable operation ofa largescale system. they are especially prevalent in infrastructure systems that perform critical support functions for society as a whole, such asthe systems used in utilities (electric, gas, telephone, and networking),finance (electronic funds transfer and auction markets), and transportation (air and rail networks). these systems place extreme requirementson features such as reliability and trustworthiness (see chapter 3). manyrequire realtime operation and decision making, some of which will bedone in consultation with users and some of which must occur automatically. the specific needs, and the ways in which these needs are met, areclosely tied to the nature of the application. for example, security practices limiting access to a system may need to incorporate different override features depending, for example, on whether the system is beingused to transfer funds between banks or to allow a doctor emergencyaccess to a patientõs medical record.common challengesdespite the diversity in social applications and the it systems thatsupport them, there are common elements, and they can motivate researchthat could inform the development of all such systems. obviously, thebroader the range of applications that benefit from particular technological and methodological innovations, the greater the overall value of theresearch. this is an argument for focusing a large portion of it researchon highly generic problems, such as the following:¥social trustñhow can people communicating with strangers inelectronic communities know who is trustworthy and who is not?¥coordinating expertiseñhow can systems and procedures make iteasier to elicit and coordinate the expertise of individuals, whether theyare doing system development or participating in discussion groups?¥personal privacy and identityñhow can systems and proceduresmake it easier for people to disclose as much as, but no more than, theywish about their identity and personal information in online contexts?¥agencyñhow can people better instruct it systems to make decisions on their behalf, e.g., to coordinate calendars and to process androute messages (such as email, faxes, and voice messages)?¥community and collaborationñhow can it better support the activities of groups of individuals seeking to communicate and collaboratemore effectively?¥knowledge contentñhow can the collection of, access to, and extraction of value from vast amounts of information be made more effective?making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154making it betterhow can these tasks be better distributed among people and systems ofdifferent types?¥business processesñhow are repetitive, ongoing activities that meeta business goal best organized around technology, and how is technologybest organized around such processes? can common elements or strategies be used?¥securityñhow can researchers rethink it to reduce the vulnerability of the infrastructure, applications, and people to various risks andsystem failures?¥operations and administrationñhow can it be designed for enhancedoperation and administration, particularly in a world in which manyapplications need to interoperate with other applications and across organizational and political boundaries?¥development methodologiesñhow can software applications be developed more effectively, with the goal of improving outcomes in terms ofmeeting application needs for functionality, interoperability with otherapplications, and the flexibility to change in the future?all of these issues are common to a number of different applications,and all are receiving attention today by researchers in disciplines such ascomputer science and engineering, information management and science,the social sciences (particularly economics, psychology, and sociology),and business. however, this attention often has too narrow a disciplinaryfocus. research in these areas would benefit from a multidisciplinaryapproach because it pays more attention to application contexts and coulddefine new issues and requirements to inform the research.systemspecific researchin addition to research in generic areas of concern such as those listedabove, it research can address more specific application contexts as well.the purpose, again, is to inform the research on it by considering realisticneeds and contexts, with the goal of molding the technology to be morepowerful, effective, and secure.13 there are important reasons for doingthis. first, any particular area of technological research is more critical tosome applications than to others. some applications stress a particularfacet of technology. by identifying and studying the applications that aremost challenging, the it research outcomes can have a broader and greaterimpact. second, researchers pursuing generic technological concerns tendto ignore interactions with other concerns or miss opportunities to addressdifferent areas of concern with more holistic solutions. the only practicalway to appreciate a full range of issues and how they interact with andbuttress one another is to look at the whole problem in specific applicamaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications155tion contexts. finally, as the application domain of research narrows, theimpact of technology improvements to that application domain are likelyto be greater.as an example, consider the it research objective ògreater flexibilityto meet changing needs.ó can flexibility be addressed generically? certainly, as outlined in chapter 3, and indeed it is worthwhile to search forgeneral approaches and principles. but it is also worthwhile to first identify more specifically what sort of flexibility is needed, as informed byparticular applications domains. does flexibility imply the merging ofinformation systems when firms merge? does it mean adding new applications to a mix and ensuring that those new applications are interoperable with the old? does it mean adding features or modifying thefeatures of existing applications? does it mean layering new applicationson top of old ones? are there other options to explore? to what extent isthe definition of flexibility itself flexible? by examining particular application domains, researchers can answer such questions with greater specificity, and the results may be more immediately useful. at the same time,of course, the results become less generally applicable; yet it is often possible to generalize from the specific case studied to a broader range ofsimilar cases.an essential part of research on the social applications of it is building and deploying experimental systems. often the utility of an application cannot be predicted by its designers or by past experience. for manyit applications, the task is more like one of industrial product design thanbusiness process reengineering. standards for it research need to acknowledge emerging social effects, not focus exclusively on the technology. theworld wide web, for example, is based on extant technologies for document management and hypertext, but the unique combination of thesetechnologies addressed a social need (to publish and communicate) witha power that could not have been predicted from previous experiencewith the technologies.conducting research on social applicationsa plausible approachresearch that addresses the social applications of it would need totarget applications that serve groups of users, organizations (includinggovernment, businesses, and others), the citizenry at large, and criticalinfrastructure systems. examples include the following:¥groupsñcollaboration, political activism, battlefield management,community development;making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156making it better¥organizationsñtax collection, census collection, military logistics,ecommerce;¥citizensñthe political process (polling and voting, citizen involvement in decision making), continuing education, entertainment, culturalopportunities; and¥critical infrastructureñtransportation and communication networks, intelligence gathering, nuclear power, and financial markets.the research would not only address todayõs nascent social applications (such as ecommerce) but also explore visionary new possibilitiesthat are unimagined today or even unimaginable owing to their scale andcomplexity. much of this research would aim for visionary and revolutionary advances through the creative application of technology. someresearch would work from the bottom up, envisioning the potential capabilities of technologies and identifying new opportunities that exploitthose capabilities. other research would work from the top down, categorizing the major challenges experienced in the world today or tomorrowthat might be overcome by the creative application of existing and newtechnology. the research would aim to enhance the positive effects of itwhile identifying and minimizing its negative effects.14similar to systems research, which needs to pursue both case researchand methodology research (as discussed in chapter 3), research on socialapplications would need to pursue both case research and genericresearch. case research would identify target application areas such asòdigital democracyó (i.e., public participation in collective decision making) and address the role it could play in them. such research would alsoseek new mechanisms for the political process and supporting technologies. generic research addresses issues such as group dynamics, decisionmaking, collaboration, enjoyment and satisfaction, and competition andlooks at how they apply to and can be mediated in social applications.generic research could also address how technology can be molded tohelp in balancing economic benefits to organizations against the rights orquality of life of individuals. an important example of a generic researchtopic is privacy; research would attempt to define what privacy entails indifferent contexts and identify technological means to control the degreeof privacy as a function of circumstance and objectives.outcomes of the research into the social applications of it could beevaluated in terms of criteria such as (1) the extent to which society andorganizations benefit more from technological progress than they wouldotherwise, with respect to whatever dimensions make sense in context(e.g., productivity, quality, or effectiveness), (2) the extent to which thenegative consequences of technological progress are avoided or mitigated,and (3) the extent to which technology is influenced by beneficial longmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications157term, visionary ideas rather than being simply the result of incrementalimprovements and nearterm commercial exploitation.research of the sort suggested in this chapter would help society reapthe rewards of òlearning by doingó and would accelerate that process. itwould help researchers recognize patterns in their results and developnew theories and would enable them to select better research targets andexploit their work more effectively. the new approach to research wouldtake nothing away from the triedandtrue work that continues to offermany benefits; it would be an additional, complementary asset in theoverall production system.new research teamsthe tight linkages between the technical and nontechnical components of sociotechnical systems mean that effective research will have todraw on a broad range of constituencies, much as work in civil engineering is influenced by architects, urban planners, and transportation engineers (box 4.2). technology researchers, social scientists, and domainexperts will have to work together to identify and solve problems relatedto the social applications of it.to date, research on the social applications of it has tended to fallinto one of four categories:¥research on it systems addressing generic issues of technology,informed (it is hoped) by a knowledge of application needs and addressing a broad swath of application contexts rather than focusing on a singlecontext (examples include many of the issues mentioned in chapter 3,such as security, administration, and flexibility);¥applications research that addresses a specific context, trying tosee how existing technologies can provide value to that application andhow that application context (such as an organization) can be reorganizedaround it technologies;¥software engineering research that explores generic techniques fordeveloping and deploying new itbased applications; examples includethe processes involved in understanding the application context, translating this understanding into requirements and specifications, implementing the applications, measuring and refining their behavior, deployingthe application, training users, and supporting the deployed applicationand its users; and¥social science research that explores how people undertake different activities and exercise their different physical and mental abilities toengage it and other resources and research that explores how peopleadapt the structure of organizations and activities in response to the intromaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158making it betterbox 4.2social applications of technology in the construction industrythe interplay among civil engineering, architecture, transportation engineering,and urban planning demonstrates the multiple influences that impinge on socialapplications of technology, in a setting that many people find somewhat morefamiliar than the information technology (it) industry. as such, the constructionindustry provides a useful illustration of the direction in which it is heading.civil engineers are adept at achieving costeffective structures based on wellspecified plans provided by an architect. the architect is adept at generatingthose plans by understanding the local conditions and environment and interviewing future occupants of the building about their needs and wishes. but neither ofthese professionals can work in isolation. their work relates to both transportationengineering and to landuse planning, and it is not difficult to see that isolateddecisions by architects and civil engineers can have unintended consequences inone of those domains, perhaps interrupting traffic patterns or altering the characterof a neighborhood. local interests, which may be expressed in plans for a givenstructure, can be varied, but they must be aggregated for purposes of transportation and landuse planning decisions.the construction process is clearly complicated by the involvement of three orfour professions with distinct cultures and perspectives. however, this is one arenain which there is a history of interaction and a comparatively mature legal andpolitical environment that impinges on the engineering activity, whichñuntil therecent advent of intelligent transportation systems and the prospect of smarthomes, thanks to progress in itñhas itself been comparatively mature and stablefor a long time.duction of it. this category includes the classical social science disciplines themselvesñe.g., psychology, social psychology, sociology, andanthropology.clearly, a great deal of valuable research can be performed in thesefour categories. much of the research agenda discussed in chapter 3 canbe cast into the first category, as can the research into component technologies that can and should be pursued (discussed in chapter 1). muchof the research carried out in socialsciencebased disciplines, such asinformation and library sciences and business, can be cast into the secondand fourth categories. a modest amount of research (in comparison tothe size of the challenges) has been conducted in the third category. it hasbeen pursued most notably by organizations such as the software engimaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications159neering institute at carnegie mellon university and some academic computer science departments.each of the four kinds of research has limitations if it becomes the solelens through which to examine the social applications of it. becausesocial applications of it link technology so tightly to people and organizations, a more integrative approach is needed. in the technology arena, itis subject to few physical limits, so it can be molded in many differentways. to consider the technology in isolation is to miss opportunities tomold it in directions that make it more useful. similarly, because a greatdeal of research in application areas takes the current observed state oftechnology as a given, it misses opportunities to think about ways inwhich the technology could be different that would make it much moreuseful. one of the great unsolved problems is how, as a part of softwareapplication conceptualization and development, to take into account therich interaction between the application context and the architecturalassumptions in the software application, as well as the issues of legacytechnology and applications and changing requirements. this last challenge clearly embodies the consideration of technology (as it is and as itcould be) in conjunction with a deep understanding of the context.there is tremendous potential for expanded research agendas thatfall between these categories and combine multiple perspectives into amore cohesive, holistic view. research that examines the impact of it onsociety and the economy is certainly needed, but equally important isresearch on the impact that application contexts have on it developmentand software development methodologies as a part of the larger processof application conceptualization and refinement. new science and engineering may arise from such research. the discussion in this reportemphasizes research in which the goal is to refine the it itself, often inconjunction with meeting application needs more effectively. impactremains an important issue, but there is an explicit goal of modifying thetechnology to maximize the beneficial impacts and mitigate the adverseones.who is in the best position to make contributions to it as informed byapplicationsñespecially the social applications of itñand how can researchon this topic best be organized? the most effective researchers will havean understanding of the potential of it, both what might be possibletechnically as well as what has already been achieved, as well as an understanding of the application context. in general, opportunities for advancingapplication areas using existing technologies are best addressed by application domain experts who have acquired a fairly substantial understanding of the technology. (there are certainly opportunities for technologyexperts to participate in this research in consulting roles, but such participation is generally not greeted with enthusiasm.) the use of applicationmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160making it betterdomains to inspire technology is a role predominantly for technologyresearchers who inform themselves about the characteristics and challenges inherent in particular problem domains. such knowledge can begained in at least two ways: (1) by working directly with the end users(individuals and organizations) in that application domain or (2) by collaborating with researchers who have the appropriate domain expertise or expertise in disciplines directly relevant to the domain.where the goal is to advance both the technologies and the ways ofaddressing application domain challenges, interdisciplinary research collaboration is generally needed. although some degree of collaborationhas always been necessary, the need for it is growing quickly, driven bythe availability of the internet, the proliferation of it applications in consumer and other layperson contexts, and the rapid expansion of socialapplications of it generally. these trends also argue for substantiallyexpanding the involvement of end users in setting the research agendasand articulating the goals and constraints of the research, for it is the endusers who experience the opportunities and challenges in an immediateand detailed fashion. although several programs have been establishedto bring together the diverse set of stakeholders needed to make progresson social applications of it, it is increasingly apparent that a broader andmore substantial effort is needed that uses multiple mechanisms to stimulate the type of research that will make significant progress. there aremany practical barriers to the desired intellectual crossfertilization, butmechanisms exist for overcoming them, as outlined in the next section.mechanisms for social applications researchparticipation of enduser organizationsto date, enduser organizations have relied largely on their vendorsto perform longterm research in it. vendor research, which emphasizescomponents, needs to continue unabated if rapid advances in the speedand capacity of it are to be maintained. however, when it comes toresearch that affects the uses of it, the constituencies who understandand benefit from those usesñthat is, enduser organizationsñmust participate. these organizations include (1) companies that are stronglydependent on it, including firms in almost all industries but especiallythose in business and financial services and online commerce; (2) suppliersof enterprise software used to automate major processes for corporations,universities, and government agencies; (3) application developers thatdevelop customized software for large companies and governmentagencies; and (4) systems integrators that integrate major infrastructuremaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications161components (hardware and software) to meet the needs of largescaleapplications.end users also include government agencies that depend heavily onit systemsñespecially those that have considerable difficulty deployingsuch systems effectively. this group includes both traditional federalsupporters of it researchñthe department of defense, the national science foundation, the department of energy, and the national aeronauticsand space administrationñas well as agencies that have a more limitedhistory of supporting research on it, such as the internal revenue service,the social security administration , and the federal aviation administration. all parts of the government are increasingly dependent on it. infy00, federal agencies were budgeted to spend more than $34 billion onit systems, up more than $1 billion over fy99.15 information technologyis used both to run the back offices that store data and record transactionsand to interact with citizens doing business with the government. arguably, the funding of basic it research directly supports the missions ofthese agencies (wulf, 1999). if new it developments can increase theeffectiveness of these functions or reduce their cost, then the nation as awhole will benefit.the greater participation of enduser organizations in it researchcould have numerous benefits. first, these organizations can bring substantive intellectual insight to the research process. research on socialapplications of it demands an understanding of the ways in which it isdeployed in different organizations, the missions it supports, the requirements it must meet, and the problems that are experienced. such insightcan come only from enduser organizations that work with such systemsroutinely and can foresee the ways in which such systems might be usedin the future. recognition of the benefits of researcher access to realsystems in situ is not new. the cstb, for example, first recommendedsuch access in 1989 in a report that provided recommendations forresearch on complex software systems. the participants at the time notedthat the problems identified dated back to the 1960s, and a reading todaysuggests that many of the same problems persist now in software engineering and related research (see box 4.3).second, enduser organizations could contribute funding, therebyexpanding the financial base for research related to it. such an expansionis necessary if research motivated by social applications is to grow without crowding out existing research on components. the wellpublicizedand expensive failures of it in enduser organizations also make a compelling case for the expansion of research funding from all sources, including the government. finally, enduser organizations will insist (appropriately) that the research have an identifiable impact on the problems theyexperience. thus, their involvement will focus the research communityõsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162making it betterbox 4.3excerpts fromscaling up: a research agenda for software engineeringshortterm actions: foster practitioner and researcher interactions¥òthere is little academic investigation of the practices, techniques, or problems out in the field today. to rectify this situation, greater interaction amongresearchers and practitioners is needed. . . .ó¥òthat academic computer scientists do not often study large software systems and the process of developing them is one reason that practitioners often feelthat the issues studied by academia do not adequately address the problems andchallenges. . . .ó¥òacademics do not study large systems because they do not have them orhave access to them. . . .ó¥òthe disparity in perspective and exposure. . . hinders u.s. progress indeveloping complex software systems.ólongterm actions: legitimize academic exploration of large softwaresystems¥òacademic investigation of research topics based on problems encounteredin the ôreal worldõ by software developers could help. . . .ó¥òfunding is a major consideration. . . . [it] is difficult to study large systemscosteffectively.ó¥òone way to get around some of the difficulties of studying large systems incorporate settings would be to facilitate the study of large systems in governmentsettings. . . .óglean insights from behavioral and managerial sciences¥òthere is a need to better understand how groups of people collaborate inlarge projects. . . .ósource: computer science and technology board (1989), pp. 1921.attention on social applications of it to a much greater extent than wouldotherwise be expected.engaging end users more directly in it research will not be easy.many cultural differences must be bridged, and practical issues in themanagement of research must be resolved. a sociotechnical systems perspective on any largescale it in context requires the identification andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications163analysis of human and organizational shortcomings as well as technicalones. it is difficult to gain access to organizations, let alone financialsupport, for projects that are likely to identify human shortcomings (aswell as technical ones) and publish them in the open literature. organizations may pay consultants for such work already, but contractual terms ofnondisclosure guarantee that the findings will not be subject to the scrutiny of peer review and will not become general knowledge. furthermore, because end users and systems integrators have not been activelyengaged in it research, few have any internal research capacity or abilityto manage outside research and ensure its quality and relevance. consequently, they may be unable (at least at first) to participate effectively inthe conduct of research. if research is conducted by parties outside theorganizations, mechanisms will be needed to ensure that the research willbenefit the enduser community and influence actual practices. researchersthemselves will need active and ongoing contacts with enduser organizations to gain handson experience with real issues and problems andthe ability to validate their ideas empirically in realistic environments.one approach would be for enduser organizations to pool theirresources and fund external research related to their interests, whether atuniversities or industrial research labs, or in consortia established expresslyfor this purpose. this approach has been used by it firms to supportresearch of mutual interest through organizations such as sematech,the microelectronics and computer technology corporation, the semiconductor research corporation, and others (see box 4.4). such arrangements have produced mixed results to date; their success depends onmany factors, including the ability of the member organizations to agreeon a set of issues to address, the leadership of the consortia, and thequality of the researchers (many are drawn from member companies).when this model is used for research on the social applications of it, themechanisms for transferring technology back to the end users could be aproblem. there is ample evidence that before they can benefit fromresearch consortia, firms must have their own research and development(r&d) operations in place. professor wes cohen of carnegie mellonuniversity has referred to this characteristic as òabsorptive capacity.óconsortia in ecommerce or medical informatics, for example, would notsucceed if banks or health maintenance organizations did not have theirown internal research operations under way.accordingly, one element of a larger strategy would be to try toincrease the amount of direct r&d conducted by firms that use it systems. many an applied research organization leverages external researchoutcomesñwhether funded by that organization or notñfor internal benefit. these organizations could be involved in choosing the recipients ofresearch funding. importantly, they have experience in identifying intermaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164making it betterbox 4.4models for pooling information technology researchcompanies in the information technology (it) industry have at times joinedforces to fund research that will aid the entire industry. the examples below couldserve as models for enduser organizations to pursue as they increase their participation in itrelated research.¥semiconductor manufacturing technology (sematech)ñthis consortiumallies 13 leading manufacturers of semiconductor devices from seven countries topursue advances in semiconductor fabrication equipment. established in 1987,sematech was originally supported by equal funding from its member companies and the defense advanced research projects agency but ended its reliance on federal funding in 1997. it has funded research on advanced technologiesfor fabricating semiconductors, including lithography, packaging, testing, design,materials, and interconnect technologies.¥microelectronics and computer technology corporation (mcc)ñthis organization provides research and development (r&d) services in electronics and it.its fundamental business is consortia r&d, in which members define and participate in highly leveraged r&d projects that meet their strategic business requirements. mcc members are eligible to participate in the projects and fund onlythose projects of most interest to them. each participant receives a royaltyfree,unrestricted license to intellectual property resulting from a project, meaning thateach can use new technologies internally and/or commercialize them. as of 1999,the mcc had 17 members and 4 foreign project participants.¥semiconductor research corporation (src)ñthis organization sponsorsbasic, precompetitive university research related to integrated circuit technology.it pools funding from industrial members and leverages federal and state government support of key research programs. the funding terms for contracts vary;however, the trend is toward multiyear research efforts (typically 3 years) with aninitial 12month funding term. at the end of the multiyear period, the researchersmay compete again for new support. the src supports two types of researchñcore and custom. core research is funded from the pool of src member fundsand constitutes most of the portfolio. custom research is funded by a singlecompany and represents 10 to 14 percent of the portfolio. as of april 2000, srchad 40 members from industry and government and was funding work at 67 u.s.universities.nal problems and challenges worthy of research, and also in identifyingindividuals who can convey those challenges to external researchers. inother words, they are matchmakers, putting together internal and externalresources and facilitating access to internal facilities for empirical researchactivities. such organizations can also be vehicles for ensuring that theresearch project is chosen in consultation with organizations well versedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications165in this process. government agencies, for example, could enlist the aid offederal agencies that are experienced in funding it research, such as thensf, doe, nasa, and the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa).the federal government is attempting to forge stronger links betweenthe it research community and end users in federal agencies. the digitalgovernment program, for example, uses the nsf as an intermediary tofund it research addressing the medium to longterm r&d and experimental deployment needs of federal agencies.16 the program requires atleast one government agency to be òsignificantly involved in defining andexecuting the researchó and requires recipients of grants to integrate intotheir projects experts in domains that are primarily or exclusively associated with government. agencies are encouraged to share facilities, data,or personnel with the researchers and/or to provide funding either directlyor jointly with the nsf.17 although the program is new and small (approximately $3 million was allocated to it in fy00), it has succeeded in attracting a number of proposals that involve a range of federal agencies withlittle or no experience in funding it research.18 however, many projectsreflect the agenciesõ interests in developing software and systems to meetparticular nearterm needs and their desire to examine different technological solutions to determine which offers the best combination offeatures. nsf program managers hope to create a research culture infederal agencies that will promote longerterm research and facilitate theagenciesõ adoption of new technologies once the research is completed,but this process will take time. mechanisms may be needed to demonstrate the feasibility and applicability of new technologies to help agencies better evaluate their risks and benefits (larry brandt, nsf, òthe nsfdigital government research program,ó presentation to the committee,june 14, 1999).another attempt to strengthen linkages between researchers and enduser organizations is ibm corporationõs firstofakind (foak) program.19the foak program, initiated in 1995, links ibmõs research division withits industry solution units (isus) to apply innovative technologies to realcustomer problems. the idea is to do research in the marketplace as wellas in ibmõs laboratories so that customers can gain access to innovativetechnologies, researchers can get early marketplace feedback and insightinto the applications of new technologies, and the isus get solution assetsthat could be reused to solve other, similar customer problems. by choosing the appropriate customer problem to work on, researchers hope theycan generate solutions that are general enough to solve other customerproblems not only in the same industry segment but also in othersegments.the foak projects are jointly funded, implemented, and adminismaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166making it bettertered by ibm research and the isus. starting in 2000, ibm created a newreview board for the program that draws members from the researchdivision and ibmõs global industries division. managers have alsoemphasized the need for a lead person who is responsible for driving theresulting innovations into the marketplace. leaders in several divisions(e.g., global services, lotus, and sofware) have championed proposalsand sponsored project teams in two of the divisions (research and globalindustries). these teams work with isus and business partners, whobring domain expertise and marketing experience to the effort.roughly 25 percent of ibmõs research budget is dedicated to the foakprogram. since the program started in late 1995, more than 80 projectshave been funded. of these, more than half have been successfully completed and their outcomes deployed in the marketplace (either as a product or as part of a solution). about 15 percent of the projects were terminated, either because they could not get a customer commitment or failedto achieve key project milestones. as of april 2000, the program hadabout nine active projects and was driving considerable patent activity.many researchers were skeptical in the beginning (òwhat do you mean,work on real customer problems?ó), but most have come to view theprogram as valuable to their longterm research. by engaging early onwith real customers in the marketplace, researchers have been able to gainearly insight into the value and application of their technology and intofuture directions for their research. successfully deployed systems includean internetbased electronic ticketing system for swiss railway, a set ofsophisticated patternmatching algorithms used to discover molecularrelationships in the process of new drug development, a continuousspeech recognition system for radiological transcriptions at massachusetts general hospital and the memorial sloankettering cancer institute, and a mail analyzer that allows customers to automatically queueproblem reports.industry internships and sabbaticalsanother means of increasing the linkages between industry end usersand academic researchers is industry internships and sabbaticals. suchprograms can help ensure that academic researchers develop an understanding of the challenges faced by enduser organizations (and vendors)in designing, developing, deploying, and operating it systems. of course,many students who graduate with advanced degrees in it go to work inindustry or government it settings; in that sense, the university perspective is introduced into industry every time a student is hired. internshipsin industry before students graduate could add real value, particularly ifstudents select thesis topics that focus on some aspect of a realworld itmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications167problem or social application. work in the social applications of it, inparticular, would benefit from greater crossfertilization between industry and academia, because it could provide academic researchers withaccess to largescale computing and communications artifacts (i.e., operating physical systems) and the individuals responsible for them.similarly, exchange programs in which faculty members work inindustry or government for a year and industry or government it professionals work at universities for a year would help build a cadre of expertswho are comfortable in both worlds. alumni of such exchange programscould go on to play a valuable role in both research centers and interdisciplinary it research groups. equally important, both they and theveterans of student internships would form a core of individuals whocould apply new research findings by designing and operating improvedlargescale systems and social applications.a number of itrelated internship and exchange programs exist, butmost place students and faculty members in vendor organizations. theexpansion of such programs to include enduser organizations might befacilitated by federal incentives. because few enduser organizations (orsystems integrators) have large research operations, they do not have atradition of supporting interns in it, nor do students view internshipswith such organizations as furthering their research careers. seed funding for such a program through a federal agency such as nsf couldencourage such internships and, if the program is successful, could convince industry to contribute funding as well. universities might need tobe persuaded that there is value in such programs, which would takestudents away from their faculty advisors for some period of time andcould be viewed as delaying the completion of their studies. at the sametime, however, such internships could give students valuable researchexperience and help them to select dissertation projects (or thesis topics).if successful, such internships and sabbaticals could also serve to demonstrate the value of it research to enduser organizations, prompting themto support additional universitybased research, benefiting both communities.industry experts could also be brought into the university system.many universities tap into the expertise in local industry by hiring industry employees as adjunct faculty. although adjunct faculty members donot typically participate in research projects, they could introduce newideas to students and other faculty members alike. the massachusettsinstitute of technology (mit) has begun to experiment with another typeof program to bring industry expertise into academia. it has appointed asmall number of òprofessors of the practice,ó who teach and conductresearch full or parttime. these individuals are not expected to havepublication records as long as those of their academic counterparts butmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168making it betterare instead expected to have a significant record of accomplishments. theprogram is still new, and mit has only a small number of such professors,but they add breadth and experience to the schoolõs engineering programs.interdisciplinary research in academiaif research on the social applications of it is to advance, then interdisciplinary research will be needed that involves participants and expertise from a wide range of academic disciplines. the work needs to involvenot only computer scientists, engineers, and software experts but alsobusiness professors and organizational theorists who understand therelationship between it and the organizational structures within which itis embedded, the human side of complex technical systems, and themarket aspects of different social applications. the research teams needto include social scientists who can evaluate the impact of it on individuals, families, organizations, and society and who understand thehumancentric nature of computing. they could include specialists inparticular application areas such as health care, manufacturing, finance,and ecommerce.researchers in business, economics, and the social sciences have alreadymade numerous advances in understanding it as it is used in a range ofsocial applications (boxes 4.5 and 4.6). several opportunities exist forstepping up the involvement of experts in business, economics, socialscience, and law in research pertaining to it. nontraditional researchmechanisms may be needed that will encourage the participation of enduser organizations in research, broaden the outlook of it researchers,and/or overcome disciplinary boundaries in universities. the management of interdisciplinary research collaborations generates its own set ofissues: technologists and social scientists have different vocabularies,methodologies, time perspectives, standards of evidence, and so on. suchdifferences need to be bridged if collaborations are to be effective.interdisciplinary research can be conducted in one of three ways.individuals can broaden their own expertise: technologists can becomeincreasingly facile with the uses of the technologies and the larger system(including sociotechnical system) contexts within which they are embedded, and experts in sociotechnical system contexts become more facilewith technology. alternatively, experts in the system contexts can collaborate more extensively and effectively with technologists. or, newprofessions can arise to mediate between it and its uses: this occurred inhealth care when the field of medical informatics emerged to help bridgethe gap between it and medicine (box 4.7) and, even earlier, in civilengineering when an entire profession (building and landscape architecture) was established to deal with application, societal, and aestheticmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications169box 4.5examples of business research related toinformation technology¥critical success factorsñwork by rockhart identified factors critical to thesuccess of information systems in business settings. what information is critical tothe success of a business? what questions would you want a database to answer?how do you design information systems to support business objectives?¥decision support systemsñwork by keane and morton promulgated theidea of using information systems to support corporate decision making at a varietyof levels.¥information technology and strategic advantageñwork at the harvard business school recognized that information technology (it) is not just for backofficeoperations but rather is an element of a firmõs competitive advantage. companiesthat deploy and employ it systems more wisely than others can benefit in themarketplace.¥computersupported cooperative workñthis research introduced the ideaof using information technology to allow people to work cooperatively within andacross organizations, to overcome differences in geography or time.¥productivityñ productivity gains from it investments have been difficult tomeasure, but brynjolfssonõs analysis of firmlevel data (as opposed to industrylevel data) indicates that there may be large payoffs, albeit with time lags. thiswork attempts to identify the factors that contribute to positive returns from itinvestments within firms. what characteristics differentiate firms that do experience increased productivity from those that do not?¥software development methodologiesñresearch by cusumano providedguidance on software development methodologies from a management point ofview.¥process handbookñthis repository of business process knowledge canfacilitate further research and help determine best practices for deploying it. theclassification and structure of the database itself is a powerful tool.source: thomas malone, sloan school of management, mit, in a presentation at thenational academy of engineering workshop òhow can academic research best contribute tonetwork systems and communications?ó washington, d.c., october 30, 1998.issues. each of these approaches has its strengths and weaknesses. thefirst approach, for example, effectively creates visionaries and leaders in afield but does not enable largescale collaborations. the second enables aproperly balanced team to be assembled but creates problems of coordination and management and makes it difficult to create a shared vision.the third approach can be effective in establishing a longterm capabilitymaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170making it betterbox 4.6examples of economics and other social science researchthat has contributed to information technology development¥role of regulationñeconomics research by alfred kahn, paul joskow,roger noll, and kip viscusi redefined the role of regulations from one of protectingthe public interest to one of stepping in when markets do not drive prices to marginal costs. this redefinition spurred deregulation in a number of industries, including communications.¥network externalitiesñwork by hal varian, paul david, brian arthur, garthsaloner, michael katz, carl shapiro, and nicholas economides showed that thenetwork industries and information industries are characterized by ònetwork externalities,ó which make the value to a consumer of a particular product or serviceincrease as more people use it. an example is an internet connection, which ismore valuable if more information is available and larger numbers of people areconnected. this insight leads to an emphasis on getting products and servicesinto the marketplace quickly, pricing them low at first to spur market growth andthen raising prices as more units are sold and their value grows.¥internet economicsñwork in this area by lee mcknight, joseph bailey, halvarian, and jeffrey mackiemason has implications for the pricing of internetbasedresources and services, such as concepts for allocating resources based on thewillingness of users to pay.¥group dynamics and decision makingñresearch by sara kiesler, suzanneiaconno, wanda orlikowski, and others (e.g., siegel et al., 1986) on group dynamicsand decision making in small electronic groups informed the design of systemsthat support group decisions.¥diffusion of applicationsñresearch by m. lynne markus (1987) and otherson how critical mass predicts the diffusion of networked applications within organizations and informs the deployment decisions for information technology (it)applications.¥distribution of the benefits of itñresearch by tora bikson, lee sproull,and others demonstrating that peripheral members of social systems benefit morefrom use of electronic communication than do central members (e.g., sproull andkiesler, 1991) influenced policy decisions about subsidies for access to theinternet.¥information sharingñresearch by paul attewell, tora bikson, sara kiesler,robert kraut, lee sproull, and others demonstrated how personal attributes andorganizational characteristics such as incentive systems influence peoplesõ use ofit for information sharing. research by julian orr (1990) and others demonstrated that service technicians often have more useful technical expertise than dosystem designers and share their knowledge in a community of practice. thiswork influenced the design of a communitybased troubleshooting database atxerox corporation that has resulted in significantly improved service performance(bell et al., 1997).sources: marvin sirbu, carnegie mellon university, presentation at the national academyof engineering workshop òhow can academic research best contribute to network systemsand communications,ó washington, d.c., october 30, 1998; lee sproull, new york university,personal communications dated august 22, 1999, and april 11, 2000.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications171box 4.7lessons from medical informaticsinsight into the challenges of interdisciplinary research related to informationtechnology (it) can be drawn from the field of medical informatics, which dealsexplicitly with linking the field of medicine and it. a handful of universities andmedical schools have established programs in medical informatics that combinetraining in both medicine and it.1 graduates of these programs can be found inacademic medical centers, healthrelated internet startups, and other organizations. some work in the it departments of large health care centers. the numberof health care organizations that have achieved a critical mass in this field is small.2all of these organizations employ physicians funded by it payroll dollars who workwith mainstream it to improve its application to the core domain of the organization (medicine), with a heavy emphasis on the academic aspects of the intersectionbetween it and the user domain and an interest in experimentation, prototyping,and evaluation of impact. results are published in academic journals and forums.several factors have contributed to the success of these programs. the first isthat academic medical centers have a tradition and culture of research. thenational library of medicine (nlm) funds training and research, and this fundingcontinues over several years, leading to a measure of program stability. the programs funded by the nlm reside in the same organization as the it function does(the university medical center), so there is organizational colocation. it is clear tothe organizations that many complex initiatives require a deep knowledge of medicine to be solved correctly. the it function (in particular, the chief informationofficer) must be comfortable with the academic component and the complex medical domain discussion that medical informatics brings to the table. organizationalmechanisms have been established to assimilate the research functions, such asnew or revised pay grades, project approaches to involving researchers on teams,and tactics to develop budgets.these factors are present in only one or two dozen out of a total of 5,000 healthcare organizations. at times, the linkage between medical informatics and the itorganization does not work very well. for instance, medical informatics programsdo not solve all instances of it staff failing to work well with end users. medicalinformatics staff members are involved in a minority of a health care organizationõsprojects; however, they are involved in the projects in which the domain (medicine)places the greatest design and operational stresses on implemented systems. onesuch system is computerized medical records, which are exceptionally complex todesign and present numerous workflow challenges.1 examples of these programs can be found at columbia university, stanford university, andthe university of utah.2 in 2000, no more than two dozen health care organizations had significant medical informatics efforts. these included partners healthcare system in boston, childrenõs hospital inboston, vanderbilt university, intermountain healthcare in salt lake city, columbia presbyterian medical center in new york, and the university of michigan.source: john glaser, chief information officer, partners healthcare system, boston, massachusetts, personal communication, july 13, 1999.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172making it betterin an interdisciplinary area, but these areas can become somewhat separated from their parent disciplines. all three of these approaches combined can make a significant difference.interdisciplinary research related to it is ramping up in universities,albeit slowly. an increasing number of active researchers in the informationsystems field list schools of management and business administration astheir primary affiliation. other important communities of researchersthat are often overlooked are those in departments of communication andschools of education. all of these groups include individuals working onboth fundamental and targeted research motivated by social applicationsof it. in addition, an increasing number of faculty members with computer science degrees are appearing in other departments across campuses, particularly in information sciences and business. they are involvingthemselves in application areas such as digital libraries and ecommerce,focusing on both the social and technical aspects and collaborating witheconomists and legal specialists. a movement in humancentered computing, involving collaboration with disciplines such as sociology andpsychology, is flowering in academia, albeit at a slower pace than similarefforts in the united kingdom and scandinavia.a major obstacle to any increase in interdisciplinary work is the strongdisciplinary orientation of many universities. academic research is typically reviewed from the perspective of a particular discipline, similar tothe way in which grant proposals are peer reviewed. the reviewers tendto be disciplinary experts and rarely reflect the interdisciplinary nature ofthe research. efforts to establish interdisciplinary programs within disciplinary boundaries and to evaluate those programs often meet with criticism because they are viewed through the lens of a single discipline.20 asa result, faculty members are often discouraged from pursuing interdisciplinary research. this is especially true early in a professional career,when gaining tenure is a major goal and a faculty member feels particularly vulnerable to peer pressure. unfortunately, early habits often persist well into a career.traditional disciplinary work is reinforced by traditional disciplinaryculture. computer science, like any other field, has its own sets of terms,attitudes, norms, and customs with regard to what constitutes researchand how to conduct it. computer scientists have even found it difficult tocollaborate with electrical engineers, although in general they collaboratemore easily with researchers from engineering and the physical sciencesthan with those from the social and life sciences. reasons for the difficulties in collaboration include factors such as project definition, laboratoryorientation, availability of physical infrastructure and professional staff,teaching loads, amount of funding for a project, and so on. more subtleobstacles are attitudes about the relative merits of different fields, withmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications173each field manifesting its own flavor of chauvinism. these difficulttoquantify realities complicate the establishment of collaborative relationships and projects.21one solution to the problem has been the establishment of new schools,divisions, or departments (typically drawing on existing resources) withinuniversities to encourage interdisciplinary research and education relatedto it and its social, political, and economic contexts. for example,carnegie mellon university has long promoted interdisciplinary researchby establishing separate departments and programs to pursue them. itsdepartment of engineering and public policyñand others like it at mit,washington university, and elsewhereñhave examined issues raised bythe intersection of it and public policy for several decades.22 many faculty members have joint appointments in these organizations and traditional academic departments. in recent years, a number of universitieshave transformed schools of library science into broader institutions thataddress issues linking it and social applications (table 4.1). these schoolstend to draw faculty from a number of departments, including computerscience, economics, social sciences, law, and business, but they can hireand promote faculty on the basis of their interdisciplinary work. in suchan environment, a faculty can be built with backgrounds in a diversity ofcore disciplines, and the evaluation process can relatively easily be appreciative of contributions that cross disciplinary boundaries, in no smallpart because faculty who join such units have the appropriate vision andorientation. many of these schools are as yet untested in terms of theirabilities to sustain quality research of the type needed to make progresson social applications. they nevertheless exemplify the kinds of effortsthat will be needed to make progress in this area. they also present morenew opportunities for educating students in interdisciplinary researchareas. by creating institutions with permanently assigned faculty, theseschools and departments can develop curricula and teach classes moreeffectively than is generally possible if faculty are scattered throughoutmultiple academic departments.limited funding is another obstacle to greater interdisciplinary workat universities on the social applications of it. although there are manynotable examples of university researchers who followed a vision andwere able to sell their visions to potential funding sources, the much morecommon model is to shape the research in the directions favored by existing funding sources. thus, as the funding goes, so (largely) goes theresearch agenda. the gross disparity between funding available forresearch in social science and that in computer science today does notbode well for prospects of new socialsciencebased activity.federal support for university research on the social and economicaspects of it (one component of the larger research agenda motivated bymaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174making it bettertable 4.1 recently established or expanded university programs onthe sociotechnical aspects of information technologyschool oruniversitydepartmentresearch emphasessyracuseschool ofinformation behavior, information retrieval,universityinformationinformation policy, information and change,studiesinformation managementuniversity ofschool ofinformation storage and retrieval, human factors,california atinformationinformation policy (e.g., economics andberkeleymanagementintellectual property), management, networkedand systemsinformation systemsuniversity ofschool ofinformation technology and institutional change,california ateducation andtechnology and privacy, genre theory, linguisticlos angelesinformationaspects of computing, internet culture,studiesinformation search and retrieval, social effects ofinformation technology, digital libraries,information policy, usercentered designuniversity ofschool ofcommunity architectures for networkedillinois atlibrary andinformation systems, information retrieval,urbanainformationcomputersupported cooperative work, agents andchampaignsciencemultiagents, organization theory, informationtechnology (e.g., artificial intelligence, distributedsystems, groupware, humancomputerinteraction), information policy and public policyuniversity ofschool ofcommunity technology, information economy,michiganinformationelectronic work, digital libraries, archives andrecord management, humancomputer interaction,information economics, management, and policy,library and information sciencesocial applications) has come largely from nsf. the computer and information science and engineering (cise) directorateõs program in computation and social systems (css; formerly the information technology andorganizations program) supports work in two related areas: (1) the integration, sustainable use, and impacts of it in groups, organizations, communities, and societies and (2) theories and technologies for reasoning,decision making, interaction, and collaboration in groups, organizations,communities, and societies. for many years, this program has been thensfõs main source of support for truly interdisciplinary sociotechnical itsystems research.23 its awards have routinely gone to research groupsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications175that involve technical specialists from computer science or related scienceand engineering disciplines, as well as social scientists with deep interestsin the technology and its social implications. when groups were made upsolely of social scientists, the proposals still had to be reviewed by peoplewith technical expertise.for the most part, these awards tend to be small, providing supportfor one or two researchers over the course of 3 years or so (table 4.2), andthe total amount of annual funding has also been small, in the range of afew million dollars. as a result, only a small subset of the issues that needto be addressed is represented in ongoing research projects, and thetechnological aspects of the program are directed at component technologies (e.g., artificial intelligence and agents) rather than the largescalesocial applications. more importantly, the smallness of the grants precludes the ability to bring together many experts from different disciplines (e.g., it and the social sciences). the css program is expected togrow in the near future and fund a variety of work on social applicationsof it (box 4.8), but it is not clear how quickly this will occur or how largethe projects will be or whether the program will begin to fund largerteams of researchers.24table 4.2 recent awards by the national science foundationõscomputation and social system programapproximateestimated sizedurationproject titleof grant ($)(years)studies of decision making in complex,75,0003dynamic environmentsalgorithmic issues in collaborative filtering326,2604coordination: integrating organizational style441,1704with environmental characteristicsseeing is believing: the value of video for499,4003remote interpersonal connectionsthe design of reputation systems362,3003decisionmaking in the context of commitments250,5003to team activitydesign of time cognizant electronic brokerages295,4404source: national science foundation awards database. available online at<www.nsf.gov>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176making it betterbox 4.8representative topics for future support by thenational science foundationõs computation andsocial systems program¥the relationship between information technology (it) and social transformationsñhow can the relationship between it and social transformation be bestconceptualized? what new theories explain how information technologies diffuseand become well integrated into social contexts? how do social contexts influencethe design and deployment of it? what accounts for inequitable distributions of itacross groups and nations? what are the barriers to diffusion, acceptance, andtransformation? what are the social and cultural divides that hinder access to, oracceptance of, new information technologies? how can these barriers and dividesbe overcome? how can human needs be best served?¥electronic interactions, relationships, and communitiesñwhat are the communicative practices of electronic groups and communities? what are the sociotechnical foundations and implications of human interaction with intelligent agents?what are the theories that describe electronic interaction and what it means to thepeople who engage in it on a routine basisñfor communicating across boundaries, working or learning at a distance, shopping, etc.? how can information andcommunications technologies be designed to enhance multiparty communicationsand the creation of knowledge? how are social relationships, trust, identity, commitment, and communities developed in electronic forums? what are the particular risks and social vulnerabilities that may emerge? how can conflict, crises,fragmentation, and other negative outcomes be managed? what is the relationship between electronic groups or communities and their larger social and culturalcontexts? how are coordination, collaboration, interdependence, negotiation,learning, and knowledge creation achieved over distance and time?¥social ecology and social institutionsñhow is the landscape of americachanging (its communities, highways, shopping malls, public marketplaces, firmsize and location, architecture, etc.)? what are the transformations of work, households, medical centers, educational establishments, communities, commerce, themilitary, etc., that matter? what new social and technical practices are emergingin these institutions? who benefits and who loses through these processes? howdo these changes affect family life, work opportunities, teaching and learning strategies and success, access to and quality of health care, and the distribution ofwealth and resources for people in different economic strata, job status, geographiclocations, etc.? how do these changes affect information and consumer privacy?how are digital or virtual enterprises developed in these contexts, and what dothey mean for existing social institutions and the humans that participate in them?source: national science foundation awards database. available online at <www.nsf.gov>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications177on a larger scale, the nsf has attempted to address the social applications of it from an institutionwide (crossdirectorate) perspective. in1997, it launched the knowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi) initiative (see box 4.9), a bold experiment in fostering crossdisciplinaryresearch inspired by social applications of it that originated within thecise directorate and the social, behavioral, and economic sciences (sbe)directorate. its existence was brief, in part because of programmaticuncertainty both within nsf and externally in the research community.that uncertainty related to the goals and approaches associated with theinitiative and the intellectual and practical challenges of pursuing crossdisciplinary research.box 4.9knowledge and distributed intelligence[knowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi)] activities aim to improve our abilityto discover, collect, represent, transmit, and apply information, thereby improvingthe way we conduct research and education in science and engineering. theseefforts promise to change how we learn and create, how we work, and how we live.. . .the objective is to create networked systems that can make all kinds of knowledge available to anyone, located anywhere, anytime.ñnational science foundation kdi brochurethe evolution of kdi as a broad theme within the national science foundationreflects the integration of multiple streams of research and development drawingon many scientific and engineering disciplines. the components are enormouslyvaried, including, for example, research in computational biology, computer networks and communications, highperformance computing, database managementand information retrieval, mathematical modeling and simulation, artificial intelligence, human learning and cognition, science, mathematics and engineering education, geospatial information systems, and science and engineering indicators.these components are combined into programs of varying scope and scale.the kdi activity aims at a new level of intellectual coalescence. it recognizesthe progress made to date in developing and deploying information technologyacross science and engineering research, and it recognizes that challenges for thefuture include assuring that such technological support can be used and is useful.it attempts to move beyond mere access to information and to develop methods tointelligently absorb, refine, and analyze information to glean useful knowledge.organizationally, kdi is a crossdirectorate, crossdisciplinary effort with three corecomponents:¥knowledge networking is intended to advance understanding of the potential of new information technologies for communication, coordination, and collaboration in science, engineering, education, and other applications. the goals ofcontinuedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178making it betterknowledge networking are (1) to develop an understanding of the fundamentalprocesses through which knowledge is created, communicated, validated, andvalued in distributed systems of information, both natural and engineered, and(2) to improve the technical, social, educational, and economic performance ofknowledge generation and use, collaborative computation, and remote interaction.¥learning and intelligent systems is intended to advance understanding oflearning in both natural and artificial systems and of how that learning can besupported, harnessed, and used in creative ways. this component also promotesthe use and development of technologies that support enhanced learning for children, workers, and the general public across different disciplines and fields. theactivity encompasses both basic research and applied efforts to transfer learningtechnologies to communities.¥new challenges in computation involves the development of methods andtools to discover, model, simulate, display, and understand complex systems andcomplicated phenomena and to manipulate large volumes of distributed data inreal time.in addition to the core components, there are currently six kdirelated initiatives in specific technological or content domains that are evolving in cooperationwith other federal agencies and privatesector organizations: (1) universal access,(2) digital libraries initiative, (3) next generation internet, (4) integrated spatialinformation systems, (5) functional genomics, and (6) digital government. theseinitiatives expressly address issues of how to design and develop technologiesthat can be used more effectively and by more people. they reflect experienceswith early information technology in a variety of contexts as well as ambitiousobjectives for progress.source: cstb (1998b).box 4.9 continuedthe nsfõs support for work related to social applications of it willprobably expand in coming years as it is deployed more ubiquitously inpublic life, as well as in homes and schools. the presidentõs informationtechnology advisory committee recommended increased federal funding for research on the social and economic impacts of it (pitac, 1999).the nsfõs information technology research (itr) initiative calls for researchin several areas of it that could be relevant to the problems identified inthis chapter, including humancomputer interfaces, information management, and the social and economic implications of it.25 its budget for theinitiative was $90 million in fy00, to be used to support a mix of small(about $150,000 per year), medium (about $1 million per year), and largemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications179($2 million to $4 million per year) projects. itr could serve as a mechanism for supporting largerscale efforts related to social applications ofit, perhaps even small centers. in addition, cise expects to allocate $30million to new information technology centers in fy00 to support fundamental research that spans the field of it and encompasses scientificapplications or addresses areas of social, ethical, and workforce issues(nsf, 2000). the challenge will be to find a suitable set of peers to reviewthe proposals, drawing from the it, social science, and domainspecificcommunities.interdisciplinary research in industryindustry tends to be less wedded to a disciplinary research structurethan universities are, and it has made a modest investment in interdisciplinary research motivated by the social applications of it. xerox corporation, for example, has long kept social science researchers on the staff ofits palo alto research center to help understand how people interactwith it systems in a variety of organizational settings. the work of thesocial scientists has been credited with improving the usability of xeroxcopiers and streamlining internal processes for disseminating the knowledge of field service technicians (bell et al., 1997). at&t employs anumber of economists to study the economics of the telecommunicationsindustry, and several computer manufacturers, apple computer amongthem, have hired psychologists and cognitive scientists to inform theirwork on humancomputer interfaces. in recent years, a number of internetbased companies have recognized the need to make their web sites moreusable and have begun to hire employees with degrees in the social sciences and humanities.26 these efforts tend to focus on issues closelyassociated with product design and implementation and are diminutivein comparison to research on the purely technical aspects of it.as the market for itrelated services continues to grow, a number oftraditional vendors of it products are becoming more deeply entwined inthe provision of largescale it systems and services. this trend could leadto greater investment in research on the social applications of it. at&tlabs, for example, recently announced a plan to fund research in thecomputer science and business departments of universities participatingin the internet 2 initiative, as a means of developing public key infrastructure for improving security across the internet. the collaboration will bemanaged by a board of experts from industry, government, and academiawho will invite participation from other players in those domains. inaddition, mit and microsoft corporation announced a partnership todevelop educational technologies. microsoft is investing $25 million inthe venture over 5 years to pursue a range of projects, from online learnmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180making it bettering to new models for academic publishing. the projects will be managedby a steering committee consisting of members of microsoft research andmit (robinson and guernsey, 1999).ibm took such efforts a step further by establishing an institute foradvanced commerce within its research division in january 1998. theinstitute is a forum for examining fundamental shifts in business andtrade in an information economy, with the goal of developing longterm,replicable electronic commerce solutions to meet corporate needs. itexplores emerging economic trends and technologies to better understand the technical, business, and social processes that are shaping theelectronic marketplace, and it has a business research center that studiesthe changing nature of work, industry structure, commerce, and technology. the institute began with an initial funding commitment of morethan $10 million and is home to more than 50 researchers with expertise init, economics, and social science. its board of directors consists of recognized it researchers as well as it executives from enduser industriessuch as automobile manufacturing and retail trade. work is under way inareas such as (1) the evolving marketplace, (2) privacy, (3) variable pricesand negotiated dealings, (4) managing the end customer, (5) the impact ofglobalization, (6) highperformance computing for commerce, and (7) system foundations (see box 4.10 for a listing of recent projects in the institute). as of early 2000, the institute had produced more than a dozenreports on topics such as analyzing clickstream data to understand webbased merchandising, businesstobusiness ecommerce, internet auctions,and pricing in a freemarket economy that contains software agents. italso has hosted several conferences on issues such as privacy in a networked world, gathering data on the information economy, and internetbased negotiation technologies.industry efforts to conduct interdisciplinary research on the socialapplications of it will undoubtedly be linked to business interests. indeed,ibm is establishing an internal organization to help move new technologies into the marketplace by engaging customers in research. of course, akey issue will be the ability of these programs to maintain a longtermoutlook while producing more immediate results to suit ongoing business development opportunities. time must pass before the programõseffectiveness can be more rigorously evaluated.multidisciplinary research centersthe notion of interdisciplinary academic departments is realistic inthe sense that similar organizations already exist, in the form of multidisciplinary research centers that involve technologists, social scientists,and end users. these centers range from centralized research facilitiesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications181box 4.10examples of projects pursued by ibm corporationõsinstitute for advanced commercethe ibm corporationõs institute for advanced commerce has pursued projectsin the following areas, among others:¥information economiesñthe practice of analyzing and simulating the futureto understand longterm directions when billions of sellers, buyers, and agentsinteract in the electronic marketplace;¥cyber auctionsñstrategies to apply competitive bidding strategies for ordinary online business activity rather than as a special case;¥internet ediñelectronic data interchange over the internet to link suppliers,retailers, factories, warehouses, and assembly lines into one ring of networkedsystems;¥micropaymentsñtechnologies to support very low cost purchases with lowtransaction costs and carefully controlled risks;¥echecksñthe equivalent of paper checks with the same financial propertiesas paper checks but with lower cost and greater ease of use; and¥ecouponsñthe equivalent of paper coupons online, offering new possibilities for selective marketing and aggressive pricing.source: ibm corporationõs institute for advanced commerce home page at <http://www.ibm.com/iac/>.that house researchers from many different disciplines under a single roofto virtual centers that enable interaction among researchers at differentinstitutions. their primary objective is to bring together researchers fromthe needed disciplines to jointly tackle a related set of problems, creatinga critical mass of expertise to drive broad progress. a previous report bythe national academy of sciences (1987) describes the benefits of thecenter mode of research as follows:centers contribute to science by enabling researchers to accomplish challenging, longer term projects that they could not undertake at all or asefficiently as individual investigators because of the need for stable support, large facilities or support teams, or simply the need to bring togetherdiverse experiences and expertise. by involving external parties as wellas students in their research activities, centers contribute to the morerapid transfer of new knowledge and to the training of professionalswith an awareness of potential applications.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182making it betterexperience to date suggests several factors that are important to thesuccess of such centers: (1) capable and enthusiastic center directors,(2) highquality investigators, (3) a mix of university and industryresearchers, (4) a research agenda approved by all of the main participants, (5) acceptable arrangements to handle intellectual property andprotect proprietary information, and (6) stable funding for long enough(perhaps 10 years) to produce real results.in addition to those factors, multidisciplinary research centers for thesocial applications of it might want to consider the following:¥focusña center might need to focus on a particular applicationdomain or a particular set of generic problems, such as ecommerce, medical informatics, or privacy.¥broad range of participantsñto ensure that the centers conductresearch motivated by social and economic needs as well as a desire forfundamental advances, they may need to link researchers from universities with industry vendors and experts from user organizations, including both companies and government agencies.¥links to testbeds or operational facilitiesñeach center would probablyneed to be linked to, and built on, large testbeds at one or more of theparticipantsõ sites so that researchers could have the sustained access toactual or nearoperational systems or applications that is required to gaininsight into realworld problems. the concern, of course, is that the individuals who manage major it activities do not want researchers tinkeringwith their computers and software or taking up too much of their operatorsõ time. one option is to give researchers access to these systems sothey can observe but not alter them. another option is to work withvendors and enduser organizations on new prototype systems andapplications. a third option is to work on experimental testbeds thatsimulate realworld needs and operations.universities and industry have established a number of research centers to pursue multidisciplinary research on it topics. the informationnetworking institute at carnegie mellon university, for example, wasestablished in 1989 to examine the technologies, economics, and policiesof global communication networks. the staff researchers have backgrounds in computer science, social science, cognitive science, and economics, and the institute has funding from both government and industry sources. the media lab at mit, the berkeley wireless research center,and the georgia center for advanced telecommunications technology(located at the georgia institute of technology) also draw researchersfrom different academic disciplines and seek support from a number ofindustrial sponsors as well as from government. the main challenge formaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications183such centersñin addition to the challenges of peer review and promotionoutlined aboveñis funding. to support a staff of, say, 30 researchers plusgraduate students, a center needs several million dollars a year, whichtends to come from industry memberships or from project funding byeither government or industry. sustaining such funding can be a challenging taskñespecially if funding is sought from organizations (such asend users of it) without a tradition of funding it research.at times, the government has helped establish research centers, eitherby concentrating research funding at particular universities (as darpahas done with mit, carnegie mellon, stanford, and the university ofcalifornia at berkeley) or by establishing more formal programs thataccept competitive proposals for the establishment or sustenance of alarger research center. the nsf, for example, has established programs tosupport science and technology centers (stcs) and engineering researchcenters (ercs), both of which have been extensively evaluated and provide valuable lessons that can inform the establishment of other types ofcenters, such as those being considered under the nsfõs itr initiative(described above). the stc program is described below. information onthe ercs is contained in box 4.11.the stc program, initiated in 1989, funds 28 centers that conductinterdisciplinary research in various fields of science (five of the centersconduct research directly applicable to it).27 the stcs receive, on average, $2.3 million a year from nsf, plus funds from industry, the universities that host the centers, and other federal agencies.28 external reviewsof the stc program have been favorable and have recommended continuation of the program. an assessment by the committee on science,engineering, and public policy (cosepup) found that òmost of the centers have been conducting outstanding researchó and that òthe stcs as awhole have done an excellent job of disseminating their results whetherthey are applied to basic science . . . or more applied fieldsó (nasnaeiom, 1996).29 others have noted that the center mode of research isnecessary to conduct largescale, complex, interdisciplinary research suchas that of an stc, and that the universities hosting stcs are removingtraditional barriers between academic disciplines and are combating thebiases against interdisciplinary work.some concerns have been raised about such centers: primarily theamount of time and energy dedicated to nonresearch missions. the nsfrequires the stcs to engage in outreach activities, such as educationalprograms for grades k12 in the communities in which they are located.the scale and type of the outreach programs vary from center to center,but their existence is a requirement for consideration for nsf funding(nsf, 1998). the cosepup report expressed concern that too much emphasis was being placed on community outreach and k12 education atmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184making it betterbox 4.11the engineering research center programthe national science foundation (nsf) began funding engineering researchcenters (ercs) in 1985 to create stronger links between industry and academicengineering programs and improve both the competitiveness of u.s. manufacturing industries and the quality of engineering education by making undergraduateand graduate training more relevant to industry needs. thirtyfour ercs havebeen established. each receives funding from nsf for 5 years, after which thefunding can be renewed for another 5 years.1 industrial participation is required.companies that participate in ercs must do more than contribute money: theymust contribute intellectually, as well, to encourage interaction between studentsand representatives of industry. the ercs average more than 30 industrial partners apiece.both an internal nsf review of the erc program in 1997 and an externalreview by the national academy of engineering (nae) in 1989 reported that ercscontributed significant benefits to the nation, both economically and educationally.2the nae review concluded that the ercs were responsible for novel research thatwas fundamentally important, making previously impossible interdisciplinary workfeasible and providing experiences for students òthat clearly excite them.ó thensf assessment reported that the ercs discover new industryrelevant knowledge at the intersections of the traditional disciplines and transfer that knowledgeto industry, while preparing a new generation of engineering leaders capable ofleading in industry by engaging successfully in teambased, crossdisciplinaryengineering to advance technology.more than half of the firms involved in the ercs that responded to an nsfsurvey reported that participation influenced the firmõs research agenda, and twothirds reported that erc participation increased the firmõs competitiveness. amajority of firms were able to improve products or processes, and 25 percent wereable to create new products or processes as a result of erc research. in addition,firms that employed graduates of the ercs reported that the employees wereòmore productive and effective engineers than peers in the same firms.ó more than80 percent of erc graduatesõ workforce supervisors reported that the graduateswere more prepared overall than their peers, contributed more technically, demonstrated a deeper technical understanding, were better at working in interdisciplinary teams, and had a broader technical understanding.the nae review questioned several aspects of nsf management of the program. primarily, it was concerned about the fact that the nsf had chosen toreduce promised funding levels at ercs to reduce costs per center. the reviewalso reported that the erc application process was too time consuming and thatthe selection process had been inconsistent over the years. concerns over community outreach were not a problem because ercs are not expected to engageextensively in such activities.1the nsf funding averages about $3 million per center, which represents approximately onethird of the total funding for the centers, the balance coming largely from industry.2the nae report concludes with the following comment: òif the federal government is to assistindustry in its fight to remain competitive, this is precisely the kind of program that it shouldsupport. if universities are to help build a technology base on which industry can draw, this isprecisely the kind of role that they should play. and if industry is to take a hand in shapingpolicies that influence its longterm wellbeing, then here is precisely the way to becomeengaged.ó see nae (1989).sources: national academy of engineering (1989), national science foundation (1997).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications185the expense of research and recommended that the outreach continue butbe given a lower priority (nasnaeiom, 1996).30 although they mayspend considerable time on center activities such as these, the scientistsinvolved report that they and their work benefit from the collegial interactions and exposure to the community and industry.31 also noted bycosepup was the importance of leadership to the success of an stc. ifthe center was to be more effective than just a group of individualresearchers who happened to share a building and some equipment, itsprojects needed to be well integrated and effectively managed. collaboration is an integral part of the center mode of research, but it must benurtured, because most academic researchers are accustomed to workingindividually or in small teams.32 lack of suitable leadership can undermine the value of a center.embedding information technology research in other disciplinesas computing and communications have become embedded in manysocial applications, the role of computing in some disciplines other thancomputer science and engineering has changed and expanded. becauseresearchers in other disciplines are faced with designing systems in whichit is an essential element, they need to understand basic it in its modernformñsoftware applications distributed over a heterogeneous computerand network infrastructureñmuch better than is typically the case. theyneed to appreciate both the opportunities and the limitations of it. animportant responsibility will be the conceptualization and analysis ofdistributed information system requirements and specifications and theacquisition of sophisticated software applications through internal development, outsourcing, or purchase.because it is becoming such a fundamental and pervasive aspect ofmany fields, it is natural for many departments on a university campus tobecome involved in research on the application of it to their respectivefields. it is becoming increasingly common for faculty and students inthese departments to be facile with it, and not infrequently the departments hire faculty members with a computer science background ordegrees who have experience in the appropriate application areas. this isnot a new phenomenonñit has a long history in other core disciplinessuch as mathematics and economics.33 initially, collaboration with outside experts is a sufficient solution, but eventually the subject becomesimportant enough to deserve inhouse expertise.accordingly, it can be expected that research related to the applications or implications of it will be expanded in departments as diverse asengineering (and the subspecialties thereof), business, the social sciences,arts and performance, music, and others. one or more new disciplinesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186making it bettermay arise out of these opportunities, much as computer science itselfarose out of the collaborative efforts of mathematicians, electrical engineers, and physicists. this is a natural process that needs to be encouraged. most likely some portion of the additional it research fundingbeing made available under the it2 initiative will be devoted to crossdisciplinary research of this kind. aside from setting up new programs(as outlined above), a number of other initiatives could help to establishinterdisciplinary programs or to embed it issues more firmly within otherdisciplines. for example,¥joint degree programs could be established between computerscience and engineering and other relevant disciplines, such as the subspecialties of engineering or business.¥restrictions on graduate programs in computer science could berelaxed to encourage students with backgrounds in other disciplines topursue degrees. conversely, students with undergraduate degrees incomputer science and engineering could be recruited into the graduateprograms of other disciplines.¥just as they have added expertise in mathematics and economics toother disciplines, universities could hire faculty members with strongbackgrounds in computing for other departments, in part so that theycould develop disciplinespecific courses and teaching materials in theapplication of it. initially, many of these faculty members would probablyhave computer science degrees and work experience in a particular application domain; typical combinations might include business and transportation it, computing embedded in mechanical systems, and so on.¥minors could be established in computer science and engineeringprograms and made available to students whose primary interests lie inother relevant disciplines.¥computing courses could be established for the benefit of a broadcrosssection of students again modeled after mathematics and economics.such courses could provide a breadth of understanding not availablefrom more specialized courses.¥postdoctoral training programs could be established for social science or computer science ph.d.s who wish to develop skills in research onit in context.in addition to promoting additional research on social applications,the expansion of interdisciplinary programs would help to redress theteaching and disciplinary imbalances that are likely to be created byincreased student interest in it. at the same time, this expansion wouldprovide a badly needed influx of graduates with strong backgrounds init combined with domainspecific understanding. many computer scimaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications187ence departments are today experiencing an enrollment surge similar tothat of the early 1980s. given current trends in technology, the wealth ofjob opportunities, and the excitement surrounding it, this enrollmentsurge may be more permanent this time. unfortunately, such growthoften comes at the expense of other engineering disciplines, even thoughmany of those disciplines continue to be vibrant and challenging andoffer excellent job opportunities.expanding the scope of informationtechnology researchthe research programs described in this chapter are initial forays intothe social applications of it. in the process, many different models arebeing created that will coexist and complement one another. theseresearch efforts will have to be redoubled, always informed by an awareness that multiple, complementary models of research exist. researchersin traditional it must broaden their outlook to encompass the social context for the technology, thereby changing what is thought of as the core ofit research.34 conversely, researchers in other academic disciplines andend users of it systems must become more actively engaged in it research.to achieve the desired balance, new models for funding and conductingresearch must be explored. only in this way will itõs potential to servesociety be fully tapped.bibliographyabt associates, inc. 1996 an evaluation of the nsf science and technology centers (stc)program, vol. i. abt associates, cambridge, mass.association for computing machinery (acm), special interest group on humancomputerinteraction. 1992. curricula for humancomputer interaction. acm press. availableonline at <http://www.acm.org/sigchi/cdg/cdg2.html>.bass, l., p. clements, and r. kazman. 1998. software architecture in practice. addisonwesley, reading, mass.bell, d.g., d.g. bobrow, o. raiman, m.h. shirley. 1997. òdynamic documents and situatedprocesses: building on local knowledge in field service,ó pp. 261276 in informationand process integration in enterprises: rethinking documents. t. wakayama, s. kannapan,c.m. khoong, s. navathe, and j. yates, eds. kluwer academic publishers, norwell,mass.benjamin, matthew. 1999. òclunky internet sites get social science treatment,ó investorõsbusiness daily, october 15, p. a6.bennis, w., and p. ward biederman. 1998. ònone of us is as smart as all of us,ó ieeecomputer 31(3):116117.bernstein, p.a., and e. newcomer. 1997. principles of transaction processing. morgankaufmann, san francisco.bijker, w.e., t.p. hughes, and t. pinch, eds. 1987. the social construction of technologicalsystems. mit press, cambridge, mass.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188making it betterbrown, john seely, and paul duguid. 2000. the social life of information. harvard businessschool press, boston.cairncross, f. 1997. the death of distance: how the communications revolution will changeour lives. harvard business school press, boston.clement, a. 1994. òcomputing at work: empowering action by lowlevel users,ó communications of the acm 37:5265.cohen, w.m., and d.a. levinthal. 1990. òabsorptive capacity: a new perspective onlearning and innovation,ó administrative science quarterly 35:128152.computer science and technology board, national research council. 1989. scaling up: aresearch agenda for software engineering. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1992. computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering.national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1994. information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1996. computing and communications in the extreme. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1997. more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs informationinfrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1998a. fostering research on the economic and social impacts of information technology:report of a workshop. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1998b. òadvancing the public interest through knowledge and distributed intelligence,ó computer science and telecommunications board, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999. summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management.national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.2000. the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age. national academy press, washington, d.c.davenport, t.h. 1993. process innovation: reengineering worth through information technology. harvard business school press, boston.deck, stewart. 1999. òhuman side key to data warehousing,ó computerworld (february15):14.diffie, w., and s. landau. 1997. privacy on the line: the politics of wiretapping and encryption. mit press, cambridge, mass.gibbs, w.w. 1994. òsoftwareõs chronic crisis,ó scientific american (september):8695.grenier, r., and g. metes. 1996. going virtual: moving your organization into the 21stcentury. prenticehall, englewood cliffs, n.j.grief, irene, ed. 1988. computersupported cooperative work: a book of readings. morgankaufman, san mateo, calif.hutchins, e. 1991. òorganizing work by adaptation,ó organization science 2:1439.iacono, s., and r. kling. 1984. òoffice routine: the automated pink collar,ó ieee spectrum (june):7376.jones, c. 1996. applied software measurement. mcgrawhill, new york.keen, p.g.w., and c. balance. 1997. online profits: a managerõs guide to electronic commerce. harvard business school press, boston.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications189kleinrock, l. 1974. òresearch areas in computer communication,ó computer communication review 25(1):3335, july.kling, r., and w. scacchi. 1984. òthe web of computing: computer technology as socialorganization,ó advances in computers 21:190.markus, m.l. 1987. òtoward a ôcritical massõ theory of interactive media: universalaccess, interdependence, and diffusion,ó communication research 14:491511.mcknight, l.w., and j.p. bailey. 1997a. òinternet economics: when constituencies collidein cyberspace,ó ieee internet computing 1(6):3037, december.mcknight, l.w., and j.p. bailey. 1997b. internet economics. mit press, cambridge, mass.messerschmitt, david g. 1999. networked applications: a guide to the new computinginfrastructure. morgan kaufmann publishers, san francisco.mitchell, w.j. 1996. city of bits: space, place, and the infobahn. mit press, cambridge, mass.national academy of engineering (nae). 1989. assessment of the national science foundationõs engineering research centers program. national academy press, washington,d.c.national academy of public administration (napa). 1995. national science foundationõsscience and technology centers: building an interdisciplinary research paradigm. napa,washington, d.c.national academy of sciences (nas), panel on science and technology centers. 1987.science and technology centers: principles and guidelines. national academy press,washington, d.c.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicine(nasnaeiom), committee on science, engineering, and public policy. 1996. anassessment of the national science foundationõs science and technology centers program.national academy press, washington, d.c.national science foundation (nsf). 1997. the engineering research centers (erc) program:an assessment of benefits and outcomes. nsf, arlington, va.national science foundation (nsf). 1998. science and technology centers (stc): integrativepartnerships. program solicitation nsf 9813. available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/stc/nsf9813.html>.national science foundation (nsf). 1999a. digital government. program announcementnsf 99102, computer and information science and engineering directorate. arlington, va.national science foundation (nsf). 1999b. ònational science board approves five newnsf science and technology centers,ó press release, july 29. available online at<http://www.nsf.gov/od/lpa/news/press/99/pr9945.htm>.national science foundation (nsf). 2000. fy2001 budget request to congress. availableonline at <http://www.nsf.gov/home/budget/start.htm>.oõleary, d.e. 1998. òenterprise knowledge management,ó ieee computer 31(3):5461.orr, j. 1990. òsharing knowledge, celebrating identity: war stories and communitymemory in a service culture,ó pp. 169189 in collective remembering: memory in society,d.s. middleton and d. edwards, eds. sage publications, beverly hills, calif.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future. national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, arlington, va., february. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.resnick, p., and h. varian, eds. 1997. òspecial section: recommender systems,ó communications of the acm 40(3):5658.robinson, sara, and lisa guernsey. 1999. òmicrosoft and mit to develop technologiestogether,ó new york times cybertimes, october 5. available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/library/tech/99/10/biztech/articles/05soft.html>.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190making it betterrosenberg, r.s. 1997. the social impact of computers, 2nd ed. academic press, new york.schofield, j. w. 1995. computers, classroom culture, and change. cambridge universitypress, cambridge, united kingdom.shapiro, c., and h. varian. 1998. information rules: a strategic guide to the network economy.harvard business school press, cambridge, mass.siegel, j.l., v. dubrovsky, s. kiesler, and t. mcguire. 1986. ògroup processes in computermediated communication,ó organizational behavior and human decision processes37:157187.sproull, l.s., and s. kiesler. 1991. connections: new ways of working in the networkedorganization. mit press, cambridge, mass.stonebraker, michael. 1998. òare we working on the right problems?ó sigmod record(acm special interest group on management of data) 27(2):496.stonebraker, m., p.m. aoki, r. devine, w. litwin, and m. olson. 1994. òmariposa: a newarchitecture for distributed data,ó pp. 5467 in proceedings of the 10th internationalconference on data engineering, ieee computer society press, new york.wald, matthew l. 2000. ònew systems for controllers may ease air traffic woes,ó newyork times, march 23. available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/library/tech/biztech/articles/23traffic.html>.walton, r.e. 1989. up and running: integrating technology and the organization. harvardbusiness school press, cambridge, mass.washington technology. 2000. òfederal agency it expenditures,ó january 10, p. 6.wulf, william. 1999. òa call for technological literacy,ó ieee computer applications inpower 12(2):10.notes1.the presidentõs information technology advisory committee (1999) identified ninemajor transformations that it will bring to society.2.other examples can be found to further demonstrate the introduction of it into anexisting application. one example is remote conferencing, which is intended to reproduceand improve on facetoface meetings or voiceonly teleconferencing as a means for groupinteraction. in business, enterprise resource planning applications are intended to improvestandard business processes such as human resources, finance, and sales, building on ahistory of more focused multifaceted systems for manufacturing resource planning.3.this topic was the subject of an earlier cstb study. see chapter 4 of cstb (1994).4.for example, the acquisition and use of wordprocessing applications in organizations are affected by status hierarchies. at one point managers bought wordprocessingsystems that were used by the wordprocessing pool. the users, lower status clerical personnel, had no control over what was used or its conditions of use (iacono and kling, 1984).suggestions for improvements in the application or its conditions of use that were made byusers were ignored because the users had low status (clement, 1994). as the function ofwordprocessing clerical personnel was taken over by white collar workers doing their ownword processing, those whitecollar workers encountered hidden interdependencies. forexample, people could not exchange documents with others who were using incompatiblesoftware. sociologists have been conducting analyses of the socially embedded nature of(apparently) standalone systems since the early 1980s (e.g., kling and scacchi, 1984). alsosee bijker et al. (1987) for a more general example of the social construction of technologicalsystems.5.the challenges and opportunities for designing systems that support a larger andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications191diverse population of users in a larger variety of applications, focusing on issues of usability, are outlined in cstb (1997).6.it is fairly easy to understand the capabilities needed by a word processing programor spreadsheet, although as collaborative authoring features have been added, these capabilities have become increasingly sophisticated and complex. a scientific computation hasa relatively welldefined form and capability. even a business application such as transaction support or management of accounts receivables or payroll records are reasonablywell defined and understood from the outset. broader application concepts, epitomized bythe expansive term òecommerce,ó inherently embrace numerous interactions among systems, organizations, and individuals at multiple levels.7.as used here, the term òeconomicó refers to a broad range of purposeful activity,including not only activity associated with various goods and servicesproducing industries but also that associated with research, learning, and government.8.òknowledge managementó is a new term that has the disadvantage of being a management buzzword, with the attendant hype, but if the hype can be set aside, the conceptcan be leveraged to set ambitious objectives for making better use of information throughtechnology.9.see stonebraker (1998) and stonebraker et al. (1994).10.for a detailed discussion of the complexities of intellectual property protection in adigital environment, see cstb (2000).11.the core role of governments is affected by it, particularly by the global nature ofnetworks. the concept of sovereignty rests largely on the geographical separation of jurisdictions, which is undermined on a global network. the trend toward more internationalgovernance mechanisms to deal with international issues is a natural response to globalization, but the trend is accelerated by global computer networking and the applications itsupports. issues such as privacy, restricted access for children, and taxation demand notonly new governance mechanisms but also new technologies to support them.12.here again, networking is a driver, building on historical improvements in transportation and telecommunications and resulting shifts in markets, organizational scope andscale, and institutional relationships. business processes and relationships associated withcontemporary it cannot be appreciated accurately without acknowledging that history.13.the cstb developed a powerful illustration of the value of systematic study of aspecific application domain. asked to look at crisis management, the board intrigued agroup of computer scientists with no knowledge of that domain by exposing them to theproblems of people whose jobs revolve around planning for, and responding to, civilianand military crises (cstb, 1996). the communication about the problems inherent in crisismanagement, in turn, led to new computer science research. some of the problems andsolutions were common to those found elsewhere, but even some of those had domainspecific requirements, as evidenced by a project participantõs observation that some of crisismanagement technology was like òdigital libraries with deadlines.ó14.it must be emphasized that social applications research is about technology as wellas social, economic, and political systems. its goal is to make technological progress moredependent on visionary attention to the uses and needs for that technology and not simplyon a nearterm, incremental commercial and technical research agenda. as it is encumbered with few fundamental limits and is mostly what we make of it, the goal is to aimtechnological advances in directions that offer the most benefit to society. this research isnot only about the impact of technology on society, as emphasized by the report of thepresidentõs information technology advisory committee (1999), but also about the impactof society and humanity on the requirements of future technologies, with the aim of maximizing the beneficial impact and minimizing the harmful ones.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192making it better15.these figures are from the office of management and budget as cited in washingtontechnology (2000).16.the digital government program is administered by the computer and informationsciences and engineering (cise) directorate at nsf but grew out of an effort by the federalinformation services and applications council (fisac) of the computing, information,and communications research and development (cic r&d) subcommittee of the nationalscience and technology council. fisac was created to stimulate and foster the migrationof technology from the it community to government application missions and informationservices communities and to identify challenges from applications to the it r&d community. it has participants from across the federal government (including the department ofhealth and human services, the department of defense, the national aeronautics andspace administration, the department of agriculture, the department of transportation,and the environmental protection agency). it (1) promotes the early application of advancedcomputing, information, and communications technologies and r&d capabilities to criticalfederal government missions, (2) supports multiagency leadership in efforts that demonstrate, deploy, and implement advanced computer and information technologies that havethe potential to be widely applicable to federal agency missions, (3) encourages pilot projectsto assess the critical computing, information, and communications technologies (e.g., security technologies) needed by applications, and (4) supports broad administration goals inthe international arena that eliminate barriers to applications. it drew inspiration fromcstb (1996).17.additional information on requirements for the digital government program isavailable in the program solicitation. see nsf (1999a).18.for example, the first solicitation, in september 1998, attracted 50 proposals (many ofthem for planning grants) that involved, among others, the bureau of the census, the bureauof labor statistics, the federal emergency management agency, the coast guard, thenational cancer institute, the department of justice, the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration, the u.s. geological survey, the department of energy, the department of housing and urban development, the general services administration, the federalreserve bank, the national institute of standards and technology, the national securityagency, the office of management and budget, and the environmental protection agency.19.information on ibmõs foak program was provided by armando garcia, ibm corporation, personal communication dated july 28, 1998, and by carol kovak, ibm corporation, personal communication dated april 20, 2000.20.as an example of this phenomenon, consider the case of the computers, organizations, policy, and society (corps) group within the department of information and computer science at the university of california at irvine. corps concerns itself with studiesof the organizational, economic, and social aspects of computing and has strengths inhumancomputer interaction, computersupported cooperative work, and informationretrieval. when the department was reviewed in 1997 as part of a mandatory 5year external review of its research and graduate programs, the review committee (which consistedprimarily of respected computer scientists) recommended that corps be removed fromthe department and placed somewhere else in the university, not because the research wasweak (on the contrary, the review committee declared it to be excellent and important), butbecause the researchers used perspectives informed by the social sciences and thereforecould not understand the engineering perspective at the heart of computer science. thedepartment did not take the review committeeõs advice (on this subject at least), but thecase demonstrates the challenges of rewarding interdisciplinary efforts in the framework ofhighly specialized disciplines.21.these and other attitudes and perceptions about barriers to crossdisciplinary collaboration were elicited by cstb director marjory blumenthal through conversations withmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research motivated by social applications193mit faculty members in computer science, electrical engineering, and social sciences, aswell as administrators, in 1998.22.historically, most civil engineering departments have been, by necessity, sociotechnicalsystems departments. similar divisions have been tried at many universities. in the 1960sand 1970s, the sloan foundation funded a number of universities to create divisions of thistype. other examples include mitõs energy laboratory and carnegie mellon universityõsrobotics institute, which go back 25 years or more. historically, these centers flourishedfor a number of years and then either atrophied or faded as funding shifted to differentsociotechnical system areas or the faculty champions retired.23.the nsf has also supported some work on sociotechnical systems through its directorate on social, behavioral and economic sciences (sbe), but most of that work has focusedon issues not directly associated with it. some researchers at the nexus of computing andthe social sciences claim that sbe has not been supportive enough of the centrality of technology in such research, but in recent years, the directorate has cosponsored work (with thecss program) on research challenges related to the social and economic impacts of it onintellectual property protection in a digital environment. see cstb (1998a) and cstb (2000).24.a òdear colleagueó letter posted on the cise web site in 1999 noted that increasedfuture funding was anticipated for the css program and called for proposals related totraditional css interests and the broader issues of social and economic implications of it.proposals could request up to $300,000 in funding for 36 months. the css expected tomake about 10 awards in fy99. see national science foundation, computing and information science and engineering directorate. undated. òdear colleagueó letter from michaellesk, division director, information and intelligent systems division. available online at<http://www.interact.nsf.gov/cise/html.nsf/html/cssdcl?opendocument>.25.indeed, the purpose of nsfõs itr program is to òenhance the value of informationtechnology for everyone.ó the complete list of areas in which nsf is soliciting proposalsunder the itr program is as follows: software, it education and workforce, humancomputer interface, information management, advanced computational science, scalableinformation infrastructure, social and economic implications of it, and revolutionary computing. letters of intent for proposals exceeding $500,000 were due in november 1999;those for smaller projects were not due until january 2000. the nsf anticipated makingawards under the itr program in september 2000. see nsf (1999a).26.many web designers do not understand user behavior, including why users oftenleave sites soon after going to them. in an attempt to understand a userõs experience of aweb site, modem media uses the technique of role playing, in which employees pretend tobe users that fit a certain profile. modem media intends to hire psychologists and anthropologists to expand its efforts to understand user behavior. meanwhile, sapient announcedplans to buy elab because of elabõs knowledge of òpatterns of behavior that reveal anddrive the nature of experience.ó however, web site usability expert jakob nielsen sayssocial scientists are not the answer, and that companies should focus instead on conductingusability tests with actual customers. see benjamin (1999).27.the stc program was initiated in response to president ronald reaganõs 1987 stateof the union address, which proposed the establishment of federal centers to promote u.s.economic competitiveness. of the original 25 centers funded from the first two programsolicitations, 23 remain; 5 new centers were granted funding in july 1999. see nsf (1999b).28.industrial support is not a requirement for the centers, but the stcs average eightindustrial partners per center. see national academy of public administration (1995).29.a bibliometric analysis conducted by abt associates, inc., found that the journalpublications of stc researchers were cited 1.69 times as often as the average u.s. academicpaper published and that the journals in which stc scientists published had greater influence than the average scientific journal. in addition, papers from stc researchers are citedmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194making it bettertwo to four times as often in u.s. patents as the average academic research paper. see abtassociates (1996).30.in most cases, outreach did not significantly interfere with the conduct of research,but it did in the case of at least one stc. the center was told after one nsf site visit that itdid not conduct enough outreach programs, so it began participating in so many outreachactivities that after another nsf site visit, the center was told that it did not conduct enoughresearch. in response to the first sitevisit report, almost all of the time of the postdoctoralscientists and almost all the resources of the center in the summer months were devoted tok12 outreach programs.31.most of the time is spent by a centerõs director and administration, and only a smallproportion of the time is spent by the actual researchers.32.the abt associates evaluation of the stc program was even more favorable than thecosepup report. abt writes that òindividual centers have produced significant researchachievements in fundamental knowledge and the development of research tools, and haveidentified a range of downstream impacts of this work.ó abt found the centers to beparticularly flexible and effective in responding to scientific opportunities and reportedthat òindustry partners consider their affiliations with the stcs to be immensely beneficial.ó in addition, the abt report viewed the k12 educational programs more favorablythan did the cosepup report. see abt associates (1996).33.as an analogy, consider the roles of mathematics and economics in other fields. asthey became increasingly critical to a number of fieldsñmathematics to physics and economics to business or agriculture, for exampleñcollaboration as a way of addressing theresulting challenges soon became inadequate. rather, domain experts felt the need to become sufficiently adept at mathematics or economics to contribute directly in these areas.the situation is similar with it, which is becoming an integral part of the sociotechnicalapplications within which it is embedded; that is, the artificial separation of applicationspecific and information technology expertise is no longer effective. a solid grounding inmathematics is considered essential to the natural sciences and engineering, and a solidgrounding in economics is considered essential to business, agriculture, and a number ofother fields. similarly, modern forms of it should be considered normal and essential partsof the background in a number of other fields. these fields include particularly the education of future engineers in fields as diverse as civil, mechanical, aerospace, electrical, andnuclear engineering, and also the education of future business managers (many of whomspecialize in the social sciences and humanities as well as business). a broad crosssectionof students in other natural and social science disciplines also need to take at least a foundation course in these technologies, analogous to a first course in economics.34.this continual expansion of what is considered the core is healthy and needs to bestrongly encouraged. two fields that were once considered applications of computers arecomputer graphics and database storage systems. after computer science researchers beganto make progress on these topics and publish papers and the capabilities became a normalpart of many systems, they gradually came to be considered part of the core of the computer science research community. the technologies surrounding ecommerce are in theprocess of making this transition. controversy surrounding the publication of the cstbreport computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering in 1992suggests that change is not always welcome or even understood. see cstb (1992).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1955expanding the scale and scope ofinformation technology researchthe twentyfirst century begins with unprecedented opportunitiesto use information technology (it) to meet a growing number ofsocietal needs. the payoff from investments in it research initiatives launched a half a century ago have become manifest: it has movedfrom the laboratory to the office, store, and home and has been incorporated into personal belongings of all types. it is also transforming countless aspects of business, government, and social interaction from education to health care to commerce, and as the potential of it grows, so, too,do usersõ expectations for it. more people want it to do more things,more easily, with more trustworthiness, and with more reach into society.the it research community has many ideas about the ways in whichcomputer science and engineering can be developed and applied to meetthose expectations and new ones that will emerge as further progress ismade. paradoxically, however, it looks as if it will be more difficult tomake practical progress. the potential of it and the challenges that mustbe overcome to realize that potential are rising in tandem, boosting thelevel of required investments. everyone can see the growth of marketsfor it goods and services, but the need for more research is less obvious.nevertheless, the range of emergent issues for it research to address isincreasing, calling for an expanded research agenda.many reports call for more funding for it research. such pleas comein the face of the misperception that companies that sell large amounts ofit products and services and that generate large revenues or market valuations are capable of the types of research needed. many reports alsomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196making it betterpoint out that academic research, funded largely by the federal government, is essential for expanding the knowledge base.1 building on thatwork, this report also advocates a large research effort that fostersadvances in a number of important, specific areas of it. at the same time,it goes beyond previous appeals by arguing that the metamorphosis of itfrom distinct devices (both hardware and software) into complex, largescale societal infrastructure calls for a shift in the emphases of it research,which in turn requires different approaches to the organization and conduct of it research. traditional mechanisms for funding and conductingit research are not necessarily attuned to todayõs research challenges, sonew mechanisms must be developed. attention to the ways in whichresearch is supported and conducted is more important than ever, giventhe allure held by industry over the past few years for the talent thathistorically filled the ranks of graduate students and faculty. todayõsreality is that research competes with other activities, and research programs must emphasize compelling and important problems that willattract and retain talented individuals.this chapter summarizes the study committeeõs primary recommendations for ensuring the continued wellbeing of the nationõs researchbase in it. the premise, based on the arguments put forth in the preceding chapters, is that it research can no longer focus almost exclusively onthe it components that have been the hallmark of past initiatives butmust expand to include commensurate research efforts on the problemsof largescale systems and the social applications that they support. thechapter recommends the continuation of ongoing and substantial funding and support for traditional areas of it research, but it also calls fornew research that emphasizes largescale systems and social applications.it recommends both meaningful efforts to promote something that hasproven difficult to achieveñinterdisciplinary researchñand diversification in the modes of supporting and conducting such research. if successful, these research efforts could ultimately improve education in largescale systems and social applications, helping to create a workforce betterable to research, develop, and use it systems.implicit in the recommendations is a recognition that the it researchcommunity is stepping into uncharted territory in which many new researchchallenges are arising and even familiar problems can assume new forms.the recommendations therefore seek to foster experimentation with avariety of approaches to bringing together diverse communities with different sets of expertise and different perspectives on the issues of itresearchñcharacteristics that have contributed to the nationõs history ofsuccess in it (cstb, 1999a). they lay out the desired characteristics ofresearch mechanisms but recognize that multiple approaches may needmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research197to be tried, evaluated, and fitted to the particular characteristics of theinstitutions involved.the recommendations are organized according to the group of stakeholders, decision makers, and policy makers to which they are directed:those in government, universities, and industry. as the discussion notes,however, these groups will have to interact to ensure that the set ofresearch programs put in place will meet societyõs growing needs for itand assure that this and future generations can safely depend on itsystems.recommendations for governmentthe federal government has an important role to play in helping toexpand the it research agenda. government agencies have long been animportant source of funding for the it research community as well as forthe other research communities that may need to become more closelyintegrated into it activities. although federal expenditures for it researchare dwarfed by those of industry, they constitute the overwhelming majority of research funds provided to universities and thus are critical in supporting longterm fundamental research that can benefit a wide range ofcompanies, both established companies and startups. moreover, becausefederal funding is so pervasive in academia, it can be used as a lever tohelp direct academic research toward needed areas. in doing so, it can laythe groundwork for more subtle transformations of research and development (r&d) in industry as well. the committee makes four recommendations to help guide this process.recommendation 1. the federal government should continue to boostfunding levels for fundamental information technology research,commensurate with the growing range of research challenges.the first step in expanding the scope of it research is to ensure theavailability of sufficient funding to address the growing range of researchproblems that must be tackled. the scope of inquiry for itrelated research is clearly growing (as is the need for more creativity and flexibilityin how funds are allocated and spent). the unprecedented growth in thecomplexity, size, and social engagement of the it systems now beingdeployed calls for fundamentally new concepts, abstractions, and methodologies to master and harness it for the good of the society. attainingthose concepts, abstractions, and methodologies is the goal of fundamental research. hence, increased funding is needed not only to supportcontinued advances in the capabilities of it components (e.g., increasedprocessing power, storage capacities, and communications bandwidth)making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198making it betterbut also to develop solutions to the problems posed by largescale systems and social applications of it. the committee views components,systems, and applications as three equally important areas for research,noting that they play roles in it analogous to the roles of biomedicalresearch, physiology, and medicine in the health sciences. each areainforms work in the others, and fundamental scientific understanding isneeded in all three areas to ensure a properly functioning system.as noted above, the government is the primary vehicle for support offundamental it research. although industry funds a considerable amountof research (some of which is fundamental research) in its own laboratories and in universities, intense competitive pressures and the need togenerate positive returns for investors force companies to direct more oftheir r&d funding to projects with more certain results and more obviousapplicability to market needs. the potential social return on investmentsin research is enormous, but these investments will not be made withoutthe governmentõs lead.it is not feasible to specify a precise dollar amount by which itresearch funding should increase, but the increases recommended by thepresidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac) andrequested by the clinton administration for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 arerepresentative of the magnitude of the annual increases needed for sometime to come (pitac, 1999). government program managers report thatthey receive far more highquality research proposals than they can fund(a situation that is common in other fields, too). how the money is spentis at least as important as the amount. researchers in the field observed,in testimony to the committee and in other contexts, that the allocation offederal funding shows less vision and more emphasis on process than itdid in the middle of the twentieth century. the historic comparison isimportant, because there is a correlation between the approach to fundingmanagement and the yield. todayõs circumstances demand a more visionary, less processbound approach, as will be discussed below, because theneeds of largescale systems and social applications can be met only withinnovative, revolutionary work. the defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa), in particular, has a history of supporting revolutionarywork, and this orientation should be reinforced and encouraged.recommendation 2. the national science foundation and thedefense advanced research projects agency should establish significant programs of fundamental research in largescale informationtechnology systems.largescale it systems pose difficult technical (and nontechnical)problems that are manifested in a variety of ways: delays in designingmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research199and deploying new it systems, failures of operational systems, inabilityto add new functionality to existing systems, and unexpected behavior.the direct cost of these failures is high.2 by some estimates, between 70and 80 percent of all major system development efforts are never finished,seriously overrun their cost and development time objectives, or fail toprovide the desired functionality. hundreds of millionsñeven billionsñof dollars are spent on such failed efforts. the indirect costs of fragilesystems are even greater because of the potential for widespread damagefrom failures of critical it infrastructures used for controlling the electricpower grid, communications systems, or financial transactions.problems with largescale systems are not new, but the steady push tobuild and use such systems means there is an imperative to address thoseproblems now. system failures are not only the stuff of daily news, theyare also the stuff of congressional hearings and inquiries by regulatoryagencies. improved techniques for designing and implementing largescale systems will require fundamental research to build a stronger scientific base for understanding such systems. a steppedup research programshould include not only case research that examines particular systemsalso methodology research that seeks common architectures, techniques,and tools that can influence a wide range of largescale systems. twoelements are key to success: the enabling resources (i.e., funding and thetalent it nurtures, infrastructure, access to appropriate artifacts) and thecultivation of a motivated community of researchers.although all federal agencies face problems with largescale systems,darpa and the national science foundation (nsf) are the best positioned to lead research efforts in this area because it needs fundamentalscience and engineering and because they have the longest history ofmanaging related research and the closest contact with the appropriateresearch communities. both darpa and nsf have a number of programs in place that address elements of the largescale systems problem,but their programs have not been linked to form the larger thrust thatwould give this problem area the high profile it deserves. a steppedupprogram would help create the critical mass of researchers needed toaddress largescale systems issues and help form a research communityaround this set of problems. strong federal leadership of the sort thatdarpa andñto a lesser, but growing, extentñnsf have demonstratedin the past could bring about a more comprehensive approach.the development of the fundamental internet technology provides amodel: effective program management led a dispersed group of researchersto work on separate projects toward a shared goal. a dynamic mix ofpeople and institutions participated in different ways and at differenttimes according to their interests and capabilities and the needs of theproject or program. both darpa and the nsf should experiment withmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200making it betterprogram management to promote such leadership, creative research, andcommunity efforts to tackle todayõs largescale systems challengesñwhich are, of course, similar to some of the early internet challenges.these agencies will need to ensure the quality of the research while allowing researchers sufficient freedom to pursue fundamental, visionary work.the research conducted under a broad program on largescale systemsshould pursue a diversity of problems and approaches. as described ingreater detail in chapter 3, it should do the following:¥support both theoretical and experimental work;¥provide small, mediumsize, and large awards to support individual investigator research, small teams of researchers, and larger collaborative efforts;¥pursue a range of approaches to largescale systems problems, suchas improved software design methodologies, system architecture, reusable code, and biological and economic models;¥attempt to address the full scope of largescale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, andpredictability;3and¥provide academic researchers some form of access to largescalesystems.access to largescale systems could be provided in any of the severalforms: researchers could team with organizations that deploy or operatesuch infrastructures; they could create separate experimental testbeds thatwould allow them to develop, demonstrate, and test new techniqueswithout worrying about interfering with operational systems; or existingsystems (such as portions of the internet) could be better instrumented toprovide researchers with the kinds of data they need for analysis. somecombination of these approaches will undoubtedly be needed.given the broadening circle of agencies interested in and involvedwith it research, darpa and nsf should attempt to involve in thisresearch program other federal agencies that operate largescale it systems and that would benefit from advances in their design. in otherwords, participants should include not only other agencies with a historyof funding it research (such as the department of energy, the nationalaeronautics and space administration, and the national institutes ofhealth) but also agencies that have not traditionally funded it researchbut have large budgets for developing and procuring it systems (such asthe internal revenue service, the federal aviation administration, andthe social security administration). doing so may help to ensure thatresearchers have access to research facilities that would allow them tomaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research201better understand the problems faced in largescale system design, development, and operation. agencies such as the deaprtment of health andhuman services and the national institute of standards and technologymight be able to expand their support for fundamental research and system problems, too.one approach for engaging a diverse set of agencies in an it researcheffort would be to build a vigorous program within nsf to understandthe internet and make it more robust. this effort could build on ongoingactivities, such as the next generation internet program, which involvesseveral federal agencies, including darpa, nsf, nasa, doe, and nih(via the national library of medicine).4 the idea would be to use theinternet as the experimental testbed and build an institutional structurethat facilitates research on it. in addition to generating useful technicalresults, this internetastestbed approach could evaluate whether theapproaches the committee suggests are effective in practice.recommendation 3. federal agencies should increase support forinterdisciplinary work on social applications of information technology that draws on the expertise of researchers from it and otherdisciplines and includes end users of it systems.people use it. that has long been the case. what is different now andfor the future is that, as more people use it, and in more ways, they areless likely to be expert users or interested in how it works (as opposed tohow well it works); furthermore, they want to make more and better useof it in ways that affect their lives more intimately and directly than theearly systems did in scientific and backoffice business applications. theseare issues with which the traditional it research community has littleexperience. successful work on the social applications of it will requirenew computer science and engineering as well as research that is coupledmore extensively and effectively to other perspectivesñperspectives fromother intellectual disciplines and from the people who use the end results,that is, the goods, services, and systems that are deployed. for some timenow, the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb),echoed by pitac and the clinton administration, has been calling forresearch on the societal impacts of it; the present committee is emphasizing a complementary, technical sort of research that will result in it withfewer adverse and more positive impacts.the ongoing information technology for the twentyfirst century(it2) initiative, in particular the social, economic, and workforce component of the it research (itr) program at the nsf, provides a basis foraddressing both the impacts of the systems and new approaches to them;the committee, however, envisions a more substantial effort that interactsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202making it betterwith the rest of the it research effort. the bases for such work are alreadyevident within programs supported by darpa, nsf, and other agencies.the nsfõs computing and social sciences program and digital government program are important steps in the right direction, and they couldserve as models or launching points for more expansive efforts if theyprove successful in the long term, but at present, they are limited in sizeand scope. broader programmatic support is needed, along with theattendant nurturing of a research community. the major expansion thatis warranted should have the following characteristics, which are discussed below:¥research support provided through a variety of mechanisms;¥explicit participation of end users and systems integrators in theresearch process;¥participation of federal agencies that are major users of it systems,not just the traditional funders of it research;¥access to operational systems and support for testbeds;¥management and oversight provided by traditional funders of itresearch; and¥pursuit of fundamental knowledge of the interaction between itand the context in which it is deployed.research support mechanisms should range from small, singleinvestigator grants to mediumsize collaborations among researchers fromdifferent disciplines, to activities characteristic of research centers thatenable large numbers of researchers to interact for extended periods oftime and across multiple projects. significant progress will not be madeon social applications through singleinvestigator research alone; effortswill be needed across the full range of program scales and scopes. thensf has recognized this need in its solicitation for the itr program, whichcalls for grants of many sizes, including for the establishment of centers tofocus on social, economic, and workforce issues. the computing andinformation science and engineering (cise) directorate has limited experience in managing such efforts, but it can build on nsfõs experience withscience and technology centers, engineering technology centers, andsupercomputing centers. it will need to ensure that centers maintain astrong focus on research and produce highquality results through periodicevaluations.another way to organize larger research programs would be to clusteractivities around a project rather than around a center per se, as darpaand, to a lesser extent, nsf have done in the past. program managerscould pick specific problems to work on (e.g., a design project, such as airtraffic control, control of the electric grid, or payment for health caremaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research203services), establish research goals to be pursued, facilitate the relationshipbetween the research community and the system to be studied, and issuea call for proposals to participateñmuch as has been done with the digitallibraries initiative.5 the life of such projects, unlike that of the center,would not be fixed at 5 or 10 years but would be linked to the naturalcycle of study implied by the testbed artifact. such a project would bemore dynamic than a center, allowing a changing mix of researchers andinstitutions to participate in different phases of the project as their interests and the needs of the project suggest as opposed to binding themtogether for a set period of time. program managers at darpa and nsfwould exercise leadership by establishing a common direction for all theresearchers, even if they were not all working under the same contract. aprocess of this kind would draw on a set of programmatic goals to motivate research rather than emphasize a particular form of organizingresearchers. it would more closely resemble the organization of earlyresearch on the internet rather than the organization of nsfõs science andtechnology center program.research programs motivated by social applications must engage endusers and system integrators in order to better understand the problemsthat people and organizations are confronting with it systems and therange of potential solutions and to gain the inspiration for research. itmay be unrealistic to expect end users and systems integrators to actuallyconduct research, at least initially, but they should at least participate onadvisory boards or otherwise contribute actively to the research process.over time, they should play a more active role in funding research andperhaps even in conducting it. the differences between them and theresearch community in culture and approach to the use of time andresources may make it difficult to engage them, but once the benefits aredemonstrated, the committee expects that end users and system integrators will become more supportive of such work.the participation of federal agencies that are major users of it systems is also important. government systems are, by definition, largescale artifacts of public interest; they are, by observation, artifacts thatpresent problems and opportunities that challenge the state of the art.6the difficulties experienced in getting these systems right show the limitations of current technology and of the skill base in industry. government agencies would save money and improve their productivity andservice quality if there were a better understanding of ways to reliablyand efficiently design, operate, maintain, and upgrade largescale systems and social applications of it. research based on government systems would undoubtedly improve the knowledge base for privatesectorsystems as well. designing a program for agencies that lack the funding,personnel, and orientation to research will be more difficult than designmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204making it bettering conventional research programs, but again, the digital governmentprogram, which has forged links between many agencies, should beleveraged, at least to explore what is possible and to initiate experiments.the coordinating structure of digital government, the federal information systems advisory committee (fisac), is charged with buildingbridges between the it research community and government agencies,and its activities should be encouraged and strengthened. experimentation will be necessary, because differences among agencies will demanddifferent mechanisms for research linkages. some activities underfisacõs purview (e.g., those associated with universal access) hold greatpotential for social applications research.an important element of efforts to better understand the social applications of itñwhich are based on largescale systemsñis researcher accessto operational it systems for purposes of observation, data collection, andanalysis. many research proposals should include plans for gaining suchaccess, which could come through the participation of enduser organizations, as described above. access to operational systems for testing anddemonstrating proposed solutions would also be desirable but may notbe feasible because of the need to keep many operational systems runningalmost continuously and the uncertainties inherent in introducing newelements into an existing system. accordingly, researchers will need todevelop plans for testing new research results in more limited testbedsystems, in which outcomes can be evaluated before the solutions aredeployed in operational systems.although end users and systems integrators must be encouraged toparticipate in research on social applications, organizations more experienced in managing it research (such as darpa and nsf within thefederal government) will need to oversee such programs, as is being donein the digital government initiative. in the committeeõs judgment, theseorganizations are the best qualified to ensure that the research maintainsa focus on longterm, fundamental results rather than devolving intoapplied research and development and targeting the needs of specific endusers. early experience with the digital government program demonstrates that what end users perceive as research is often seen by the itresearch community as development. a strong focus on fundamentalresearch is necessary if leading it researchers are expected to participatein the research program and if meaningful, broadly applicable insight isto be gained.finally, the work funded in this area should pursue a fundamentalknowledge of the interaction between it and the context in which it isdeployed. a central element of the overall program must be to inform itresearch as well as understand the social and economic implications of itapplications. one challenge will be to establish effective peer reviewmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research205mechanisms to ensure the quality of the research. because reviewers willneed to be drawn from the range of disciplines encompassed by an individual proposal, programs in specific areas need to be announced beforehand (such as digital libraries) so that appropriate sets of reviewers can beassembled to evaluate groups of related proposals.recommendation 4. the bureau of the census should work withthe national science foundation to develop more effective procedures for classifying data on federal and industry investments ininformation technology r&d that better account for the dynamicnature of the industry.better data on industry investments in r&d would allow for betterinformed policymaking about research support, especially levels of funding. such data are currently gathered for the nsf by the census bureau,but they are highly inconsistent from one year to the next, owing largelyto frequent reclassifications of companies into, out of, and among theindustry sectors most closely allied with it.7 significant improvementscould probably made without increasing the cost of data collection bysimply aggregating the data in a more consistent way from one year to thenext. admittedly, the dynamic nature of the it industry and waves ofmergers and acquisitions among major players can make company classification difficult, yet existing procedures for classification appear to givepriority to accurate reporting for a given year rather than across years.moreover, they tend to categorize a firm according to the industry classification that best describes the composition of its domestic payroll ratherthan its main source of revenues. as firms move production overseas orchange the workforce mix through mergers, acquisitions, spinoffs, andoutsourcing, their industry classifications can change dramatically, producing equally dramatic changes in reported research.8 large, diversified it companies would appear to be most prone to reclassificationbecause their lines of business span several industry sectors. they alsotend to have the largest r&d budgets, so reclassifications can have a largeeffect on the reported, aggregate statistics.efforts are under way to replace the standard industrial classification codes with a set of north american industrial classification systemcodes that will provide better coverage of the information and information technology industries.9 this change is unlikely to have a significanteffect on the quality of industrial r&d data in the it industries unlessimproved methods are developed for classifying firms into the new categories and ensuring greater consistency in such classifications over time.attempts to improve the collection and reporting of it r&d in industryshould include efforts to develop more robust procedures for classificamaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206making it bettertion that are less sensitive to small changes in company structure. thegoal should be to facilitate the compilation and reporting of more consistent sets of data series describing past, present, and future investments init r&d. these issues will become even more important as the nationcontinues its course toward an information economy and it becomesmore pervasive.recommendations for universitieswhereas government and industry will be the primary sources offunding for an expanded it research agenda, universities will be primarysites for conducting that research. they will also be the primary institutions for educating the next generation of researchers, developers, andusers of largescale systems and social applications. research is closelytied to education, forming part of the educational process of graduate andsome undergraduate students and generating additional knowledge thatcannot be conveyed through more conventional course work. universitieshave a long tradition of conducting fundamental research on it that hascontributed to innovation in industry. this tradition must be extended tothe problems of largescale systems and social applications. this will notbe an easy task in todayõs environment. universities are not presently setup to address these important areas, and they will need to change if theyare to help make it better. many computer science and engineeringdepartments are caught up in internetrelated technologies, which willmake it hard to shift attention to issues of largescale systems and socialapplications when so much can be done using a traditional componentoriented approach. nevertheless, there may be pockets of interest thatcan be motivated in the near term. in the longer term it may become moreapparent that many of the most successful internetbased innovations arethose that pursue social applicationsñwhich face the challenges of largescale it systems. several steps can be taken to shift attention to largescale systems and social applications.recommendation 5. universities should take steps to increase theability of faculty members and students to participate in interdisciplinary research related to information technology and researchon largescale systems.given the tendency of faculty members and other researchers to orient their research to conventional disciplinary pursuits, they will not beable to pursue interdisciplinary research focused on social applications ofit without additional incentives and the removalñor relaxationñof existing barriers to interdepartmental collaboration. increases in the amountmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research207of research funding available for interdisciplinary work (as recommendedabove) would be an important means of achieving both objectives, butuniversities should also implement changes that will enable their faculties to work at the intersection of multiple disciplines and help researchstaffs to win interdisciplinary research funding. the steps they take willvary from one university to another, reflecting the relative strengths andweakness of different departments and the relationships among them,but several areas are ripe for examination and should be addressed, asnoted below. efforts to enable university research in largescale systemsand the social applications of it will also enrich educational opportunities in these areas, enhancing the nationõs ability to conduct research on itand make better use of it.recommendation 5.1. universities should ensure that their hiring,review, and tenure processes are aligned with the interdisciplinarynature of the research that this report recommends.as noted in chapter 4, one barrier to interdisciplinary research inuniversities is the difficulty of hiring, promoting, and granting tenure tofaculty members who pursue interdisciplinary work. their work is oftenviewed through a disciplinary lens that does not properly appreciate workthat crosses disciplinary boundaries. within the computer science community, work on applications is seldom seen as a valuable or respectabletarget of research. any of a number of mechanisms could be used toaddress this problem, depending on the university. some universitieshave established interdisciplinary schools, divisions, or departments thatcan hire and promote faculty members who specialize in multiple interdisciplinary areas, but this is not necessarily the only solution. theseformalized structures also contribute to the universityõs educational missions that help train future generations of students and itrelated workers.other universities have found ways to establish tenure committees andreview processes that more accurately assess interdisciplinary research,even if that research takes place within a traditional academic department.computer science departments or university administrators could alsopromulgate policies stating that research in interdisciplinary or applicationsoriented areas will be given full consideration in the promotion and tenureprocess.10 any one of these approachesñor a combination of themñcould be appropriate. the key is to ensure that disciplinarybased reviewprocedures do not disfavor work at the intersection of disciplines whilesimultaneously ensuring the quality of research. all interdisciplinaryresearch cannot be of high quality, and quality control is especially important in fields with growing budgets.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208making it betterrecommendation 5.2. universities should encourage closer tiesbetween faculty and student researchers and their counterparts inindustry, especially in companies with pressing needs to resolveproblems of largescale systems and social applications of information technology.the forging of stronger ties between universities and companiesengaged in building or operating largescale systems or social applications of it could help university researchers to gain (1) greater exposureto, and insight into, the challenges faced by these types of organizationsand (2) access to some elements of the research infrastructure. one wayto strengthen such ties is to appoint representatives from such companiesto departmental review committees and advisory boards. another mechanism, which should be strongly encouraged, is to promote sabbaticals andinternships to facilitate direct interaction between university researchers andindustry.one of the most effective mechanisms for transferring knowledgeand expertise is to have people work together. indeed, a number ofleading researchers require all their ph.d. students without industrialexperience to spend one summer or semester in industry to gain whatthey consider invaluable experience.11 the problem with pursuing suchan approach in the areas of largescale systems and social applications isthat few it enduser companies have internship programs for it researchers(most it companies with research labs have such programs). universityadministrators should work with such companies to establish trial internship programs that could be expanded if they prove successful. officialswill need to work with funding agencies and foundations to secure fundsfor such programs, at least until the enduser organizations become convinced of their value and provide additional support themselves. university administrators should also promote interest in these programs amongfaculty and students. some faculty members may be hesitant to encourage students to take time away from their university laboratory, especially if their absence would create staffing problems for critical researchprojects. but if the internship programs are designed to benefit the students, and spending time in industry is important for students, then suchissues as time away from professors and staffing research projects shouldbe planned for in advance. if the internships are as successful as thiscommittee envisions, their contribution to the quality and effectiveness ofit research will quickly become apparent.recommendation 6. senior faculty members should take the lead inpioneering research on largescale systems and social applicationsof information technology.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research209universities need to find ways in which junior faculty can work onimportant, interesting problems. in most cases, junior faculty membersare at a disadvantage in pioneering new research in interdisciplinaryareas. concerns about gaining tenure within the existing disciplinarystructure of most universities can dissuade them from proposing revolutionary research ideas early in their careers, as can the difficulties inherentin securing federal funding for interdisciplinary research. the recommendations above are intended to alleviate some of these problems, butthey do not address them all. the trend away from large grants to university research labs and toward smaller grants to individual investigatorshas further limited the ability of senior faculty to support innovative workby junior faculty. the expanded research programs outlined above onlargescale it systems and social applications of it could address part ofthis problem by making additional funding available, but the leadershipof senior faculty members will also be important in legitimizing newresearch areas. by building on the vision of research in largescale systems and social applications that is laid out in this report and communicating that vision to the research community and to funding agencies anduniversities, senior faculty will help create more opportunities for juniorfaculty to strike out in these new directions.recommendations for industryindustry is an important partner in any attempt to expand the scaleand scope of it research. it both funds and conducts it research, and,ultimately, it must harvest the fruits of research to develop new products,processes, and services for clients. in the eyes of some, industry is alreadythe leader in work on largescale systems and social applications becauseit is intimately involved in developing systems to support innovativeapplications in commerce, publishing, health care, education, and manyother fields. yet, industryõs development activities may have exceeded itsresearch capacity, contributing to the deployment of systems that are notwell understood. as noted in chapter 2, most industry research is concentrated in the vendor communityñthe companies that produce it components (e.g., hardware, software, and devices). these companies mustcontinue to invest in research that enables continued progress in it, butthey and other organizations that use it need to become more involved inresearch that addresses largescale systems and social applications.recommendation 7. organizations that are significant end users ofinformation technology systems should actively seek opportunitiesto engage in it research.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210making it betteras it becomes increasingly intertwined in the operations of enduserorganizations in the public and private sectors, there is an increased needto bring such organizations into the research process. these organizationscan contribute to the it research base through any of a variety of mechanisms, some of which were outlined above: by funding research in otherorganizations (such as universities), by conducting research themselves(although most end users currently lack this capability), by forming industry consortia, or by providing input into ongoing research initiatives toensure that the right problems are being addressed and that the solutionsare viable. participation in the it research process will make them betterinformed consumers of it goods and services and will help guide itresearch into areas that are well matched to particular enduser needs andproblems. incentives for such organizations to invest in it research aregrowing as they become increasingly dependent on it systems to carryout their missions, yet most such organizations lack the resources andexpertise needed to manage it research programs conducted either internally or externally.the committee recognizes the difficulty of engaging enduser organizations in a productive way but believes that greater collaborationbetween them and it researchers is critical to ensuring that it evolves ina way that will meet realworld needs and address the problems faced byorganizations reliant on such systems. the federally sponsored programsrecommended above are intended to help bridge the gap and introduceend users to the processes of it research, but these programs should notbe the only mechanisms through which end users engage it researchers.end users should consider other activities, such as supporting universityresearch that is applicable to their needs, serving on the advisory boardsof it research groups in universities and industry, supporting internshipsfor students in itrelated academic programs, and forming externalresearch groups that monitor work in the it research community andserve as liaisons between companies and it researchers.this process needs to be viewed as a longterm, evolutionary one thatcan grow into more active participation in research over time. eventually, enduser organizations may fund research or engage in researchprograms with vendors and academic research groups. before this canhappen, end users need to become more familiar with the it researchcommunity. although the incentives for such activities may not be immediately obvious, the committee believes that such engagement will ultimately prove beneficial to enduser organizations in terms of an improvedability to make it systems perform the needed functions on time, withinbudget, and with high reliability.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research211recommendation 8. information technology companies with established r&d organizations should develop mechanisms for engaging end users more actively in the research process.vendors need to be involved in any effort to expand the scale andscope of it research. they have an established tradition of conductingproblemoriented research and have a better understanding of customerneeds than do most university researchers or government program managers. for the foreseeable future, vendors will remain the main funders ofitrelated r&d. in recent years, industry research has become moreapplied as companies attempt to link research efforts to more clearlydefined areas of corporate interest. work on largescale systems andsocial applications may give them an opportunity to increase the amountof fundamental research conducted while maintainingñor even increasingñthe applicability of their research to user needs. the better theirunderstanding of the fundamentals of largescale it systems and socialapplications, the better they should be able to develop systems and applications for their clients.it companies should explore a range of options for pursuing moreinterdisciplinary and systemsrelated research while continuing theirresearch on it components. several mechanisms could be used. companies could establish programs similar to ibm corporationõs firstofa kindprogram to link their researchers more closely to cuttingedge end userswith interesting problems that call for research. doing so will not onlyalign research more closely with customer needs, making it more valuable in the long term, but will also create bettereducated customers whocan interact more effectively with researchers. or they could fund jointresearch with end users in universities or industry, as microsoft corporation is doing in its educational venture with the massachusetts institute oftechnology (mit).12 another approach is to increase company contactswith, and support for, university researchers by allocating more resourcesfor students and faculty to spend time in industrial facilities and for industrial researchers to visit university laboratories. money is a significantobstacle to such interactions, as is the argument that staff members havemore compelling things to do. research managers and corporate executives must also provide leadership to ensure that these relationships areestablished and to maintain a commitment to making them work.conclusionexpanding it research in scale and scope will be essential to ensuringthat society captures the full benefits of the investments it has alreadymade in it. continued progress is needed in the areas of research thatmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212making it betterenabled the it revolution unfolding today and that are the foundation forthe nationõs transition to an information economy. additional work onlargescale systems and the social applications of it will allow society totransform a range of interactions in all walks of life. the recommendationsin this report emphasize putting in place the processes that will expandthe research agenda and bring the needed range of expertise to bear onproblems that have plagued largescale systems and social applications.they reflect the uncertainties surrounding the course that future it development and deployment will take, as well as the differences in the abilitiesof the various stakeholders to participate productively in the process.these initial, if tentative, steps need to be taken so that it can better servesocietyõs growing range of needs as it enters the twentyfirst century.bibliographycommittee for economic development (ced). 1998. americaõs basic research: prosperitythrough discovery. committee for economic development, new york.computer science and technology board (cstb), national research council. 1989. scalingup: a research agenda for software engineering. national academy press, washington,d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1992. computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering.national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1995. evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to supportthe nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1996a. continued review of the tax systems modernization of the internal revenue service.final report. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1996b. computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis managementand other applications. national academy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999a. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council.1999b. trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.council on competitiveness. 1996. endless frontier, limited resources: u.s. r&d policy forcompetitiveness. council on competitiveness, washington, d.c., april.presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future. national coordination office for computing,information, and communications, arlington, va., february. available online at<http://www.ccic.gov/ac/report/>.notes1.see, for example cstb (1992, 1995, 1999a), council on competitiveness (1996), andced (1998).making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding the scale and scope of it research2132.several of the more highprofile failures have resulted in hundreds of millions ofdollars being spent over several years. for instance, the federal aviation administrationhas spent $42 billion to modernize the air traffic control system over the past two decades,and the system has still not been completed (see chapter 3).3.see chapter 3 for a more indepth discussion of these topics.4.the next generation internet program encompasses three related efforts: researchon, and development of, new networking technologies; development of revolutionary applications that take advantage of enhanced networking capabilities; and deployment of severaltestbed networks across which new technologies can be deployed and revolutionary applications can be run. additional information is available online at <www.ngi.gov>.5.the digital libraries initiative is a multiagency initiative that, in its second phase,will pursue research related to the development of the next generation of digital libraries,both to advance the use and usability of globally distributed, networked informationresources and to encourage existing and new communities to focus on innovative applications areas. the initiative attempts to stimulate the partnering arrangements needed tocreate nextgeneration operational systems in areas such as education, engineering anddesign, earth and space sciences, biosciences, geography, economics, and the arts andhumanities. its sponsors include the nsf, darpa, the national library of medicine, thelibrary of congress, the national endowment for the humanities, the national aeronauticsand space administration, and the federal bureau of investigation. the research centerson topics such as humancentered computing, content, and systems, as well as on testbedsand applications. support is provided for both individual investigator grants and multidisciplinary research groups. additional information about the program is available onlineat <www.dli2.nsf.gov>.6.it is also true that federal agencies have had many successes in creating new computer systems, successes that do not get as much publicity as the problems. but thesesuccesses are more a testimonial to the skill and perseverance of federal it managers than areason to praise the available knowledge base.7.these sectors include those defined by the following standard industrial classification (sic) codes: 357, office, computing, and accounting machines; 366, communicationsequipment; 367, electronic components (including semiconductor devices); 737, computerand data processing services; and 48, communications (e.g., telephone and other communications services).8.linda cohen, a member of the study committee, and jerry sheehan, a member of thecstb staff, are examining this issue in greater detail. they will produce a summary paperon their findings late in the year 2000.9.on april 9, 1997, the north american industry classification system (naics)became the new standard code system to describe business establishments and industries,replacing the standard industrial classification (sic) codes. this new system will be usedby the u.s., mexican, and canadian governments to collect and distribute statistical information.10.recommendation 5.1 echoes a recommendation from an earlier cstb report that alsocalled for an expanded research agenda for computer science. see cstb (1992).11.david patterson, university of california at berkeley, personal communication, april6, 2000.12.as noted in chapter 4, microsoft announced a partnership with mit in 1999 topursue educational technologies. microsoft is investing $25 million in the effort, andprojects will be managed by a steering committee consisting of equal numbers of membersfrom microsoft research and mit.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.217appendix atwo research topics involvingsocial applicationsto illustrate the kinds of research it envisions on the social applications of information technology (it), the committee looks briefly attwo research topics. the first, deconstructing wireless, is the subjectof an ongoing collaborative effort to analyze the wireless communicationsindustry. the second, network security, is well known and is beingpursued by researchers around the world. it is touched on here to demonstrate its interdisciplinary aspects.deconstructing wirelessone actual research project on the social applications of it isòdeconstructing wireless,ó which is being conducted by researchers at theuniversity of california at berkeley, princeton university, and the swissfederal institute of technology at lausanne.1 this collaboration of engineers and economists is taking a fresh look at the wireless communicationindustry. the researchers define deconstruction as a research paradigmthat takes a topdown, interdisciplinary view of a largescale global system, in this case wireless networking. deconstruction is necessitated bythe confluence of technology and economic, business, and policy considerations in such systems.a system and market like wireless networking is heavily influencedby the rapid pace of technological advance as well as by policy (e.g.,telecommunications regulation, privacy concerns, and universal servicerequirements), law (e.g., intellectual property protection and competitivemaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218appendix aconstraints), economics (e.g., investments, network externalities, lockin),business considerations (e.g., complementors and competitors, standardization), and the needs and wishes of users (both individuals and organizations). in the past, researchers have addressed these influences one byone. this project recognizes that there are strong relationships betweenthese influences that can be exploited to create new opportunities. althoughwireless technology can be shaped in many ways, the most effectivedesign for the technology needs to take into account economics, industry,and policy issues.the methodology of deconstruction differs from standard systemsanalysis (see figure a.1). the first step is to decide which specific business and societal goals will be the central focus. for their work on wireless networking, the researchers chose two:¥achieving a level of flexibility in the system architecture such thatnew terminal software can be quickly deployed and the barriers to entryfor new services and business models can be lowered and¥maximizing the effectiveness of competition in the industry byremoving technological and other impediments to competitive offeringsand market entry.once these goals had been set, the next step was to postulate anarchitecture for the system that seemed best able to achieve the goals.postulating an architecture is part of a òdivide and conqueró strategy tobusiness and societal goalssystem architecture (unencumbered by the past)newtechnologieseconomicconstraintsviablebusinessmodelsregulatoryissuesother relevant research issuesfigure a.1 deconstruction starts with identifying business and societal goalsand then postulating a system architecture.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a219figure a.2 a classification of interdisciplinary work into three categories oflearning.break the research challenges into manageable pieces. of course, theelements of the overall architecture are critically important in their ownright because they not only influence much of the research that will followbut also ultimately determine the model that will be used for industrystructure and competition.deconstruction deliberately ignores issues like legacy systems andthe practical need for incremental advances in the technology. it does soin order to create a mental experiment that, because it takes nothing forgranted, can yield real breakthroughs in insight. if important opportunities are identified in this way, they can later influence realworld systems,or perhaps even result in entirely new networks (just as the internet oncedid).finally, many individual research issues must be addressed to realizethe business and societal goals in the context of the postulated architecture. in this project, the issues have been technological, economic, andpolicyrelated. two of the collaborators (katz and farrell) are economistswith experience in telecommunications regulation at the federal communications commission and can address economic and policy issues. theother three researchers are technologists who can address technical issues.one way to better understand the deconstruction process used in thewireless networking project is to examine the classification of interdisciplinary work shown in figure a.2. it divides disciplines into three categories: (1) those that emphasize the foundations of knowledge (e.g., theend uses inbusiness and societytechnical, social, andorganizational systemscore understanding and technologyphysicalsciencessocialsciencesand lawliberalartsbusinessengineeringtechnicalsocialmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220appendix ahumanities, physical and biological sciences, communications devices,and electronics); (2) those that emphasize systems, which are assemblagesof elements that perform higherlevel functions (e.g., chemistry and cosmology in the physical sciences, physiology and ecology in the biologicalsciences, sociology, economics, and law in the social sciences, and power,computing, and communications in engineering); and (3) those that interact directly with people, organizations, and society (e.g., business, music,and the arts). of course, some disciplines incorporate work that wouldfall into two or three of these categories, examples being engineering andthe health sciences.deconstruction focuses on the systems level. it recognizes that manyrealworld systems, like wireless networks, are actually mixes of differenttypes of systems, especially technical and social, and it brings togetherperspectives from different disciplines to address common challenges.the deconstruction of wireless networks that is being performed musthave, at a minimum, contributions from engineering (communicationsand computing), social sciences (economics and law), and business.the confluence and interdependence of technical and nontechnicalfactors become evident in this research. there are many new technologies(known or unknown but motivated by this application) that could beapplied to wireless networks. with existing or new technologies, thearchitecture of the network itself and the structure of the industries thatsupport it could be shaped in many ways. the question becomes, whatway will come closest to achieving the business and societal goals setforth at the beginning? how can investment in new networking conceptsbe stimulated, and how can users be induced to actually adopt the newtechnologies? will new networking concepts (better ideas) automaticallybe adopted by a free marketplace, or is regulatory intervention required?these questions can only be answered satisfactorily by considering a hostof economic and policy questions. in turn, the forces at play in the marketplace and in the regulatory arena directly affect how the technology ismolded and positioned.a simple example will serve to illustrate this last point. mobile codeis a promising technology for dynamically downloading software to processors internal to the network and to terminals. such processing hasbeen proposed, for example, for converting between different data representations or for accommodating parts of a network with widely differentcapabilities (like wireless access and fiber backbone). this should contribute to competition by allowing new application functionality to betransparently deployed long after the infrastructure supporting it is provisioned. however, it raises a host of questions: how is that softwarelicensed and paid for? who provides the necessary processing cycles,and how are they paid for? how is the allocation of these processingmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a221resources determined, since they are shared over multiple applicationsand users, coordinated in a way that achieves endtoend objectives? inthe presence of virulent competition, they are likely owed by differenteconomic entities, which raises questions that go beyond coordination toinclude pricing and settlements of revenues. these questions have stimulated new research on the coordination of multiple resource allocationsusing ecommerce mechanisms (such as some sort of auction). this suggests that existing ecommerce mechanisms such as credit card clearinghouses, might be employed. because the revenues for each usage arelikely to be small, however, the technology has to be conceptualized toresult in very small transactions costs, which affects both the technologydesign and the viable economic mechanisms it implements. the bestcombination of effectiveness and cost will be obtained by consideringmechanism and technology design as a whole.network securitylarge public networks such as the internet and the public switchedtelephone network represent a formidable management challenge. notonly are they large and complex systems, but they display the characteristics of sociotechnical systems. they must meet the needs of their subscribers, and they involve many people in their operation and maintenance. their ownership is fragmented, so that operation and maintenancemust be effected across different service providers who often simultaneously complement one another (they provide endtoend service) andcompete with one another (for customers). handsoff business relationships must be maintained in negotiating arrangements for interconnection,for determining pricing to customers, and for settlement of revenues.generally three levels of management are recognized for such networks. network management encompasses provisioning the networkõsfacilities and operating them, including detection of and recovery fromfaults. service management enables the opportunistic establishment ofendtoend services in response to customer requests. business management ensures that customers are monitored and billed for services andthat the resulting revenue is passed back to constituent service providers.it can be presumed that such a network is under continual assaultfrom many directions, from hackers and even terrorist organizations.these assaults may be directed at users of the network or at the networkitself. the perpetrators may have monetary gain, terrorist disruption, orsimple vandalism in mind. most existing approaches to security focus onthe users and uses directly, attempting to make them secure individuallyunder the assumption that the network environment itself is not secure.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222appendix ain addition, the network operator will take measures to protect the network itself.efforts to monitor the internet in an attempt to detect and foil criminal or terrorist attempts will involve the network infrastructure taking amuch greater responsibility than heretofore for the security of users, on amassive scale, and suggests an important, supplementary role for thenetwork and service management functions. while it appears to be apromising direction for research into what is undoubtedly a serious problem, many approaches could be taken. thus, it would be interesting tomount an effort on greatly expanded security measures in networks, withthe goal of identifying approaches that are on the one hand affordableand, on the other, effective at identifying and foiling attacks and protecting sensitive data and bringing the perpetrators to justice.to a large extent, security is a technical challenge, as the questionsraised have significant technical components. how can malicious behavior be distinguished from normal innocuous network usage (the answermay involve a kind of pattern matching at both micro and macro levels)?how can security mechanisms be made scalable and affordable? oncesuch behavior is identified, how can it be verified with sufficient reliability to allow corrective action, and what sorts of action might be mounted?how can technical measures be put in place that will allow the perpetrators to be identified and their behavior proven to the satisfaction of acourt? which aspects can be automated, and which necessarily involvehuman intervention and judgment?taken as a whole, the network, its legitimate users, its operators, andthe malicious agents constitute a sociotechnical system. that is, manyissues of a nontechnical or only partly technical nature arise and must beconsidered before a reasonable conclusion can be reached. how canlegitimate usersõ rights to privacy be preserved, and what are those rights?what is the likely nature of attacks that may be mounted, and for whatpurpose are they mounted? what characteristics of such attacks mayallow them to be identified? what are the range of potential securitybreaches of the network and its users, and what would be their impact?considering these impacts, how much can be spent on countermeasures,and how can the costs and risks to a business be analyzed?the proposed approaches would have to deal with some practicalrealities. network operators are businesses that must have revenue tocompensate for costs. the willingness of users to pay for measures tocounter somewhat speculative or unknown risks must be assessed. theremust be some viable economic model to determine who pays for and whobenefits from these measures. that such networks often have multipleownership, which means fragmented operational responsibility, must betaken into account.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a223experts and researchers in several disciplines could contribute to thisresearch, in addition to computer scientists on the technical aspects. riskanalysis and cost/benefit analysis would fall to economists, who wouldset the parameters on the acceptable costs and cost recovery mechanisms.the organizational structures that would most effectively realize thesecurity functionsñincluding, for example, human interventionsñcouldbe studied by business. motivations and scenarios for attack could beprovided by political scientists, allowing the range of possibilities to benarrowed. in the case of individual vandals and hackers, psychologicalprofiles and likely behavior patterns would be very useful input.note1.the researchers are david messerschmitt, michael katz, and joseph farrell from theuniversity of california at berkeley, sergio verdu from princeton, and jeanpierre hubauxfrom the swiss federal institute of technology.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224appendix bbiographies of committee memberssamuel h. fuller, cochair, is vice president for research and development at analog devices corporation. he was formerly vice presidentfor technical strategy and chief scientist at digital equipment corporation, where he led the creation of the research laboratories for digitalfocused on distributed computing, highperformance computing,internetworking, and humancomputer interfaces. he also initiated workthat led to digitalõs ethernet, workstations, unix, and internet products.before joining digital in 1978, dr. fuller was an associate professor ofcomputer science and electrical engineering at carnegie mellon university, where he was involved in the performance evaluation and design ofseveral influential experimental multiprocessor computer systems.dr. fuller received his b.s. from the university of michigan in 1968 andhis m.s. (1969) and ph.d. (1972) from stanford university. he is a memberof the national academy of engineering, the institute of electrical andelectronics engineers, and the association for computing machinery.dr. fuller is a member of the national research councilõs commission onphysical sciences, mathematics, and applications and was a foundingmember of the computer science and telecommunications board (19861992). he served on the steering committee for cstbõs competitivenesscolloquium on systems integration (19891991) and on the committeethat wrote the cstb report cryptographyõs role in securing the informationsociety.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b225david g. messerschmitt, cochair, is the roger a. strauch professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences at the university ofcalifornia at berkeley and from 1993 to 1996 was department chair. before1977 dr. messerschmitt was at at&t bell laboratories in holmdel, newjersey. his current research interests include issues overlapping signalprocessing (especially video and graphics coding) and transport in broadband networks with wireless access, network services and protocols formultimedia, wireless multimedia computing, and the economics of networks. dr. messerschmitt has served as a consultant to a number ofcompanies and is a cofounder and director of tcsi inc. he is a fellow ofthe institute of electrical and electronics engineers, inc., a member of thenational academy of engineering, a member of the advisory committeefor the national science foundationõs computer and information scienceand engineering directorate. from 1993 to 1998, dr. messerschmitt was amember of the computer science and telecommunications board of thenational research council. he won the 1999 alexander graham bellmedal for exceptional contributions to the advancement of communication sciences and engineering. he received a b.s. degree from the university of colorado and an m.s. and ph.d. from the university of michigan.paul baran is generally regarded as the inventor of packet switching,based on his work at rand in the 1960s. he is a founder of severalsilicon valley companies, including com21, inc., a provider of broadbandcable modem technology for highspeed modem and data services, wherehe is chairman of the board. he also serves on the advisory board ofgeocast, a digital data broadcasting company. mr. baran received theb.s. degree in electrical engineering from drexel university in 1949 andthe m.s. degree in engineering from ucla in 1959. he was awarded anhonorary doctor of science in engineering degree by drexel university in1997. he is a member of the national academy of engineering, a lifefellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, inc. (ieee),an international marconi fellow, an american association for theadvancement of science fellow, and a trustee of the ieee history center.linda cohen is professor of economics and chair of the departmentof economics at the university of california at irvine. her research interests concern political economy, government regulation, governmentpolicy for research and development, positive political theory, and law.dr. cohen previously worked as a research associate at the brookingsinstitution in washington, d.c. she was a member of the department ofenergy program review committee on airborne nuclear waste management, a member of the advisory panel in support of the congressionaloffice of technology assessmentõs study of magnetic fusion research andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226appendix bdevelopment, and a member of the panel on the study of human factorsresearch needs in nuclear regulatory research for the national researchcouncil. she is currently a member of the public interest energy researchadvisory panel for the california energy commission. dr. cohen iscoauthor of the technology pork barrel (brookings institution, 1991) and isa fellow of the california council for science and technology.john a. copeland is a professor in the school of electrical and computer engineering at the georgia institute of technology. he holds thejohn h. weitnauer chair and is currently director of the communicationssystems center. he was director of the georgia center for advancedtelecommunications technology from june 1993 to november 1996.before joining georgia tech in march 1993, dr. copeland was vice president of technology at hayes microcomputer products (19851993), vicepresident of engineering technology at sangamo weston, inc. (19821985),and a researcher at bell labs (19651982). he began his career at bell labsconducting research on semiconductor microwave and millimeterwavedevices. later, he supervised a group that developed magnetic bubblecomputer memories. in 1974, he led a team that designed cmos integrated circuits, including bell labsõ first microprocessor, the bellmac8.his last contributions at bell labs were in the area of lightwave communications and optical logic. at sangamo weston he was responsible forr&d groups at 10 divisions. at hayes he was responsible for the development of modems with data compression and error control and for hayesõrepresentation on ccitt and ansi standards committees. dr. copelandreceived his b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees in physics from the georgiainstitute of technology. he has been awarded 37 patents and has published over 50 technical articles. in 1970 he was awarded ieeeõs morris n.liebmann award for his work on gallium arsenide microwave devices.he is a fellow of the ieee and has served as editor of the ieee transactionson electron devices. he also served on the board of trustees for the georgiatech research corporation (19831993).albert m. erisman is director of mathematics and computing technology for the phantom works within the boeing company. he leads astaff of 250 computer scientists, mathematicians, statisticians, and engineers who provide leadership for boeing in all areas of information technology and mathematics. dr. erisman has been with boeing since 1969.his work has been in mathematical algorithms, mathematical software,and the application of these technical areas to the improvement of boeingengineering and analysis codes. more recently he addressed the broaderarea of the application of advanced information technology to the transformation of business processes. management focus has included themaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b227linking of research and development with business requirements, thedelivery of technology for business benefit, and the management of aninnovative environment. dr. erisman has published two books and morethan 20 technical papers. in december 1989, he was named one of 11inaugural technical fellows of the boeing company. the technical fellowship was established to recognize professional excellence among engineers and scientists who have made significant technical contributions toboeing. he was a member of the national research councilõs committeeon supercomputing, a member of a national science foundation panel toassess the state of mathematics education and research, and has heldvarious offices in the society for industrial and applied mathematics.dr. erisman earned a b.a. in mathematics from northern illinois university in 1962 and both his m.s. and ph.d. degrees in applied mathematicsfrom iowa state university in 1967 and 1969, respectively.daniel t. ling is vice president of microsoft research, redmond. hejoined microsoft research in march 1992 as a senior researcher in the areaof user interfaces and computer graphics. he has been particularly interested in the design of agentbased user interfaces, user interface architectures, intelligent and adaptive interfaces, and virtual worlds. he waslater named director of research. before to joining microsoft, dr. lingwas a senior manager at the ibm thomas j. watson research center. heinitially worked on specialpurpose vlsi chips for displays and was acoinventor of the videoram dynamic memory. he subsequently managed departments that conducted research on advanced microsystemsbased on 370 and risc architectures and the associated systems and vlsidesign tools. one of these departments initiated work on a novel machinearchitecture, organization, and design known as america, which led tothe ibm rs/6000 workstations. he subsequently managed the veridicaluser environments department that engaged in research into innovativeuser interfaces including multimodal interfaces, virtual worlds technology, and 3d visualization. dr. ling also served on the staff of the directorof development in the general technology division overseeing the development of cmos chip technologies and on special assignment to the vicepresident of systems research. he received his b.s., m.s., and ph.d.degrees in electrical engineering from stanford university. he was also afannie and john hertz foundation fellow. dr. ling holds seven patentsand is the author of a variety of publications in solid state physics, systems, user interfaces, and holography. he was awarded an ibm outstanding innovation award in 1986 for his coinvention of the videoram.he is a member of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, theamerican physical society, and the association for computing machinmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228appendix bery. he also serves on advisory committees for the university of washington and the university of california at berkeley.robert l. martin is the chief technology officer for lucent technologies. his expertise has been at bell laboratories and bellcore, where heheld a variety of positions related to systems development. he has beenresponsible for unix, network management systems, intelligent networksystems, packet switching, and broadband access systems developments.dr. martin received his b.s. in electrical engineering from brown university in 1964 and his m.s. and ph.d. degrees in electrical engineering andcomputer science from massachusetts institute of technology (mit) in1965 and 1967, respectively. in 1985, he attended the mit alfred p. sloanschool senior executive program. a fellow of the institute of electricaland electronics engineers, inc., dr. martin was a member and the firstchair of the ieeeõs software industrial advisory board. he has served onthe national research councilõs computer science and telecommunications board and is now a member of the federal communicationcommissionõs technological advisory board.joel moses is institute professor, professor of engineering systems,and professor of computer science and engineering at massachusettsinstitute of technology (mit). he was previously head of the electricalengineering and computer science department, dean of engineering, andprovost of mit. he led the development of the macsyma system, aforerunner of the major formula manipulation systems available today.he is a cooriginator of the concept of knowledgebased systems. hiscurrent interests include the organization of large complex systems.dr. moses is a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, inc., and of the american association for the advancement ofscience and is a member of the national academy of engineering (nae)and the american academy of arts and sciences. he is a former memberof the academic advisory committee for sematech, a former member ofthe white house office of science and technology policyõs committee onhigh performance computing and communications, a member of naeõscommittee on engineering education, a member of the national researchcouncilõs committee on workforce needs in information technology,and a former member of its manufacturing studies board and its boardon telecommunications and computer applications. he is a member ofthe advisory boards of the engineering schools at columbia universityand the university of michigan. he received a b.a. (1962) and an m.a.(1963) from columbia university and a ph.d. (mathematics, 1967) frommit.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b229norine e. noonan is assistant administrator for research and development at the environmental protection agency. she was formerly vicepresident for research and dean of the graduate school at florida instituteof technology and, before that, branch chief for science and space at theoffice of management and budget. dr. noonan also held faculty appointments at the university of florida and georgetown university. from1982 to 1983, she served as an american chemical society congressionalscience fellow. her areas of expertise are in research management, federal budgetary processes, and science and technology policy. she is amember of phi beta kappa and sigma xi, a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science, and a member of the americansociety for cell biology. she has served on several other nationalresearch council committees, notably the committee on antarctic policyand science, the task force on alternative organizations for the future ofspace science, and the committee on building an environmental management science program. dr. noonan received her b.a. in zoologysumma cum laude from the university of vermont and her m.a. andph.d. in cell biology from princeton university.david a. patterson holds the e.h. and m.e. pardee chair of computer science at the university of california at berkeley and has taughtcomputer architecture since joining the universityõs faculty in 1977. atberkeley, he led the design and implementation of risc i, probably thefirst vlsi reduced instruction set computer. this research became thefoundation of the sparc architecture currently used by fujitsu and sunmicrosystems. as part of the celebration of the twentyfifth anniversaryof the microprocessor in 1996, microprocessor report and comdex namedsparc one of the most significant microprocessors. professor pattersonwas also a leader of the redundant arrays of inexpensive disks project,which led to highperformance storage systems from many companies.he was also involved in the network of workstations project, which ledto cluster technology used by internet companies such as inktomi. theseprojects led to three distinguished dissertation awards from the associationfor computing machinery (acm). his current research interests are inbuilding novel microprocessors using intelligent dram (iram) for usein portable multimedia devices and in creating intelligent storage (istore)to provide computers for internet services that are highly available andeasily maintained and that can be gracefully evolved. dr. patterson was achair of the computer science division in the electrical engineering andcomputer science department at the university of california at berkeley,the acm special interest group in computer architecture, and the computing research association. he has consulted for many companies,including digital equipment corporation, hewlett packard, intel, andmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230appendix bsun microsystems, and is also the coauthor of five books. he is a memberof the national academy of engineering, a fellow of the computer society of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee), and afellow of the acm. he is also a member of the computer science andtelecommunications board of the national research council. his teaching has been honored by the acm with the karl v. karlstrom outstanding educator award, by ieee with the undergraduate teaching awardand the james h. mulligan, jr., education medal, and by the university ofcalifornia with the distinguished teaching award and the diane s.mcentyre award for excellence in teaching. he received the inauguraloutstanding alumnus award of the ucla computer science department as part of its twentyfifth anniversary and has received the ieeetechnical achievement award, the ieee reynold b. johnson informationstorage award, and the ieee john von neumann medal.stewart personick is the e. warren colehower chair professor oftelecommunications at drexel university and director of the center fortelecommunications and information networking, also at drexel. until1998, he was vice president of information networking at bellcore. hebegan his career at bell laboratories in 1967 and spent 18 years as anindividual researcher and an r&d manager focusing on fiberopticstechnology and applications. between 1985 and 1998, he managed organizations focusing on emerging telecommunications technology, systems,services, and applications and was heavily involved in industry and government activities related to the emerging national information infrastructure. dr. personick received his b.s. from city college of new yorkand his sc.d. degree from mit. he is a fellow of the institute of electricaland electronics engineers, inc., a fellow of the optical society of america,and a member of the national academy of engineering. he was amember and former chair of the u.s. federal networking council advisory committee, is a frequent lecturer on the national information infrastructure and related telecommunications subjects, and is the author ofseveral books and numerous articles on telecommunications technologyand applications.robert sproull is vice president and fellow at sun microsystemslaboratories and leads its application technologies center. since hisundergraduate days, he has been building hardware and software forcomputer graphics, such as clipping hardware, an early deviceindependentgraphics package, page description languages, laser printing software,and window systems. he has also been involved in vlsi design, especially of asynchronous circuits and systems. before joining sun, he was aprincipal with sutherland, sproull & associates, an associate professor atmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b231carnegie mellon university, and a member of the xerox palo altoresearch center. he is a coauthor with william newman of the earlytextbook principles of interactive computer graphics and author of the booklogical effort, which deals with designing fast cmos circuits. he is amember of the national academy of engineering and the u.s. air forcescientific advisory board.mark weiser (deceased) was the chief technologist at the xerox paloalto research center (parc). he joined xerox parc as a member of thetechnical staff in 1987 and later headed the computer science laboratory.from 1979 to 1987, dr. weiser was assistant and associate professor andassociate chair in the computer science department at the university ofmaryland. he started three companies, and his 75 plus technical publications are in such areas as the psychology of programming, program slicing, operating systems, programming environments, garbage collection,and technological ethics. dr. weiserõs work since 1988 focused on ubiquitous computing, a program he initiated that envisions personal computersbeing replaced with invisible computers embedded in everyday objects.he believed that this would lead to an era of calm technology in whichtechnology, rather than causing users to panic, would help them focus onwhat is really important. weiser was also the drummer with the rockband severe tire damage, the first live band on the internet. dr. weiserhad no bachelorõs degree; his ph.d. was in computer and communications sciences from the university of michigan (1979).patrick windham is a consultant on science and technology policyissues. he operates his own firm, windham consulting, and also servesas a senior associate with r. wayne sayer and associates, a governmentrelations company. in addition, he is a lecturer in the public policy program at stanford university. from 1984 until 1997, mr. windham servedas a senior professional staff member for the subcommittee on science,technology, and space of the committee on commerce, science, andtransportation of the u.s. senate. he helped senators oversee and draftlegislation for several large civilian science and technology agencies andfocused on issues of science, technology, and u.s. industrial competitiveness. from 1976 to 1978 he worked as a congressional fellow with thesenate commerce committee, and from 1982 to 1984 he served as a legislative aide in the personal office of sen. ernest hollings. mr. windhamreceived an a.b. from stanford university and a masterõs of public policyfrom the university of california at berkeley.irving wladawskyberger is vice president of technology andstrategy for the ibm enterprise systems group. he was formerly generalmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232appendix bmanager of the internet division at ibm, where he was responsible foribmõs internet and ebusiness strategy and for coordinating its implementation across the company. he joined ibmõs thomas j. watsonresearch center in 1970, where he focused on organizing technologytransfer programs to move the innovations of computer science fromibmõs research labs into its product divisions. after joining ibmõs product development organization in 1985, dr. wladawskyberger continuedhis efforts to bring advanced technologies to the marketplace, leadingibmõs initiatives in supercomputing and parallel computing, includingthe transformation of its large systems through the incorporation of parallel computing architectures. he has managed a number of ibmõs businesses, including the unixbased rs/6000 division. dr. wladawskyberger is cochair of the presidentõs information technology advisorycommittee. he was a founding member of the computer science andtelecommunications board of the national research council and a member of the nrcõs commission on physical sciences, mathematics, andapplications. dr. wladawskyberger received his m.s. and ph.d. degreesin physics from the university of chicago.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.233indexaa2b music, 73aas. see advanced automation systemabilene network, 132abstraction, 120abt associates, inc., 193194academic networks, 133academic researchgaps in, 9091interdisciplinary, 168179accelerated strategic computing initiative(asci), 61, 96acceptable use policies (aups), 133additions to systems, unintended andunanticipated consequences of, 5administrative challenges, 154associated with largescale systems, 118advanced automation system (aas), 105advanced computational science, researchin, 62advanced research projects agency(arpa), 46aetna, 8384agenda. see research agendaair traffic control (atc) system, 149modernizing, 105, 213airport surface detection equipment, 105akamai technologies, inc., 92alto computer, 21, 97alwaysup systems, goal for informationtechnology research, 24amazon.com, 8384, 86, 97, 117america online inc., 81amris, 104andersen consulting, 8, 7980, 97apple computer, 30, 179macintosh, 21appliances, information, 107applications, 32. see also groupapplications; social applicationsresearchdiffusion of, 170applications research, 157applied research, defining, x, 2829òappropriabilityó problem, 7475architectural approachesdefining, 138design of research programs for, 126127arpanet, 96, 131historical perspective on, 21, 140artifacts, 140asci. see accelerated strategic computinginitiativeassociation of university technologymanagers (autm), 9192atc. see air traffic control systemmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234indexat&t corporation, 179expenditures on r&d, 64, 7778historical structuring of, 81patents held by, 84recent trends in research by, 3031redirection of research at, 7273work on speech recognition, 21aups. see acceptable use policiesautm. see association of universitytechnology managersautomata theory, 139automatic programmer capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24availability issues, 116118bbaas. see broad agency announcementsbankboston, 92basic research, defining, x, 26bell atlantic, 102bell communications researchcorporation (bellcore), 77bell laboratories, 72, 7677benchmarks, 139berkeley wireless research center, 182billing fraud, detecting, 76boeing company, 66, 80, 83, 97brahe, tycho, 26broad agency announcements (baas), 6263brooks, fred, 139brookssutherland report, 121bugs, 116testing for, 112bureau of land management, troubledsystems at, 102bureau of the census, 49, 64, 66, 96need for the national science foundationto work with, 13, 205206business process challenges, 154business research, related to informationtechnology, 169business system context, embedding largescale systems within larger, 6business week online, 35cc programming language, 23cad. see computeraided designcalifornia department of motor vehicles,troubled systems at, 102103california institute of technology,computational facility forsimulating the dynamic responseof materials, 96carnegie mellon university, 17, 29, 62, 90,92, 163department of engineering and publicpolicy, 173information networking institute, 182software engineering institute, 158159case. see computeraided softwareengineering toolscase research, 124, 156cbo. see congressional budget officeccic. see committee on computing,information and communicationscensus bureau. see bureau of the censuscenter for astrophysical thermonuclearflashes, 96center for integrated turbulencesimulation, 96center for simulation of accidental firesand explosions, 96center for simulation of advancedrockets, 96central research laboratories, countertrendin, 7679challenges. see research challengeschanges to systems, unintended andunanticipated consequences of, 5changing needs of users, 5chronicle of higher education, 137ciao. see critical infrastructure assuranceofficecic. see committee on information andcommunicationscisco systems, 81, 86, 92expenditures on r&d, 70, 78cise. see computing and informationscience and engineering directorateciticorp, 8384civil engineering applications, 158clickstream data, analyzing, 180clinton, president william, 47clinton administration, xii, 3, 10, 62, 198, 201cohen, wes, 163collaborationapplications involving, 106challenges in, 153making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index235encouragement of interdepartmental byuniversities, 206207columbia university, programs in medicalinformatics, 171commerce, electronic, 7commercial equipment and suppliesindustry sector, 64, 68commercial offtheshelf (cots)technology, 110commercializationchallenge of in social applications ofinformation technology, 151152of university research, 9193committee on computing, informationand communications (ccic), 120committee on information andcommunications (cic), 121committee on information technologyresearch in a competitive world,xiv, 2committee on science, engineering, andpublic policy (cosepup), 183, 185,194committee to assess the scope anddirection of computer science andtechnology, 3940communications, influx from researchers,6263communications equipment industrysector, 6465, 68communications services industry sector,6465, 68expenditures on r&d, 67communities, electronic, 7community challenges, 153companies. see information technologycompanies; individual companiescompaq computer, 70, 81competitiveness, 43maximizing effectiveness of, 218complexity challengesassociated with largescale systems, 5,108110in social applications research, 7component software, 129130component vendors, expenditures onr&d, 65components, 32dealing with large numbers of, 5deep interactions among, 5independently designed, 5untrustworthy, 110components industry sector, 6465, 68comprehensive test ban treaty,complying with, 61computation and social systems (css)program, 174176computational facility for simulating thedynamic response of materials, 96computeraided design (cad), 83computeraided software engineering(case) tools, 104computer and data processing servicesindustry sector, 6465, 68expenditures on r&d, 65, 67computer graphics, historical perspectiveon, 21computer science, 4, 6, 13, 17, 26, 30, 49,52, 5557, 6061, 83, 8889, 93, 118,126, 133, 144, 147, 150151, 154, 159,172, 175, 179, 182, 185186, 195, 201,206207federal obligations for research in, 55computer science and engineering (cs&e),3940computer science and telecommunicationsboard (cstb), ix, 2, 1920, 38, 51, 79,98, 140, 144, 161brookssutherland report, 121committee to assess the scope anddirection of computer science andtechnology, 3940computing the future, 3940computer sciences corporation, 79computer simulations, 96computersupported cooperative work, 169computersassemblers of personal, 67, 76based on quantum mechanics, 76development of mouse for, 21support and repair of, 65computers, organizations, policy, andsociety (corps) group, 192computing, scientific, 46computing and information science andengineering (cise) directorate, 59,174, 179, 202computing and social system program, 12,203computing industry sector, 6465, 68computing the future: a broader agenda forcomputer science and engineering, 3940, 194making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236indexconducting research on social applications,155160new research teams, 157160a plausible approach, 155157conferencing, remote, 190confirm hotel reservation system, 102,104congressional budget office (cbo), 31, 85consequences, of changes or additions tosystems, 5consortia, 163constituencies supporting informationtechnology research, 20construction industry, social applicationsof technology in, 158control data corporation, 30control of social applications ofinformation technology, 152153coordinationof expertise, 153of social applications of informationtechnology, 152153copyrights, limitations of, 75corporate espionage, 115corporate investment in research anddevelopment, disincentives to, 7076corporation for national researchinitiatives, 132corps. see computers, organizations,policy, and society groupcosepup. see committee on science,engineering, and public policycots. see commercial offtheshelftechnologycray research, 30critical infrastructure assurance office(ciao), 47critical infrastructures, 7, 156defining, 101critical success factors, 169cs&e. see computer science andengineeringcss. see computation and social systemsprogramcstb. see computer science andtelecommunications boardcustom programming, 65customer support, gaining for innovation,76customization, 139òmass,ó 111customized consulting, 79cyber auctions, 181ddarpa. see defense advanced researchprojects agencydecision making, group dynamics and, 170decision support systems, 169decomposition, hierarchical, 112deconstructing wireless, 217221defense advanced research projectsagency (darpa), 31, 56, 5859, 6263, 164, 166historical perspective on, 21information assurance andsurvivability program, 122involvement in next generationinternet program, 123, 201recommendations for new programs at,11, 198201very large scale integrated circuitprogram, 21, 96defense contractors, 7980defense information systems agency(disa), 115dell computer corporation, 67, 76deloitte & touche, 117denver international airport, troubledsystems at, 102department of commerce, involvement innext generation internet program,123department of defense (dod), 36, 51, 54,5659, 6162, 161, 166attacks on computers of, 115department of energy (doe), 51, 5658, 6162, 161, 200involvement in next generationinternet program, 123, 201department of health and human services(dhhs), 11, 5759, 201involvement in next generationinternet program, 123design of largescale systems, 118133large numbers of individuals involvedin, 56design of research programs, 126133architectural approaches, 126127ecological and economic systems asmodels for, 128making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index237extensions of existing approaches, 129130inspiration from natural and socialsystems, 127software development processes, 127, 129support for research infrastructure, 131133theoretical approaches, 126developmentdisincentives to corporate investmentin, 7076methodologies for, 154dhhs. see department of health andhuman servicesdiffusion of applications, 170digital equipment corporation, 30expenditures on r&d, 68, 70digital government program, 12, 5758,141, 192, 202, 204digital libraries initiative (dli), 12, 5960,203, 213disa. see defense information systemsagencydisciplinary research. see alsointerdisciplinary research; otherdisciplinesanalogies to, 41discovery. see knowledge discoverydiscussion forums, 150disincentives, to corporate investment inresearch and development, 7076display system replacement program, 105distance education, technology supporting,106distributed operation and administrationchallenges, associated with largescale systems, 118distributed systems, electronic commerceapplications as, 119diversity, in the research base, 4951dli. see digital libraries initiativedod. see department of defensedoe. see department of energyeechecks, 181ecommerce applications, 119, 191redefining the business process, 152ecoupons, 181elab, 193email, 150earlystage financing, 87ebay, 86, 117ecological systems, as models for thedesign of research programs, 128economic growth, information technologycompaniesõ contribution to, 18economic implications of computing andcommunications, research in, 62economic structures, novel activities andshifts in, 7economic systems, as models for thedesign of research programs, 128economics of investment, in informationtechnology research, 75economics research, contributing toinformation technologydevelopment, 170edi (electronic data interchange), internet,181edison, thomas alva, 26eds. see electronic data serviceseducation, technology supporting distance,106electrical engineering, 13, 17, 30, 49, 5255,57, 88, 93, 150electronic commerce applications, 7, 149as distributed systems, 119electronic communities, 7electronic components industry sector, 6465, 68electronic data interchange. see edielectronic data services (eds), 8, 7980embedding information technologyresearch in other disciplines, 185187embedding largescale systems, withinlarger social and business systemcontext, 6emergent behaviors of systems, 5, 109employment, information technologycompaniesõ contribution to, 18encryption, 115processing requirements for, 106enduser organizationsexpenditures on r&d, 65participation of, 160166research by, 15, 8285, 209211endusersconstantly changing needs of, 5large numbers of, 6need for companies to involve in theirresearch, 1516, 211making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238indexneed for federal agencies to increasesupport for programs including, 1213, 201205understanding behaviors of, 193endeavor expedition, 62engineering research centers (ercs), 98,183184ercs. see engineering research centersernst & young, 79e*trade securities, 83, 117evolving the high performance computingand communications initiative tosupport the nationõs informationinfrastructure, 121expanded systems, difficulties with, 113expanding the scale and scope ofinformation technology research,195213recommendations for government, 197206recommendations for industry, 209211recommendations for universities, 206209expanding the systems research agenda,124126expansion financing, 87expeditions into the 21st century, 63, 96extensions of existing approaches, in thedesign of research programs, 129130ffaa. see federal aviation administrationfacultyencouraging participation of ininterdisciplinary research, 1314,206208needing to pioneer informationtechnology research, 1415, 208209failurescomplexity of, 112hardware, 116farrell, joseph, 223federal aviation administration (faa),1112, 35, 57, 200attacks on computers of, 115troubled systems at, 102103, 105, 213federal communications commission, 219federal information services andapplications council (fisac), 192federal information systems advisorycommittee (fisac), 204federal information technology researchprograms, xi, 6063federal reserve, 18federal support for information technologyresearch, 5163levels of, 20need for classifying data on, 13, 205206need for increased, 911, 197198role of, ixsources of, 5658styles of, 5860trends in, 5256in universities, 89fidelity investments institutional servicescompany, inc., 138fingerprintauthentication technology, 73firstofakind (foak) program (ibm),165166, 192, 211fisac. see federal information servicesand applications council andfederal information systemsadvisory committeeflexibility challenges associated with largescale systems, 111114, 218florida fingerprint system, troubledsystems at, 102focus centers, 90, 98formalism, 139fundamental research, 66, 75defining, xneed for nsa and darpa to establishprograms for, 11, 198201funding. see investment in informationtechnology researchggao. see general accounting officegapsin academic research, 9091in the research base, 7981gateway, inc., 67, 76general accounting office (gao), 105, 137general motors corporation, 66generic research, 156genetic materials, information processingcapabilities of, 76georgia center for advancedtelecommunications technology, 182making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index239georgia institute of technology, focuscenter at, 98global industries division (ibm), 166global positioning system augmentationprogram, 105global services division (ibm), 79government performance and results actof 1993, 46, 56government researchneed for bureau of the census to workwith the nsf on classifying dataabout, 13, 205206need for increased federal support for,911, 197198need for increased support forinterdisciplinary, 1213, 201205need for nsa and darpa to establishfundamental research programs, 11,198201recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 913, 197206government services, delivery of, 149graphical user interfaces, historicalperspective on, 21gray, jim, 24group applications, of informationtechnology, 149150group dynamics, and decision making, 170gupta, anoop, 98hhackers, damage done by, 115hardware failure, 116harvard business school, 169hershey foods, inc., 102103heterogeneity issues, 139challenges associated with largescalesystems, 110111hewlettpackardreliability claims by, 138systems integration services from, 79hidden markov models, 21hierarchical decomposition, 112hierarchies, status, 190highlevel programming languages, 23high performance computing andcommunications act of 1991, xiihigh performance computing andcommunications (hpcc) program,19, 39, 45, 51, 62, 121historical perspective on informationtechnology research, 21horn, paul, 72hpcc program. see high performancecomputing and communicationsprogramhpcci. see high performance computingand communications programhubaux, jeanpierre, 223humancomputer interaction (hci), 147research in, 62human error, 114, 116iibm corporation, 8, 17, 211expenditures on r&d, 66, 68, 70, 81firstofakind (foak) program, 165166, 192, 211global industries division, 166global services division, 79historical structuring of, 81industry solution units (isus), 165institute for advanced commerce, 180181patents held by, 84recent trends in research by, 3031redirection of research at, 72relational database research by, 21research division, 81, 180systems integration services from, 79work on speech recognition, 21identity challenges, 153òimitation game,ó 24implementation of largescale systems,improving, 118133improving the design and implementationof largescale systems, 118133designing a research program, 126133expanding the systems research agenda,124126limitations of past research, 119123independent requirements, large numberof, 6independently designed components, 5individuals involved in design andoperation, large numbers of, 56industry researchchanging structure of, 3032federal statistics concerning, 6465and gaps in the research base, 7981making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240indexinterdisciplinary, 179180need for closer ties with universityresearch, 208need for companies to involve endusers in, 1516, 211recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 1516, 209211systems integration, 7981industry sectors, 6465, 68industry solution units (isus), 165industry support for informationtechnology research, xi, 6487countertrend in central researchlaboratories, 7679disincentives to corporate investment,7076internships and sabbaticals, 166168need for classifying data on, 13, 205206and research by enduser organizations,8285trends in, 6670venture capital support for innovation,8587information age, 20information appliances, 107information assurance and survivabilityprogram, 122information economies, 181information management, research in, 62information networking institute, 182information sharing, 14, 170information technology (it)business research related to, andstrategic advantage, 169expanding applications of, ix, 3337focus on, 2023future of, 12, 50national debate about, ixneed for leadership in, xprogress in, 20, 2526retrospective assessments of, 28social applications of, 144148information technology companiescontribution to economic growth, 18contribution to employment, 18expenditures on r&d, 69, 71need to involve endusers in theirresearch, 1516, 211information technology developmentsimplications for the research enterprise,4243implications of information technologyresearch for, 3742information technology education andworkforce, research in, 62information technology for the twentyfirst century (it2) initiative, xii, 19,6163, 121, 186information technology industries, 6465supply chains in, 67information technology research, 2337changing environment for, 2937and changing industrial structure, 3032classification of, 2629constituencies supporting, 20embedding in other disciplines, 185187and expanding applications ofinformation technology, 3337expanding the scale and scope of, 187,195213facets of, 2329federal support for, 1213, 3031, 5163,201205goals for, 2425historical perspective on, 21implications of information technologydevelopments for, 3742importance of, ixindustry support for, 6487mechanisms for strengthening, ximechanisms for supporting, 20national debate about, ixresearch goals for, 24resources for, 4898scope of, xxi, 20trends in, xvarieties of, 2326information technology research (itr)initiative, xii, 60, 62, 121, 178179,193, 201202information week magazine, 8283informix, relational database research by, 21infrastructure programs, limitations of,132133infrastructurescritical, 7, 101, 156existing, 132133underlying, 34innovationcustomer support for, 76venture capital support for, 8587making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index241inspiration from natural and socialsystems, in the design of researchprograms, 127institute for advanced commerce (ibm),180181integrated circuits. see also systemsintegrationfunding research in, 78integrated terminal weather system, 105intel corporation, 3, 81, 86expenditures on r&d, 67, 70intel microprocessor architecture, 74intel pentium microprocessors, 138intellectual property protectionarrangements, 140intelligent systems, learning and, 178interactions among components, deep, 5interdepartmental collaboration,encouragement of by universities,206207interdisciplinary researchin academia, 168179in industry, 179180need for federal agencies to increasesupport for, 1213, 201205need for universities to encouragefaculty and students in, 1314, 206208interfaces. see also graphical userinterfacesefforts to develop intuitive, 79research in humancomputer, 62internal revenue service (irs), 12, 35, 57,200troubled systems at, 102103international competitiveness issues, xinternetdata on, 141economics of, 170future problems facing, 74, 76, 160global dimensions of, 113growth of, x, 4, 22, 30, 131historical perspective on, 21ipv4 protocol of, 74ipv6 protocol of, 74making more robust, 140, 201search engines on, 92internet 2, 132133internet edi, 181internet service providers (isps), 133data on, 141òinternet time,ó 28internships and sabbaticals, 166168intrico consortium, 104intuitive interfaces, efforts to develop, 79investment in information technologyresearch. see also corporateinvestment in research anddevelopment; federal support forinformation technology research;privateindustry sector support forresearcheconomics of, 75inadequacy of current, 4ipv4 protocol, 74ipv6 protocol, high cost of implementing,74irs. see internal revenue serviceisps. see internet service providersisus. see industry solution unitsit. see information technologyit2. see information technology for thetwentyfirst centuryjjava programming language, 23javabeans, 130junior faculty, encouraging innovativework by, 209kkatz, michael, 223kdi. see knowledge and distributedintelligence initiativekepler, johannes, 26kleinrock, leonard, 46, 145knowledge and distributed intelligence(kdi) initiative, 177178knowledge content challenges, 153154knowledge discovery, 106knowledge managementdefining, 191in social applications of informationtechnology, 150151knowledge networking, 177178kpmg, 79making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242indexllaboratories. see research laboratorieslampson, butler, 47òlargeenoughóscale network systems,131large numbersof independent requirements, 6of individuals involved in design andoperation, 56of users, 6largescaleimage databases, efforts todevelop, 79largescale systemsdefining, 3, 108ecological and economic systems asmodels for, 128examples of troubled, 102faculty needing to pioneer research in,1415, 208209failure rate in development of, 99100improving the design andimplementation of, 118133need for research into, 3operational failures experienced by, 100performance prediction in, 109problems with, 56, 100107research on, 99141technical challenges associated with,107118testing, 112layering, 120learning, and intelligent systems, 178leveson, nancy, 90limitations, of past research, 119123linux, 97òlockin,ó 36lockheed martin, 8, 8081longterm research, 70, 74lucent digital radio, 73lucent technologies, 8, 81expenditures on r&d, 66, 7678redirection of research at, 7273lycos, 92mmacintosh, 21managementinformation, 62, 106knowledge, 150151problems with, 103104, 221òsupplychain,ó 106manhattan project, 26manufacturing design, 149marketplace factors, 76markov models, hidden, 21òmass customization,ó 111massachusetts institute of technology(mit), 17, 90, 92, 211educational venture with microsoft,179180, 211, 213media lab, 182òprofessors of the practiceó at, 167168project oxygen, 62, 96sloan school of management, 84mcc. see microelectronics and computertechnology corporationmci corporation, expenditures on r&d,64, 78mechanisms for social applicationsresearch, 160187embedding information technologyresearch in other disciplines, 185187industry internships and sabbaticals,166168interdisciplinary research in academia,168179interdisciplinary research in industry,179180multidisciplinary research centers, 180185participation of enduser organizations,160166mechanisms for strengthening informationtechnology research, ximechanisms for supporting informationtechnology research, 20media lab, 182medical informatics, 163, 168lessons from, 163, 171memex capability, goal for informationtechnology research, 24mems. see microelectromechanical systemsmerrill lynch, 66, 8384, 97trusted global advisor system, 97metcalfe, robert, 97metcalfeõs law, 97methodology research, 124metrorail, troubled systems at, 117microdrive device, 72microelectromechanical systems (mems),advances in, 106, 137making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index243microelectronics and computertechnology corporation (mcc),163164micropayments, 181microprocessors, complexity of, 137microsoft corporation, 3, 8, 81, 86, 179180educational venture with mit, 179180,211, 213expenditures on r&d, 6567, 70, 81recent trends in research by, 30microsoft office, grammar checker in, 97microsoft research, 7879microsoft windows standard, 74middleware, 138mit. see massachusetts institute oftechnologymobile code, 220modem media, 193modularity, 120modules, reusable, 129130mooreõs law, 22, 31, 108, 110motorola, inc., 3, 97motorola labs, 78mouse, development of, 21multidisciplinary researchcenters for, 180185difficulties with, 143nnanoscale devices, advances in, 106national academy of engineering, 184national aeronautics and spaceadministration (nasa), 5862, 161,166, 200involvement in next generationinternet program, 123, 201national institute of standards andtechnology, 200national institutes of health (nih), 62, 200involvement in next generationinternet program, 201national library of medicine (nlm), 59,171, 201national oceanic and atmosphericadministration (noaa), 62national science and technology council,committee on computing,information and communications,120national science foundation (nsf), x, 18,21, 31, 49, 5662, 161, 165computation and social systemsprogram, 174176engineering directorate, 122engineering research centers, 98, 183184information technology research (itr)initiative, xii, 60, 62, 121, 178179,193, 201202knowledge and distributed intelligenceinitiative, 177178need for bureau of the census to workwith, 13, 205206programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology promotedby, 173174recommendations for new programs at,11, 198201scalable enterprise systems, 122123science and technology centers, 183,185, 193national weather service, troubledsystems at, 102natural systems, inspiration for the designof research programs, 127nec corporation, recent trends in researchby, 30network control protocol, 140network effect, 74network externalities, 170network security, 221223network systemsacademic, 133òlargeenoughóscale, 131very high speed, 132new york stock exchange, 102next generation internet (ngi) initiative,59, 6162, 108, 123, 201, 213ngi. see next generation internetinitiativenih. see national institutes of healthnlm. see national library of medicinenoaa. see national oceanic andatmospheric administrationnomadicity, 110nortel, expenditures on r&d, 78north american industrial classificationsystem codes, efforts to implement,96, 205, 213nsf. see national science foundationmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244indexnsfnet, commercialization of, 98numbers of components, dealing withlarge, 5nynex, expenditures on r&d, 77o1 gbps network systems, 132office, computing, and accountingmachines industry sector, 6465, 68open market, inc., 92operation desert storm, transport to, 29operation of largescale systems, largenumbers of individuals involved in,56operational challenges, 154associated with largescale systems, 118operational facilities, linking tomultidisciplinary research centers,182oracle, 8expenditures on r&d, 81relational database research by, 21organizations. see also enduserorganizationsnovel activities and shifts in structures, 7ppaci. see partnerships for advancedcomputational infrastructurepacket switching, historical perspective on,21, 109palo alto research center (parc), 63, 179redirection of research at, 73parc. see palo alto research centerpartnerships for advanced computationalinfrastructure (paci), 5960pasteur, louis, 26pasteurstyle research, 2729patents, limitations of, 7475òpathdependent effects,ó 36pentium pro microprocessor, 137peoplesoft, 8performance prediction, in largescalesystems, 109personal computers, assemblers of, 67, 76personal memex capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24personal privacy challenges, 153persystant technologies, 73pitac. see presidentõs informationtechnology advisory committeeportolano/workscape, 62postel, jonathan, 131prediction. see performance predictionprepackaged software, development of, 65,81president of the united states, 18presidential decision directive 63, 47presidentõs information technologyadvisory committee (pitac), xii,10, 19, 4647, 62, 178, 190191, 198pricewaterhousecoopers, 79, 98princeton university, deconstructingwireless, 217privacy, 153privateindustry sector support forresearch, xi, 6487levels of, 20process handbook, 169processing, transaction, 139productivity issues, 169professional and commercial equipmentand supplies industry sector, 64, 68òprofessors of the practice,ó 167168programmingcustom, 65efficiency of, 140programming languages. see alsoautomatic programmer capabilityhighlevel, 23new designs for, 28programs. see federal informationtechnology research programs;research programsproject oxygen, 62, 96project whirlwind, 21public goods, 75qquantum mechanics, computers based on,76rr&d. see research and developmentrbocs. see regional bell operatingcompaniesmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index245recommendations, for expanding the scaleand scope of information technologyresearch, 916, 197211reducedinstructionset computing (risc)historical perspective on, 21microprocessors employing, 27reengineering applications, 146regional bell operating companies (rbocs),expenditures on r&d, 64, 7778regulation, role of, 170reinventing applications, 146relational databases, historical perspectiveon, 21reliability issues, 116118, 153remote conferencing, 190repairs, computer, 65representation and analysis for modeling,specification, design, prediction,control and assurance of large scale,complex systems, 139requirements, large numbers ofindependent, 6research. see also academic research;university researchcase, 124, 156countertrend in central laboratories, 7679defining, x, 17economics, 170by enduser organizations, 8285fundamental, 11, 66, 75, 198201generic, 156goals for information technologyresearch, 24implications of information technologydevelopments for, 4244limitations of past, 119123methodology, 124multidisciplinary centers for, 180185need for, 4quadrant model of, 27quality of, 95social science, 170support for infrastructure, 131133targeted, 6566, 70telecommunications, 7778research agenda, expanding, 34, 6, 89, 62,124126research and development (r&d), 1, 3, 6162, 6471, 8083, 85disincentives to corporate investmentin, 7076need for companies to involve endusers in, 1516, 211need for nsf and bureau of the censusto classify data on investments in,13, 205206research basedegree of consensus regarding, xiidiversity in, 4951gaps in, 7981research challenges in social applicationsof information technology, 148155commerce, 151152common, 153154coordination and control, 152153group applications, 149150knowledge management, 150151in systemspecific research, 154155research division (ibm), 81, 180research motivated by social applicationsof information technology, 142194challenges in, 148155conducting, 155160defining, 144148expanding the scope of, 187mechanisms for, 160187research on largescale systems, 99141improving the design andimplementation of, 118133moving forward, 133134problems with, 100107technical challenges associated with,107118research programsdesign of, 126133designing, 126133research teams, for conducting research onsocial applications, 157160research topics involving socialapplications, 217223researchers, influx of communicationsfrom, 6263resources for information technologyresearch, 4898. see also enduserorganizationsand diversity in the research base, 4951federal support for, 5163industry support for, 6487university research, 8793retrospective assessments, of informationtechnology, 28reusable modules, 129130making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246indexrevolutionary computing, research in, 62risc. see reducedinstructionsetcomputingrsa data security, 92ssabbaticals, 166168sabre group, 8384safety, software, 90sage defense system, 21sap, 8expenditures on r&d, 81saudi arabia, mobilizing war materiel to,36scalability issues, 139goal for information technologyresearch, 24, 137problems with, 100scalable enterprise systems, 122123scalable information infrastructure,research in, 62scaling up: a research agenda for softwareengineering, 162science and technology centers (stcs), 183,185, 193, 203scientific computing, 46scope, of information technology research,xxi, 20seagate technologies, 67secure systems, 115116goal for information technologyresearch, 24securities and exchange commission(sec), corporate filings to, 6667security challenges, 154network, 221223sematech, 163164semiconductor research corporation(src), 90, 163164senior faculty, needing to pioneerinformation technology research, 1415, 208209sloan foundation, 193sloan school of management, 84òsmart matter,ó 73social applications of informationtechnology, 144148. see also groupapplicationsdefining, 3, 142examples and features of, 149need for federal agencies to increasesupport for, 1213, 201205social applications research, 7, 142194challenges in, 148155citizens, 156critical infrastructure, 156faculty needing to pioneer, 1415, 208209groups, 155mechanisms for, 160187organizations, 156topics involving, 217223social implications of computing andcommunications, 155research in, 62social science research, 157158contributing to information technologydevelopment, 170social security administration, 12, 57, 200social structures, novel activities and shiftsin, 7social systemsembedding largescale systems withinlarger contexts, 6providing inspiration for the design ofresearch programs, 127social trust challenges, 153sociotechnical systems, 3, 138, 142software. see also middlewarecomponent, 129130development of prepackaged, 65, 81research in, 62software bugs, 116testing for, 112software developers, expenditures onr&d, 65software developmentmethodologies for, 169processes in the design of researchprograms, 127, 129software engineering institute, 158159software engineering research, 157, 162software safety, 90speechrecognition, 72historical perspective on, 21speechtotext capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24òspininsó and òspinouts,ó 73sprint corporation, expenditures on r&d,64, 78src. see semiconductor researchcorporationmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index247standard industrial classification (sic)codes, 17, 213efforts to replace, 96, 205expansions of, 66standard terminal automationreplacement system, 105standish group, 137138stanford university, 90, 92center for integrated turbulencesimulation, 96programs in medical informatics, 171stateless architecture, 83status hierarchies, 190stcs. see science and technology centersstokes, donald, 26stokesõ quadrant model of research, 27strategic advantage, informationtechnology and, 169strengthening information technologyresearch, mechanisms for, xistudents, encouraging participation of ininterdisciplinary research, 1314,206208styles of federal support, 5860sun microsystems, 92supplies industry sector, 64, 68òsupplychainó management, 106support for research infrastructure. see alsoinvestment in informationtechnology researchcomputer, 65in the design of research programs, 131133swiss federal institute of technology atlausanne, deconstructing wireless,217sybase, relational database research by, 21syracuse university, programs insociotechnical aspects of informationtechnology, 174systemspecific research challenges, insocial applications of informationtechnology, 154155systems, 32alwaysup, 24consequences of changes or additionsto, 5deconstructing, 220difficulties with upgrades, 113emergent behaviors of, 5secure, 24sociotechnical, 138troublefree, 24systems integration, 65challenge of, 7981expenditures on r&d in, 80systems research agenda, expanding, 124126t3com inc., 97tablet computer, efforts to develop, 79tacoma narrows bridge collapse, 34, 47targeted research, 6566, 70tcp/ip standard, 74technical challenges associated with largescale systems, 107118complexity, 108110distributed operation andadministration, 118flexibility, 111114heterogeneity, 110111large scale challenges, 108trustworthiness, 114118telecommunications research, changes in,7778telepresence, 24testbed networks, 131testbeds, linking to multidisciplinaryresearch centers, 182testing largescale systems, 112texttospeech capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24theoretical approaches, to the design ofresearch programs, 126transaction processing, 139transforming applications, 146trendsin federal funding, 5256in industrial support, 6670in support for university research, 8890troublefree systems, goal for informationtechnology research, 24trusted global advisor system, 97trustworthiness challengesassociated with largescale systems, 110,114118, 153availability issues, 116118reliability issues, 116118security issues, 115116turing award, 24turing test, 24making it better: expanding information technology research to meet society's needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248indexuu s west, expenditures on r&d, 77unintended and unanticipatedconsequences, of changes oradditions to systems, 5unit testing, 112university of california at berkeley, 17, 90,9293deconstructing wireless, 217endeavor expedition, 62focus center at, 98programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174relational database research at, 21university of california at irvine, 192university of california at los angeles,programs in sociotechnical aspectsof information technology, 174university of chicago, center forastrophysical thermonuclearflashes, 96university of illinois at urbanachampaigncenter for simulation of advancedrockets, 96programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174university of michigan, 17programs in sociotechnical aspects ofinformation technology, 174university of utah, 21center for simulation of accidentalfires and explosions, 96programs in medical informatics, 171university of washington, 92portolano/workscape, 62university research, 8793commercialization of, 9193faculty needing to pioneer informationtechnology research, 1415, 208209gaps in, 9091need for closer ties with industryresearch, 208need for faculty and students toparticipate in interdisciplinaryresearch, 1314, 206208recommendations for expanding thescale and scope of, 1315, 206209trends in support for, 8890untrustworthy components, creatingtrustworthy systems from, 110upgrades, difficulties with, 113us air force, sage defense system, 21usability issues, within largescale systems,6users. see endusersvvc. see venture capitalventure capital (vc), support forinnovation, 31, 8587venture one corporation, 98veridical, inc., 73very high speed network systems, 132very large scale integrated circuitprogram, 21, 96viavoice product, 72visual insights, 72visualization, 96von hippel, eric, 84wwashington, dc, metrorail, 117willamette microprocessor, 137wireless, deconstructing, 217221work, changing nature of, 146workscape, 62world memex capability, goal forinformation technology research, 24world wide web, 150capturing information from, 106needs of, 25recent growth of, 22xxerox corporation, 17, 179. see also paloalto research centeralto computer, 21, 97expenditures on r&d, 66, 70patents held by, 84redirection of research at, 73yyahoo, 86